St. John of Damascus 650 - 754 AD DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN E 

St. John of Damascus 

650 - 754 AD 

DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: 
AN EXACT EXPOSITION OF THE ORTHODOX FAITH 

n DE FIDE 

ORTHODOXA: 
AN EXACT 
EXPOSITION 
OF THE 
ORTHODOX 
FAITH 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provvisori/mbs%20Library/001%20-Da%20Fare/00-index.htm2006-06-01 18:06:30

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION OF THE ORTHODOX FAITH :Index. 

St. John of Damascus 

650 - 754 AD 

DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: 
AN EXACT EXPOSITION OF THE ORTHODOX FAITH 

General Index 

n BOOK I 

n BOOK II 

n BOOK III 

n BOOK IV 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...ary/001%20-Da%20Fare/0-SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa.htm2006-06-01 18:06:30

 
 
 
 
 
 

SJOHNDAMASCUSDEFIDEORTHODOXA: BOOK I , Index. 

BOOK I 

Index 

CHAPTER I. That the Deity is incomprehensible, 
and that we ought not to pry into and meddle with 
tire things which have not been delivered to us by 
the holy Prophets, and Apostles, and Evangelists. 

CHAPTER II. Concerning things utterable and 
things unutterable, and things knowable and thinks 
unknowable. 

CHAPTER III. Proof that there is a God. 

CHAPTER IV. Concerning the nature of Deity: that it 
is incomprehensible. 

CHAPTER V. Proof that God is one and not many. 

CHAPTER VI. Concerning the Word and the Son of 
God: a reasoned proof. 

CHAPTER VII. Concerning the Holy Spirit, a 
reasoned proof. 

CHAPTER VIII. Concerning the Holy Trinity. 

CHAPTER IX. Concerning what is affirmed about 
God. 

CHAPTER X. Concerning divine union and 
separation. 

CHAPTER XI. Concerning what is affirmed about 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/1-SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:30

 
 
 

SJOHNDAMASCUSDEFIDEORTHODOXA: BOOK I , Index. 

God as though He had body. 

CHAPTER XII. Concerning the Same. 

CHAPTER XIII. Concerning the place of God: and 
that the Deity alone is uncircumscribed. 

CHAPTER XIV. The properties of the divine nature. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/1-SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:30

 

SJOHNDAMASCUSDEFIDEORTHODOXA: BOOK II , Index. 

BOOK II 

Index 

CHAPTER I. Concerning aeon or age. 

CHAPTER II. Concerning the creation. 

CHAPTER IlI Concerning angels. 

CHAPTER IV. Concerning the devil and demons. 

CHAPTER V. Concerning the visible creation. 

CHAPTER VI. Concerning the Heaven. 

CHAPTER VII. Concerning light, fire, the luminaries, 
sun, moon and stars. 

CHAPTER VIII. Concerning air and winds. 

CHAPTER IX. Concerning the waters. 

CHAPTER X. Concerning earth and its products. 

CHAPTER XI. Concerning Paradise. 

CHAPTER XII. Concerning Man. 

CHAPTER XIII. Concerning Pleasures. 

CHAPTER XIV. Concerning Pain. 

CHAPTER XV. Concerning Fear. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/1-SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:31

 
 
 

SJOHNDAMASCUSDEFIDEORTHODOXA: BOOK II , Index. 

CHAPTER XVI. Concerning Anger. 

CHAPTER XVII. Concerning Imagination. 

CHAPTER XVIII. Concerning Sensation. 

CHAPTER XIX. Concerning Thought. 

CHAPTER XX. Concerning Memory. 

CHAPTER XXI. Concerning Conception and 
Articulation. 

CHAPTER XXII. Concerning Passion and Energy. 

CHAPTER XXIII. Concerning Energy. 

CHAPTER XXIV. Concerning what is Voluntary and 
what is Involuntary. 

CHAPTER XXV. Concerning what is in our own 
power, that is, concerning Free-will. 

CHAPTER XXVI. Concerning Events. 

CHAPTER XXVII. Concerning the reason of our 
endowment with Free-will. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. Concerning what is not in our 
hands. 

CHAPTER XXIX. Concerning Providence. 

CHAPTER XXX. Concerning Prescience and 
Predestination. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/1-SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:31

SJOHNDAMASCUSDEFIDEORTHODOXA: BOOK II , Index. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/1-SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:31

 

SJOHNDAMASCUSDEFIDEORTHODOXA: BOOK III , Index. 

BOOK III 

Index 

CHAPTER I. Concerning the Divine OEconomy and 
God's care over us, and concerning our salvation. 

CHAPTER II. Concerning the manner in which the 
Word was conceived, and concerning His divine 
incarnation. 

CHAPTER III. Concerning Christ's two natures, in 
apposition to those who hold that He has only one. 

CHAPTER IV. Concerning the manner of the Mutual 
Communication. 

CHAPTER V. Concerning the number of the 
Natures. 

CHAPTER VI. That in one of its subsistences the 
divine nature is united in its entirety to the human 
nature, in its entirety and not only part to part. 

CHAPTER VII. Concerning the one compound 
subsistence of God the Word. 

CHAPTER VIII. In reply to those who ask whether 
the natures of the Lord are brought under a 
continuous or a discontinuous quantity. 

CHAPTER IX. In reply to the question whether there 
is Nature that has no Subsistence. 

CHAPTER X. Concerning the Trisagium ("the Thrice 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/1-SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:31

 
 
 

SJOHNDAMASCUSDEFIDEORTHODOXA: BOOK III , Index. 

Holy"). 

CHAPTER XI. Concerning the Nature as viewed in 
Species and in Individual, and concerning the 
difference between Union and Incarnation: and how 
this is to be understood, "The one Nature of God 
the Word Incarnate." 

CHAPTER XII. That the holy Virgin is the Mother of 
God: an argument directed against the Nestorians. 

CHAPTER XIII. Concerning the properties of the 
two Natures. 

CHAPTER XIV. Concerning the volitions and freewill of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

CHAPTER XV. Concerning the energies in our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

CHAPTER XVI. In reply to those who say "If man 
has two natures and two energies, Christ must be 
held to have three natures and as many energies." 

CHAPTER XVII. Concerning the deification of the 
nature of our Lord's flesh and of Hi's will. 

CHAPTER XVIII. Further concerning volitions and 
free-wills: minds, too, and knowledges and 
wisdoms. 

CHAPTER XIX. Concerning the theandric energy. 

CHAPTER XX. Concerning the natural and innocent 
passions. 

CHAPTER XXI. Concerning ignorance and 
servitude. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/1-SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:31

SJOHNDAMASCUSDEFIDEORTHODOXA: BOOK III , Index. 

CHAPTER XXII. Concerning His growth. 

CHAPTER XXIII. Concerning His Fear. 

CHAPTER XXIV. Concerning our Lord's Praying. 

CHAPTER XXV. Concerning the Appropriation. 

CHAPTER XXVI. Concerning the Passion of our 
Lord's body, and the Impassibility of His divinity. 

CHAPTER XXVII. Concerning the fact that the 
divinity of the Word remained inseparable from the 
soul and the body, even at our Lord's death, and 
that His subsistence continued one. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. Concerning Corruption and 
Destruction. 

CHAPTER XXIX. Concerning the Descent to Hades. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/1-SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:31

 

SJOHNDAMASCUSDEFIDEORTHODOXA: BOOK IV , Index. 

BOOK IV 

Index 

CHAPTER I. Concerning what followed the 
Resurrection. 

CHAPTER II. Concerning the sitting at the right 
hand of the Father. 

CHAPTER III. In reply to those who say "If Christ 
has two natures, either ye do service to the 
creature in worshipping created nature, or ye say 
that there is one nature to be worshipped, and 
another not to be worshipped." 

CHAPTER IV. Why it was the Son of God, and not 
the Father or the Spirit, that became man: and what 
having became man He achieved. 

CHAPTER V. In reply to those who ask if Christ's 
subsistence is create or uncreate. 

CHAPTER VI. Concerning the question, when 
Christ was called. 

CHAPTER VII. In answer to those who enquire 
whether the holy Mother of God bore two natures, 
and whether two natures hung upon the Crass. 

CHAPTER VIII. How the Only-begotten Son of God 
is called first-born. 

CHAPTER IX. Concerning Faith and Baptism. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/1-SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:31

 
 
 

SJOHNDAMASCUSDEFIDEORTHODOXA: BOOK IV , Index. 

CHAPTER X. De fide. 

CHAPTER XI. De cruce, ubi rursum de fide. 

CHAPTER XII. Concerning Worship towards the 
East. 

CHAPTER XIII. Concerning the holy and 
immaculate Mysteries of the Lord. 

CHAPTER XIV. Concerning our Lord's genealogy 
and concerning the holy Mother of God. 

CHAPTER XV. Concerning the honour due to the 
Saints and their remains. 

CHAPTER XVI. Concerning Images. 

CHAPTER XVII. Concerning Scripture. 

CHAPTER XVIII. Regarding the things said 
concerning Christ. 

CHAPTER XIX. That God is not the cause of evils. 

CHAPTER XX. That there are not two Kingdoms. 

CHAPTER XXI. The purpose for which God in His 
foreknowledge created persons who would sin and 
not repent. 

CHAPTER XXII. Concerning the law of God and the 
law of sin. 

CHAPTER XXIII. Against the Jews on the question 
Sabbath. 

CHAPTER XXIV. Concerning Virginity. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/1-SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:31

SJOHNDAMASCUSDEFIDEORTHODOXA: BOOK IV , Index. 

CHAPTER XXV. Concerning the Circumcision. 

CHAPTER XXVI. Concerning the Antichrist. 

CHAPTER XXVII. Concerning the Resurrection. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/1-SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:31

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.1. 

St. John of Damascus 

650 - 754 AD 

DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: 
AN EXACT EXPOSITION OF THE ORTHODOX FAITH 

BOOK I 

CHAPTER I. That the Deity is incomprehensible, and that we ought 
not to pry into and meddle with tire things which have not been 
delivered to us by the holy Prophets, and Apostles, and Evangelists. 

No one hath seen God at any time; the Only-begotten Son, which is 
in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him. The Deity, 
therefore, is ineffable and incomprehensible. For no one knoweth the 
Father, save the Son, nor the Son, save the Father. And the Holy 
Spirit, too, so knows the things of God as the spirit of the man 
knows the things that are in him. Moreover, after the first and 
blessed nature no one, not of men only, but even of supramundane 
powers, and the Cherubim, I say, and Seraphim themselves, has ever 
known God, save he to whom He revealed Himself. 

God, however, did not leave us in absolute ignorance. For the 
knowledge of God's existence has been implanted by Him in all by 
nature. This creation, too, and its maintenance, and its government, 
proclaim the majesty of the Divine nature. Moreover, by the Law and 
the Prophets in former times and afterwards by His Only-begotten 
Son, our Lord and God and Saviour Jesus Christ, He disclosed to us 
the knowledge of Himself as that was possible for us. All things, 
therefore, that have been delivered to us by Law and Prophets and 
Apostles and Evangelists we receive, and know, and honour, 
seeking for nothing beyond these. For God, being good, is the cause 
of all good, subject neither to envy nor to any passion. For envy is 
far removed from the Divine nature, which is both passionless and 
only good. As knowing all things, therefore, and providing for what 
is profitable for each, He revealed that which it was to our profit to 
know; but what we were unable to bear He kept secret. With these 
things let us be satisfied, and let us abide by them, not removing 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-1.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:32

 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.1. 

everlasting boundaries, nor overpassing the divine tradition. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-1.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:32

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.2. 

CHAPTER II. Concerning things utterable and things 
unutterable, and things knowable and thinks unknowable. 

It is necessary, therefore, that one who wishes to speak or to hear of 
God should understand clearly that alike in the doctrine of Deity and 
in that of the Incarnation, neither are all things unutterable nor all 
utterable; neither all unknowable nor all knowable. But the knowable 
belongs to one order, and the utterable to another; just as it is one 
thing to speak and another thing to know. Many of the things relating 
to God, therefore, that are dimly understood cannot be put into fitting 
terms, but on things above us we cannot do else than express 
ourselves according to our limited capacity; as, for instance, when 
we speak of God we use the terms sleep, and wrath, and 
regardlessness, hands, too, and feet, land such like expressions. 

We, therefore, both know and confess that God is without beginning, 
without end, eternal and everlasting, uncreate, unchangeable, 
invariable, simple, uncompound, incorporeal, invisible, impalpable, 
uncircumscribed, infinite, incognisable, indefinable, 
incomprehensible, good, just, maker of all things created, almighty, 
all-ruling, all-surveying, of all overseer, sovereign, judge; and that 
God is One, that is to say, one essences; and that He is known, and 
has His being in three subsistences, in Father, I say, and Son and 
Holy Spirit; and that the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit are 
one in all respects, except in that of not being begotten, that of being 
begotten, and that of procession; and that the Only-begotten Son 
and Word of God and God, in His bowels of mercy, for our salvation, 
by the good pleasure of God and the co-operation of the Holy Spirit, 
being conceived without seed, was born uncorruptedly of the Holy 
Virgin and Mother of God, Mary, by the Holy Spirit, and became of 
her perfect Man; and that the Same is at once perfect God and 
perfect Man, of two natures, Godhead and Manhood, and in two 
natures possessing intelligence, will and energy, and freedom, and, 
in a word, perfect according to the measure and proportion proper to 
each, at once to the divinity, I say, and to the humanity, yet to one 
composite persons; and that He suffered hunger and thirst and 
weariness, and was crucified, and for three days submitted to the 
experience of death and burial, and ascended to heaven, from which 
also He came to us, and shall come again. And the Holy Scripture is 
witness to this and the whole choir of the Saints. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-2.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:32

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.2. 

But neither do we know, nor can we tell, what the essence of God is, 
or how it is in all, or how the Only-begotten Son and God, having 
emptied Himself, became Man of virgin blood, made by another law 
contrary to nature, or how He walked with dry feet upon the waters. It 
is not within our capacity, therefore, to say anything about God or 
even to think of Him, beyond the things which have been divinely 
revealed to us, whether by word or by manifestation, by the divine 
oracles at once of the Old Testament and of the New. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-2.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:32

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.3. 

CHAPTER III. Proof that there is a God. 

That there is a God, then, is no matter of doubt to those who receive 
the Holy Scriptures, the Old Testament, I mean, and the New; nor 
indeed to most of the Greeks. For, as we said, the knowledge of the 
existence of God is implanted in us by nature. But since the 
wickedness of the Evil One has prevailed so mightily against man's 
nature as even to drive some into denying the existence of God, that 
most foolish and woe-fulest pit of destruction (whose folly David, 
revealer of the Divine meaning, exposed when he said, The fool said 
in his heart, There is no God), so the disciples of the Lord and His 
Apostles, made wise by the Holy Spirit and working wonders in His 
power and grace, took them captive in the net of miracles and drew 
them up out of the depths of ignorance to the light of the knowledge 
of God. In like manner also their successors in grace and worth, both 
pastors and teachers, having received the enlightening grace of the 
Spirit, were wont, alike by the power of miracles and the word of 
grace, to enlighten those walking in darkness and to bring back the 
wanderers into the way. But as for us who are not recipients either of 
the gift of miracles or the gift of teaching (for indeed we have 
rendered ourselves unworthy of these by our passion for pleasure), 
come, let us in connection with this theme discuss a few of those 
things which have been delivered to us on this subject by the 
expounders of grace, calling on the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Spirit. 

All things, that exist, are either created or uncreated. If, then, things 
are created, it follows that they are also wholly mutable. For things, 
whose existence originated in change, must also be subject to 
change, whether it be that they perish or that they become other than 
they are by act of wills. But if things are uncreated they must in all 
consistency be also wholly immutable. For things which are 
opposed in the nature of their existence must also be opposed in the 
mode of their existence, that is to say, must have opposite 
properties: who, then, will refuse to grant that all existing things, not 
only such as come within the province of the senses, but even the 
very angels, are subject to change and transformation and 
movement of various kinds? For the things appertaining to the 
rational world, I mean angels and spirits and demons, are subject to 
changes of will, whether it is a progression or a retrogression in 
goodness, whether a struggle or a surrender; while the others suffer 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-3.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:32

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.3. 

changes of generation and destruction, of increase and decrease, of 
quality and of movement in space. Things then that are mutable are 
also wholly created. But things that are created must be the work of 
some maker, and the maker cannot have been created. For if he had 
been created, he also must surely have been created by some one, 
and so on till we arrive at something uncreated. The Creator, then, 
being uncreated, is also wholly immutable. And what could this be 
other than Deity? 

And even the very continuity of the creation, and its preservation 
and government, teach us that there does exist a Deity, who 
supports and maintains and preserves and ever provides for this 
universe. For how could opposite natures, such as fire and water, air 
and earth, have combined with each other so as to form one 
complete world, and continue to abide in indissoluble union, were 
there not some omnipotent power which bound them together and 
always is preserving them from dissolution? 

What is it that gave order to things of heaven and things of earth, 
and all those things that move in the air and in the water, or rather to 
what was in existence before these, viz., to heaven and earth and air 
and the elements of fire and water? What was it that mingled and 
distributed these? What was it that set these in motion and keeps 
them in their unceasing and unhindered course? Was it not the 
Artificer of these things, and He Who hath implanted in everything 
the law whereby the universe is carried on and directed? Who then is 
the Artificer of these things? Is it not He Who created them and 
brought them into existence. For we shall not attribute such a power 
to the spontaneous. For, supposing their coming into existence was 
due to the spontaneous; what of the power that put all in orders ? 
And let us grant this, if you please. What of that which has preserved 
and kept them in harmony with the original laws of their existence ? 
Clearly it is something quite distinct from the spontaneous.And what 
could this be other than Deity ? 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-3.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:32

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.4. 

CHAPTER IV. Concerning the nature of Deity: that it is 
incomprehensible. 

It is plain, then, that there is a God. But what He is in His essence 
anti nature is absolutely incomprehensible and unknowable. For it is 
evident that He is incorporeal. For how could that possess body 
which is infinite, and boundless, and formless, and intangible and 
invisible, in short, simple and not compound? How could that be 
immutable which is circumscribed and subject to passion? And how 
could that be passionless which is composed of elements and is 
resolved again into them? For combination is the beginning of 
conflict, and conflict of separation, and separation of dissolution, 
and dissolution is altogether foreign to God. 

Again, how will it also be maintained that God permeates and fills the 
universe? as the Scriptures say, Do not I fill heaven and earth, saith 
the Lords? For it is an impossibility that one body should permeate 
other bodies without dividing and being divided, and without being 
enveloped and contrasted, in the same way as all fluids mix and 
commingle. 

But if some say that the body is immaterial, in thee same way as the 
fifth body of which the Greek philosophers speak (which body is an 
impossibility), it will be wholly subject to motion like the heaven. For 
that is what they mean by the fifth body. Who then is it that moves it? 
For everything that is moved is moved by another thing. And who 
again is it that moves that? and so on to infinity till we at length 
arrive at something motionless. For the first mover is motionless, 
and that is the Deity. And must not that which is moved be 
circumscribed in space? The Deity, then, alone is motionless, 
moving the universe by immobility. So then it must be assumed that 
the Deity is incorporeal. 

But even this gives no true idea of His essence, to say that He is 
unbegotten, and without beginning, changeless and imperishable, 
and possessed of such other qualities as we are wont to ascribe to 
God and His environments. For these do not indicate what He is, but 
what He is not. But when we would explain what the essence of 
anything is, we must not speak only negatively. In the case of God, 
however, it is impossible to explain what He is in His essence, and it 
befits us the rather to hold discourse about His absolute separation 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-4.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:33

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.4. 

from all things. For He does not belong to the class of existing 
things: not that He has no existence, but that He is above all existing 
things, nay even above existence itself. For if all forms of knowledge 
have to do with what exists, assuredly that which is above 
knowledge must certainly be also above essence: and, conversely, 
that which is above essence will also be above knowledge. 

God then is infinite and incomprehensible and all that is 
comprehensible about Him is His infinity and incomprehensibility. 
But all that we can affirm concerning God does not shew forth God's 
nature, but only the qualities of His nature. For when you speak of 
Him as good, and just, and wise, and so forth, you do not tell God's 
nature but only the qualities of His nature. Further there are some 
affirmations which we make concerning God which have the force of 
absolute negation: for example, when we use the term darkness, in 
reference to God, we do not mean darkness itself, but that He is not 
light but above light: and when we speak of Him as light, we mean 
that He is not darkness. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-4.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:33

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.5. 

CHAPTER V. Proof that God is one and not many. 

We have, then, adequately demonstrated that there is a God, and that 
His essence is incomprehensible. But that God is one and not many 
is no matter of doubt to those who believe in the Holy Scriptures. For 
the Lord says in the beginning of the Law: I am the Lord thy God, 
which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt. Thou shall have no 
other Gods before Me. And again He says, Hear, O Israel, the Lord 
our God is one Lord. And in Isaiah the prophet we read For I am the 
first God and I am the last and beside Me there is no God. Before Me 
there was not any God, nor after Me will there be any God, and 
beside Me there is no God. And the Lord, too, in the holy gospels 
speaketh these words to His Father, And this is life eternal, that they 
may know Thee the only true God. But with those that do not believe 
in the Holy Scriptures we will reason thus. 

The Deity is perfect, and without blemish in goodness, and wisdom, 
and power, without beginning, without end, everlasting, 
uncircumscribed, and in short, perfect in all things. Should we say, 
then, that there are many Gods, we must recognise difference among 
the many. For if there is no difference among them, they are one 
rather than many. But if there is difference among them, what 
becomes of the perfectness? For that which comes short of 
perfection, whether it be in goodness, or power, or wisdom, or time, 
or place, could not be God. But it is this very identity in all respects 
that shews that the Deity is one and not many. 

Again, if there are many Gods, how can one maintain that God is 
uncircumscribed? For where the one would be, the other could not 
be. 

Further, how could the world be governed by many and saved from 
dissolution and destruction, while strife is seen to rage between the 
rulers? For difference introduces strife. And if any one should say 
that each rules over a part, what of that which established this order 
and gave to each his particular realm? For this would the rather be 
God. Therefore, God is one, perfect, uncircumscribed, maker of the 
universe, and its preserver and governor, exceeding and preceding 
all perfection. 

Moreover, it is a natural necessity that duality should originate in 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-5.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:33

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.5. 

unity. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-5.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:33

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.6. 

CHAPTER VI. Concerning the Word and the Son of God: a 
reasoned proof. 

So then this one and only God is not Wordless. And possessing the 
Word, He will have it not as without a subsistence, nor as having had 
a beginning, nor as destined to cease to be. For there never was a 
time when God was not Word: but He ever possesses His own Word, 
begotten of Himself, not, as our word is, without a subsistence and 
dissolving into air, but having a subsistence in Him and life and 
perfection, not proceeding out of Himself but ever existing within 
Himself. For where could it be, if it were to go outside Him? For 
inasmuch as our nature is perishable and easily dissolved, our word 
is also without subsistence. But since God is everlasting and 
perfect, He will have His Word subsistent in Him, and everlasting 
trod living, and possessed of all the attributes of the Begetter. For 
just as our word, proceeding as it floes out of the mind, is neither 
wholly identical with the mind nor utterly diverse from it (for so far as 
it proceeds out of the mind it is different from it, while so far as it 
reveals the mind, it is no longer absolutely diverse from the mind, 
but being one in nature with the mind, it is yet to the subject diverse 
from it), so in the same manner also the Word of Gods in its 
independent subsistence is differentiated froth Him from Whom it 
derives its subsistence: but inasmuch as it displays in itself the 
same attributes as are seen in God, it is of the same nature as God. 
For just as absolute perfection is contemplated in the Father, so also 
is it contemplated in the Word that is begotten of Him. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...ry/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-6.htm2006-06-01 18:06:33

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.7. 

CHAPTER VII. Concerning the Holy Spirit, a reasoned proof. 

Moreover the Word must also possess Spirit. For in fact even our 
word is not destitute of spirit; but in our case the spirit is something 
different from our essence. For there is an attraction and movement 
of the air which is drawn in and poured forth that the body may be 
sustained. And it is this which in the moment of utterance becomes 
the articulate word, revealing in itself the force of the word. But in 
the case of the divine nature, which is simple and uncompound, we 
must confess in all piety that there exists a Spirit of God, for the 
Word is not more imperfect than our own word. Now we cannot, in 
piety, consider the Spirit to be something foreign that gains 
admission into God from without, as is the case with compound 
natures like us. Nay, just as, when we heard of the Word of God, we 
considered it to be not without subsistence, nor the product of 
learning, nor the mere utterance of voice, nor as passing into the air 
and perishing, but as being essentially subsisting, endowed with 
free volition, and energy, and omnipotence: so also, when we have 
learnt about the Spirit of God, we contemplate it as the companion of 
the Word and the revealer of His energy, and not as mere breath 
without subsistence. For to conceive of the Spirit that dwells in God 
as after the likeness of our own spirit, would be to drag down the 
greatness of the divine nature to the lowest depths of degradation. 
But we must contemplate it as an essential power, existing in its own 
proper and peculiar subsistence, proceeding from the Father anti 
resting in the Word, and shewing forth the Word, neither capable of 
disjunction from God in Whom it exists, and the Word Whose 
companion it is, nor poured forth to vanish into nothingness, but 
being in subsistence in the likeness of the Word, endowed with life, 
free volition, independent movement, energy, ever willing that which 
is good, and having power to keep pace with the will in all its 
decrees, having no beginning and no end. For never was the Father 
at any time lacking in the Word, nor the Word in the Spirit. 

Thus because of the unity in nature, the error of the Greeks in 
holding that God is many, is utterly destroyed: and again by our 
acceptance of the Word and the Spirit, the dogma of the Jews is 
overthrown: and there remains of each party only what is profitable. 
On the one hand of the Jewish idea we have the unity of God's 
nature, anti on the other, of the Greek, we have the distinction in 
subsistences and that only. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-7.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:33

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.7. 

But should the Jew refuse to accept the Word and the Spirit, let the 
divine Scripture confute him and curb his tongue. For concerning 
the Word, the divine David says, For ever, O Lord, Thy Word is 
settled in heaven. And again , He sent His Word and healed them. 
But the word that is uttered is not sent, nor is it for ever settled. And 
concerning the Spirit, the same David says, Thou sendest forth Thy 
Spirit, they are created. And again, By the word of the Lord were the 
heavens made: and all the host of them by the breath of His mouth. 
Job, too, says, The Spirit of God hath made me, and the breath of the 
Almighty hath given me life. Now the Spirit which is sent and makes 
and stablishes and conserves, is not mere breath that dissolves, any 
more than the mouth of God is a bodily member. For the conception 
of both must be such as harmonizes with the Divine nature. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-7.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:33

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.8. 

CHAPTER VIII. Concerning the Holy Trinity. 

We believe, then, in One God, one beginning, having no beginning, 
uncreate, unbegotten, imperishable and immortal, everlasting, 
infinite, uncircumscribed, boundless, of infinite power, simple, 
uncompound, incorporeal, without flux, passionless, unchangeable, 
unalterable, unseen, the fountain of goodness and justice, the light 
of the mind, inaccessible; a power known by no measure, 
measurable only by His own will alone (for all things that He wills He 
can), creator of all created things, seen or unseen, of all the 
maintainer and preserver, for all the provider, master and lord and 
king over all, with an endless and immortal kingdom: having no 
contrary, filling all, by nothing encompassed, but rather Himself the 
encompasser and maintainer and original possessor of the universe, 
occupying all essences intact and extending beyond all things, and 
being separate from all essence as being super-essential and above 
all things and absolute God, absolute goodness, and absolute 
fulness: determining all sovereignties and ranks, being placed above 
all sovereignty and rank, above essence and life and word and 
thought: being Himself very light and goodness and life and 
essence, inasmuch as He does not derive His being from another, 
that is to say, of those things that exist: but being Himself the 
fountain of being to all that is, of life to the living, of reason to those 
that have reason; to all the cause of all good: perceiving all things 
even before they have become: one essence, one divinity, one 
power, one will, one energy, one beginning, one authority, one 
dominion, one sovereignty, made known in three perfect 
subsistences anti adored with one adoration, believed in and 
ministered to by all rational creation, united without confusion and 
divided without separation (which indeed transcends thought). (We 
believe) in Father and Son and Holy Spirit whereinto also we have 
been baptized. For so our Lord commanded the Apostles to baptize, 
saying, Baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy 
Spirit. 

(We believe) in one Father, the beginning, and cause of all: begotten 
of no one: without cause or generation, alone subsisting: creator of 
all: but Father of one only by nature, His Only-begotten Son and our 
Lord and God and Saviour Jesus Christ, and Producer of the most 
Holy Spirit. And in one Son of God, the Only-begotten, our Lord, 
Jesus Christ: begotten of the Father, before all the ages: Light of 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-8.htm (1 of 10)2006-06-01 18:06:34

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.8. 

Light, true God of true God: begotten, not made, consubstantial with 
the Father, through Whom all things are made: and when we say He 
was before all the ages we shew that His birth is without time or 
beginning: for the Son of God was not brought into being out of 
nothing, He that is the effulgence of the glory, the impress of the 
Father's subsistence, the living wisdom and power, the Word 
possessing interior subsistence, the essential and perfect and living 
image s of the unseen God. But always He was with the Father and in 
Him, everlastingly and without beginning begotten of Him. For there 
never was a time when the Father was and the Son was not, but 
always the Father and always the Son, Who was begotten of Him, 
existed together. For He could not have received the name Father 
apart from the Son: for if He were without the Son, He could not be 
the Father: and if He thereafter had the Son, thereafter He became 
the Father, not having been the Father prior to this, and He was 
changed from that which was not the Father and became the Father. 
This is the worst form of blasphemy. For we may not speak of God 
as destitute of natural generative power: and generative power 
means, the power of producing from one's self, that is to say, from 
one's own proper essence, that which is like in nature to one's self. 

In treating, then, of the generation of the Son, it is an act of impiety 
to say that time comes into play and that the existence of the Son is 
of later origin than the Father. For we hold that it is from Him, that is, 
from the Father's nature, that the Son is generated. And unless we 
grant that the Son co-existed from the beginning with the Father, by 
Whom He was begotten, we introduce change into the Father's 
subsistence, because, not being the Father, He subsequently 
became the Father. For the creation, even though it originated later, 
is nevertheless not derived from the essence of God, but is brought 
into existence out of nothing by His will and power, and change does 
not touch God's nature. For generation means that the begetter 
produces out of his essence offspring similar in essence. But 
creation and making mean that the creator and maker produces from 
that which is external, and not out of his own essence, a creation of 
an absolutely dissimilar nature. 

Wherefore in God, Who alone is passionless and unalterable, and 
immutable, and ever so continueth, both begetting and creating are 
passionless. For being by nature passionless and not liable to flux, 
since He is simple and uncompound, He is not subject to passion or 
flux either in begetting or in creating, nor has He need of any cooperation. But generation in Him is without beginning and 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-8.htm (2 of 10)2006-06-01 18:06:34

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.8. 

everlasting, being the work of nature and producing out of His own 
essence, that the Begetter may not undergo change, and that He may 
not be God first and God last, nor receive any accession: while 
creation in the case of God, being the work of will, is not co-eternal 
with God. For it is not natural that that which is brought into 
existence out of nothing should be co-eternal with what is without 
beginning and everlasting. There is this difference in fact between 
man's making and God's. Man can bring nothing into existence out 
of nothing, but all that he makes requires pre-existing matter for its 
basis, and he does not create it by will only, but thinks out first what 
it is to be and pictures it in his mind, and only then fashions it with 
his hands, undergoing labour and troubles, and often missing the 
mark and failing to produce to his satisfaction that after which he 
strives. But God, through the exercise of will alone, has brought all 
things into existence out of nothing. Now there is the same 
difference between God and man in begetting and generating. For in 
God, Who is without time and beginning, passionless, not liable to 
flux, incorporeal, alone and without end, generation is without time 
and beginning, passionless and not liable to flux, nor dependent on 
the union of two: nor has His own incomprehensible generation 
beginning or end. And it is without beginning because He is 
immutable: without flux because He is passionless and incorporeal: 
independent of the union of two again because He is incorporeal but 
also because He is the one and only God, and stands in need of no 
co-operation: and without end or cessation because He is without 
beginning, or time, or end, and ever continues the same. For that 
which has no beginning has no end: but that which through grace is 
endless is assuredly not without beginning, as, witness, the angels. 

Accordingly the everlasting God generates His own Word which is 
perfect, without beginning and without end, that God, Whose nature 
and existence are above time, may not engender in time. But with 
man clearly it is otherwise, for generation is with him a matter of sex, 
and destruction and flux and increase and body clothe him round 
about, and he possesses a nature which is male or female. For the 
male requires the assistance of the female. But may He Who 
surpasses all, and transcends all thought and comprehension, be 
gracious to us. 

The holy catholic and apostolic Church, then, teaches the existence 
at once of a Father: and of His Only-begotten Son, born of Him 
without time and flux and passion, in a manner incomprehensible 
and perceived by the God of the universe alone: just as we recognise 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-8.htm (3 of 10)2006-06-01 18:06:34

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.8. 

the existence at once of fire and the light which proceeds from it: for 
there is not first fire and thereafter light, but they exist together. And 
just as light is ever the product of fire, and ever is in it and at no time 
is separate from it, so in like manner also the Son is begotten of the 
Father and is never in any ways separate from Him, but ever is in 
Him. But whereas the light which is produced from fire without 
separation, and abideth ever in it, has no proper subsistence of its 
own distinct from that of fire (for it is a natural quality of fire), the 
Only-begotten Son of God, begotten of the Father without separation 
and difference and ever abiding in Him, has a proper subsistence of 
its own distinct froth that of the Father. 

The terms, 'Word' and 'effulgence,' then, are used because He is 
begotten of the Father without the union of two, or passion, or time, 
or flux, or separation: and the terms 'Son' and 'impress of the 
Father's subsistence,' because He is perfect and has subsistence s 
and is in all respects similar to the Father, save that the Father is not 
begotten: and the term 'Only-begotten' because He alone was 
begotten alone of the Father alone. For no other generation is like to 
the generation of the Son of God, since no other is Son of God. For 
though the Holy Spirit proceedeth from the Father, yet this is not 
generative in character but processional. This is a different mode of 
existence, alike incomprehensible and unknown, just as is the 
generation of the Son. Wherefore all the qualities the Father has are 
the Son's, save that the Father is unbegotten, and this exception 
involves no difference in essence nor dignity, but only a different 
mode of coming into existence. We have an analogy in Adam, who 
was not begotten (for God Himself moulded him), and Seth, who was 
begotten (for he is Adam's son), and Eve, who proceeded out of 
Adam's rib (for she was not begotten). These do not differ from each 
other in nature, for they are human beings: but they differ in the 
mode of coming into existence. 

For one must recognise that the word agenhGon with only one 'n' 
signifies "uncreate" or "not having been made," while agennhGon 

written with double 'n' means "unbegotten." According to the first 
significance essence differs from essence: for one essence is 
uncreate, or agenhGon with one 'n,' and another is create or genhGh. 
But in the second significance there is no difference between 
essence and essence. For the first subsistence of all kinds of living 
creatures is agennhGos but not agenhGos. For they were created by 
the Creator, being brought into being by His Word, but they were not 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-8.htm (4 of 10)2006-06-01 18:06:34

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.8. 

begotten, for there was no pre-existing form like themselves from 
which they might have been born. 

So then in the first sense of the word the three absolutely divine 
subsistences of the Holy Godhead agree: for they exist as one in 
essence and uncreate. But with the second signification it is quite 
otherwise. For the Father alone is ingenerate, no other subsistence 
having given Him being. And the Son alone is generate, for He was 
begotten of the Father's essence without beginning and without 
time. And only the Holy Spirit proceedeth from the Father's essence, 
not having been generated but simply proceeding. For this is the 
doctrine of Holy Scripture. But the nature of the generation and the 
procession is quite beyond comprehension. 

And this also it behoves us to know, that the names Fatherhood, 
Sonship and Procession, were not applied to the Holy Godhead by 
us: on the contrary, they were communicated to us by the Godhead, 
as the divine apostle says, Wherefore I bow the knee to the Father, 
from Whom is every family in heaven and on earth. But if we say that 
the Father is the origin of the Son and greater than the Son, we do 
not suggest any precedence in time or superiority in nature of the 
Father over the Son (for through His agency He made the ages), or 
superiority in any other respect save causation. And we mean by 
this, that the Son is begotten of the Father and not the Father of the 
Son, and that the Father naturally is the cause of the Son: just as we 
say in the same way not that fire proceedeth from light, but rather 
light from fire. So then, whenever we hear it said that the Father is 
the origin of the Son and greater than the Son, let us understand it to 
mean in respect of causation. And just as we do not say that fire is of 
one essence and light of another, so we cannot say that the Father is 
of one essence and the Son of another: but both are of one and the 
same essence. And just as we say that fire has brightness through 
the light proceeding from it, and do not consider the light of the fire 
as an instrument ministering to the fire, but rather as its natural 
force: so we say that the Father creates all that He creates through 
His Only-begotten Son, not as though the Son were a mere 
instrument serving the Father's ends, but as His natural and 
subsistential force. And just as we say both that the fire shines and 
again that the light of the fire shines, So all things whatsoever the 
Father doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise. But whereas light 
possesses no proper subsistence of its own, distinct from that of the 
fire, the Son is a perfect subsistence, inseparable from the Father's 
subsistence, as we have shewn above. For it is quite impossible to 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-8.htm (5 of 10)2006-06-01 18:06:34

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.8. 

find in creation an image that will illustrate in itself exactly in all 
details the nature of the Holy Trinity. For how could that which is 
create and compound, subject to flux and change, circumscribed, 
formed and corruptible, clearly shew forth the super-essential divine 
essence, unaffected as it is in any of these ways? Now it is evident 
that all creation is liable to most of these affections, and all from its 
very nature is subject to corruption. 

Likewise we believe also in one Holy Spirit, the Lord and Giver of 
Life: Who proceedeth from the Father and resteth in the Son: the 
object of equal adoration and glorification with the Father and Son, 
since He is co-essential and co-eternal: the Spirit of God, direct, 
authoritative, the fountain of wisdom, and life, and holiness: God 
existing and addressed along with Father and Son: uncreate, full, 
creative, all-ruling, all-effecting, all-powerful, of infinite power, Lord 
of all creation and not under any lord: deifying, not deified: filling, 
not filled: shared in, not sharing in: sanctifying, not sanctified: the 
intercessor, receiving the supplications of all: in all things like to the 
Father and Son: proceeding from the Father and communicated 
through the Son, and participated in by all creation, through Himself 
creating, and investing with essence and sanctifying, and 
maintaining the universe: having subsistence, existing in its own 
proper and peculiar subsistence, inseparable and indivisible from 
Father and Son, and possessing all the qualities that the Father and 
Son possess, save that of not being begotten or born. For the Father 
is without canst and unborn: for He is derived from nothing, but 
derives from Himself His being, nor does He derive a single quality 
from another. Rather He is Himself the beginning and cause of the 
existence of all things in a definite and natural manner. But the Son 
is derived from the Father after the manner of generation, and the 
Holy Spirit likewise is derived from the Father, yet not after the 
manner of generation, but after that of procession. And we have 
learned that there is a difference between generation and 
procession, but the nature of that difference we in no wise 
understand. Further, the generation of the Son from the Father and 
the procession of the Holy Spirit are simultaneous. 

All then that the Son and the Spirit have is from the Father, even 
their very being: and unless the Father is, neither the Son nor the 
Spirit is. And unless the Father possesses a certain attribute, neither 
the Son nor the Spirit possesses it: and through the Father, that is, 
because of the Father's existence, the Son and the Spirit exist, and 
through the Father, that is, because of the Father having the 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-8.htm (6 of 10)2006-06-01 18:06:34

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.8. 

qualities, the Son and the Spirit have all their qualities, those of 
being unbegotten, and of birth and of procession being excepted. 
For in these hypostatic or personal properties alone do the three 
holy subsistences differ from each other, being indivisibly divided 
not by essence but by the distinguishing mark of their proper and 
peculiar subsistence. 

Further we say that each of the three has a perfect subsistence, that 
we may understand not one compound perfect nature made up of 
three imperfect elements, but one simple essence, surpassing and 
preceding perfection, existing in three perfect subsistences. For all 
that is composed of imperfect elements must necessarily be 
compound. But from perfect subsistences no compound can arise. 
Wherefore we do not speak of the form as from subsistences, but as 
in subsistences. But we speak of those things as imperfect which do 
not preserve the form of that which is completed out of them. For 
stone and wood and iron are each perfect in its own nature, but with 
reference to the building that is completed out of them each is 
imperfect: for none of them is in itself a house. 

The subsistences then we say are perfect, that we may not conceive 
of the divine nature as compound. For compoundness is the 
beginning of separation. And again we speak of the three 
subsistences as being in each other, that we may not introduce a 
crowd and multitude of Gods. Owing to the three subsistences, there 
is no compoundness or confusion: while, owing to their having the 
same essence and dwelling in one another, and being the same in 
will, and energy, and power, and authority, and movement, so to 
speak, we recognise the indivisibility and the unity of God. For verily 
there is one God, and His word and Spirit. 

Marg. MS. Concerning the distinction of the three subsistences: and 
concerning the thing itself and our reason and thought in relation to 
it. 

One ought, moreover, to recognise that it is one thing to look at a 
matter as it is, and another thing to look at it in the light of reason 
and thought. In the case of all created things, the distinction of the 
subsistences is observed in actual fact. For in actual fact Peter is 
seen to be separate from Paul. But the community and connection 
and unity are apprehended by reason and thought. For it is by the 
mind that we perceive that Peter and Paul are of the same nature and 
have one common nature. For both are living creatures, rational and 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-8.htm (7 of 10)2006-06-01 18:06:34

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.8. 

mortal: and both are flesh, endowed with the spirit of reason and 
understanding. It is, then, by reason that this community of nature is 
observed. For here indeed the subsistences do not exist one within 
the other. But each privately and individually, that is to say, in itself, 
stands quite separate, having very many points that divide it from 
the other. For they are both separated in space and differ in time, 
and are divided in thought, and power, and shape, or form, and habit, 
and temperament and dignity, and pursuits, and all differentiating 
properties, but above all, in the fact that they do not dwell in one 
another but are separated. Hence it comes that we can speak of two, 
three, or many men. 

And this may be perceived throughout the whole of creation, but in 
the case of the holy and superessential and incomprehensible 
Trinity, far removed from everything, it is quite the reverse. For there 
the community and unity are observed in fact, through the coeternity of the subsistences, and through their having the same 
essence and energy and will and concord of mind, and then being 
identical in authority and power and goodness--I do not say similar 
but identical--and then movement by one impulse. For there is one 
essence, one goodness, one power, one will, one energy, one 
authority, one and the same, I repeat, not three resembling each 
other. But the three subsistences have one and the same movement. 
For each one of them is related as closely to the other as to itself: 
that is to say that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are one in 
all respects, save those of not being begotten, of birth and of 
procession. But it is by thought that the difference is perceived. For 
we recognise one God: but only in the attributes of Fatherhood, 
Sonship, and Procession, both in respect of cause and effect and 
perfection of subsistence, that is, manner of existence, do we 
perceive difference. For with reference to the uncircumscribed Deity 
we cannot speak of separation in space, as we can in our own case. 
For the subsistences dwell in one another, in no wise confused but 
cleaving together, according to the word of the Lord, I am in the 
father, and the father in Me: nor can one admit difference in will or 
judgment or energy or power or anything else whatsoever which 
may produce actual and absolute separation in our case. Wherefore 
we do not speak of three Gods, the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Spirit, but rather of one God, the holy Trinity, the Son and Spirit 
being referred to one cause, and not compounded or coalesced 
according to the synaeresis of Sabellius. For, as we said, they are 
made one not so as to commingle, but so as to cleave to each other, 
and they have their being in each other without any coalescence or 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-8.htm (8 of 10)2006-06-01 18:06:34

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.8. 

commingling. Nor do the Son and the Spirit stand apart, nor are they 
sundered in essence according to the diaeresis of Arias. For the 
Deity is undivided amongst things divided, to put it concisely: and it 
is just like three suns cleaving to each other without separation and 
giving out light mingled and conjoined into one. When, then, we turn 
our eyes to the Divinity, and the first cause and the sovereignty and 
the oneness anti sameness, so to speak, of the movement and will of 
the Divinity, and the identity in essence and power and energy and 
lordship, what is seen by us is unity. But when we look to those 
things in which the Divinity is, or, to put it more accurately, which 
are the Divinity, and those things which are in it through the first 
cause without time or distinction in glory or separation, that is to 
say, the subsistences of the Son and the Spirit, it seems to us a 
Trinity that we adore. The Father is one Father, and without 
beginning, that is, without cause: for He is not derived from 
anything. The Son is one Son, but not without beginning, that is, not 
without cause: for He is derived from the Father. But if you eliminate 
the idea of a beginning from time, He is also without beginning: for 
the creator of times cannot be subject to time. The Holy Spirit is one 
Spirit, going forth from the Father, not in the manner of Sonship but 
of procession; so that neither has the Father lost His property of 
being unbegotten because He hath begotten, nor has the Son lost 
His property of being begotten because He was begotten of that 
which was unbegotten (for how could that be so?), nor does the 
Spirit change either into the Father or into the Son because He hath 
proceeded and is God. For a property is quite constant. For how 
could a property persist if it were variable, moveable, and could 
change into something else? For if the Father is the Son, He is not 
strictly the Father: for there is strictly one Father. And if the Son is 
the Father, He is not strictly the Son: for there is strictly one Son and 
one Holy Spirit. 

Further, it should be understood that we do not speak of the Father 
as derived from any one, but we speak of Him as the Father of the 
Son. And we do not speak of the Son as Cause or Father, but we 
speak of Him both as from the Father, and as the Son of the Father. 
And we speak likewise of the Holy Spirit as from the Father, and call 
Him the Spirit of the Father. And we do not speak of the Spirit as 
from the Son: s but yet we call Him the Spirit of the Son. For if any 
one hath not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His, saith the divine 
apostle. And we confess that He is manifested and imparted to us 
through the Son. For He breathed upon His Disciples, says he, and 
said, Receive ye the Holy Spirit. It is just the same as in the case of 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-8.htm (9 of 10)2006-06-01 18:06:34

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.8. 

the sun from which come both the ray and the radiance (for the sun 
itself is the source of both the ray and the radiance), and it is 
through the ray that the radiance is imparted to us, and it is the 
radiance itself by which we are lightened and in which we 
participate. Further we do not speak of the Son of the Spirit, or of the 
Son as derived from the Spirit. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-8.htm (10 of 10)2006-06-01 18:06:34

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.9. 

CHAPTER IX. Concerning what is affirmed about God. 

The Deity is simple and uncompound. But that which is composed of 
many and different elements is compound. If, then, we should speak 
of the qualities of being uncreate and without beginning and 
incorporeal and immortal and everlasting and good and creative and 
so forth as essential differences in the case of God, that which is 
composed of so many qualities will not be simple but must be 
compound. But this is impious in the extreme. Each then of the 
affirmations about God should be thought of as signifying not what 
He is in essence, but either something that it is impossible to make 
plain, or some relation to some of those things which are contrasts 
or some of those things that follow the nature, or an energy. 

It appears then that the most proper of all the names given to God is 
"He that is," as He Himself said in answer to Moses on the mountain, 
Say to the sons of Israel, He that is hath sent Me. For He keeps all 
being in His own embrace, like a sea of essence infinite and unseen. 
Or as the holy Dionysius says, "He that is good." For one cannot say 
of God that He has being in the first place and goodness in the 
second. 

The second name of God is o qeos, derived from qeein, to run, 
because He courses through all things, or from aiqein, to burn: For 
God is a fire consuming all evils: or from qeasqai, because He is allseeing: for nothing can escape Him, and over all He keepeth watch. 
For He saw all things before they were, holding them timelessly in 
His thoughts; and each one conformably to His voluntary anti 
timeless thought, which constitutes predetermination and image and 
pattern, comes into existence at the predetermined time. 

The first name then conveys the notion of His existence and of the 
nature of His existence: while the second contains the idea of 
energy. Further, the terms 'without beginning,' ' incorruptible,' 
'unbegotten,' as also 'uncreate,' 'incorporeal,' 'unseen,' and so forth, 
explain what He is not: that is to say, they tell us that His being had 
no beginning, that He is not corruptible, nor created, nor corporeaI, 
nor visible. Again, goodness and justice and piety and such like 
names belong to the nature, but do not explain His actual essence. 
Finally, Lord and King and names of that class indicate a 
relationship with their contrasts: for the name Lord has reference to 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-9.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:35

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.9. 

those over whom the lord rules, and the name King to those under 
kingly authority, and the name Creator to the creatures, and the 
name Shepherd to the sheep he tends. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-9.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:35

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.10. 

CHAPTER X. Concerning divine union and separation. 

Therefore all these names must be understood as common to deity 
as a whole, and as containing the notions of sameness and 
simplicity and indivisibility and union: while the names Father, Son 
and Spirit, and cause, less and caused, and unbegotten and 
begotten, and procession contain the idea of separation: for these 
terms do not explain His essence, but the mutual relationship and 
manner of existence. 

When, then, we have perceived these things and are conducted from 
these to the divine essence, we do not apprehend the essence itself 
but only the attributes of the essence: just as we have not 
apprehended the essence of the soul even when we have learnt that 
it is incorporeal and without magnitude and form: nor again, the 
essence of the body when we know that it is white or black, but only 
the attributes of the essence. Further, the true doctrine teacheth that 
the Deity is simple and has one simple energy, good and energising 
in all things, just as the sun's ray, which warms all things and 
energises in each in harmony with its natural aptitude and receptive 
power, having obtained this form of energy from God, its Maker. 

But quite distinct is all that pertains to the divine and benignant 
incarnation of the divine Word. For in that neither the Father nor the 
Spirit have any part at all, unless so far as regards approval and the 
working of inexplicable miracles which the God-Word, having 
become man like us, worked, as unchangeable God and son of God. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-10.htm2006-06-01 18:06:35

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.11. 

CHAPTER XI. Concerning what is affirmed about God as 
though He had body. 

Since we find many terms used symbolically in the Scriptures 
concerning God which are more applicable to that which has body, 
we should recognise that it is quite impossible for us men clothed 
about with this dense covering of flesh to understand or speak of the 
divine and lofty and immaterial energies of the Godhead, except by 
the use of images and types and symbols derived from our own life. 
So then all the statements concerning God, that imply body, are 
symbols, but have a higher meaning: for the Deity is simple and 
formless. Hence by God's eyes and eyelids and sight we are to 
understand His power of overseeing all things and His knowledge, 
that nothing can escape: for in the case of us this sense makes our 
knowledge more complete and more full of certainty. By God's ears 
and hearing is meant His readiness to be propitiated and to receive 
our petitions: for it is this sense that renders us also kind to 
suppliants, inclining our ear to them more graciously. God's mouth 
and speech are His means of indicating His will; for it is by the 
mouth and speech that we make clear the thoughts that are in the 
heart: God's food and drink are our concurrence to His will, for we, 
too, satisfy the necessities of our natural appetite through the sense 
of taste. And God's sense of smell is His appreciation of our 
thoughts of and good will towards Him, for it is through this sense 
that we appreciate sweet fragrance. And God's countenance is the 
demonstration and manifestation of Himself through His works, for 
our manifestation is through the countenance. And God's hands 
mean the effectual nature of His energy, for it is with our own hands 
that we accomplish our most useful and valuable work. And His right 
hand is His aid in prosperity, for it is the right hand that we also use 
when making anything of beautiful shape or of great value, or where 
much strength is required. His handling is His power of accurate 
discrimination and exaction, even in the minutest and most secret 
details, for those whom we have handled cannot conceal from us 
aught within themselves. His feet and walk are His advent and 
presence, either for the purpose of bringing succour to the needy, or 
vengeance against enemies, or to perform any other action, for it is 
by using our feet that we come to arrive at any place. His oath is the 
unchangeableness of His counsel, for it is by oath that we confirm 
our compacts with one another. His anger and fury are His hatred of 
and aversion to all wickedness, for we, too, hate that which is 
contrary to our mind and become enraged thereat. His forgetfulness 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-11.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:35

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.11. 

and sleep and slumbering are His delay in taking vengeance on His 
enemies and the postponement of the accustomed help to His own. 
And to put it shortly, all the statements made about God that imply 
body have some hidden meaning and teach us what is above us by 
means of something familiar to ourselves, with the exception of any 
statement concerning the bodily sojourn of the God-Word. For He for 
our safety took upon Himself the whole nature of man, the thinking 
spirit, the body, and all the properties of human nature, even the 
natural and blameless passions. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-11.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:35

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.12. 

CHAPTER XII. Concerning the Same. 

The following, then, are the mysteries which we have learned from 
the holy oracles, as the divine Dionysius the Areopagite said: that 
God is the cause and beginning of all: the essence of all that have 
essence: the life of the living: the reason of all rational beings: the 
intellect of all intelligent beings: the recalling and restoring of those 
who fall away from Him: the renovation and transformation of those 
that corrupt that which is natural: the holy foundation of those who 
are tossed in unholiness: the steadfastness of those who have stood 
firm: the way of those whose course is directed to Him and the hand 
stretched forth to guide them upwards. And I shall add He is also the 
Father of all His creatures (for God, Who brought us into being out of 
nothing, is in a stricter sense our Father than are our parents who 
have derived both being and begetting from Him): the shepherd of 
those who follow and are tended by Him: the radiance of those who 
are enlightened: the initiation of the initiated: the deification of the 
deified: the peace of those at discord: the simplicity of those who 
love simplicity: the unity of those who worship unity: of all beginning 
the beginning, super-essential because above all beginnings: and 
the good revelation of what is hidden, that is, of the knowledge of 
Him so far as that is lawful for and attainable by each. 

Further and more accurately concerning divine names. 

The Deity being incomprehensible is also assuredly nameless. 
Therefore since we know not His essence, let us not seek for a name 
for His essence. For names are explanations of actual things. But 
God, Who is good and brought us out of nothing into being that we 
might share in His goodness, and Who gave us the faculty of 
knowledge, not only did not impart to us His essence, but did not 
even grant us the knowledge of His essence. For it is impossible for 
nature to understand fully the supernatural. Moreover, if knowledge 
is of things that are, how can there be knowledge of the superessential? Through His unspeakable goodness, then, it pleased Him 
to be called by names that we could understand, that we might not 
be altogether cut off from the knowlege of Him but should have some 
notion of Him, however vague. Inasmuch, then, as He is 
incomprehensible, He is also unnameable. But inasmuch as He is the 
cause of all and contains in Himself the reasons and causes of all 
that is, He receives names drawn from all that is, even from 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-12.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:35

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.12. 

opposites: for example, He is called light and darkness, water and 
fire: in order that we may know that these are not of His essence but 
that He is super-essential and unnameable: but inasmuch as He is 
the cause of all, He receives names from all His effects. 

Wherefore, of the divine names, some have a negative signification, 
and indicate that He is super-essential: such are "non-essential," 
"timeless," "without beginning," "invisible": not that God is inferior 
to anything or lacking in anything (for all things are His and have 
become from Him and through Him and endure in Him), but that He is 
pre-eminently separated from all that is. For He is not one of the 
things that are, but over all things. Some again have an affirmative 
signification, as indicating that He is the cause of all things. For as 
the cause of all that is and of all essence, He is called both Ens and 
Essence. And as the cause of all reason and wisdom, of the rational 
and the wise, He is called both reason and rational, and wisdom and 
wise. Similarly He is spoken of as Intellect and Intellectual, Life and 
Living, Power and Powerful, and so on with all the rest. Or rather 
those names are most appropriate to Him which are derived from 
what is most precious and most akin to Himself. That which is 
immaterial is more precious and more akin to Himself than that 
which is material, and the pure than the impure, and the holy than 
the unholy: for they have greater part in Him. So then, sun and light 
will be more apt names for Him than darkness, and day than night, 
and life than death, and fire and spirit and water, as having life, than 
earth, and above all, goodness than wickedness: which is just to 
say, being more than not being. For goodness is existence and the 
cause of existence, but wickedness is the negation of goodness, that 
is, of existence. These, then, are the affirmations and the negations, 
but the sweetest names are a combination of both: for example, the 
super-essential essence, the Godhead that is more than God, the 
beginning that is above beginning and such like. Further there are 
some affirmations about God which have in a pre-eminent degree the 
force of denial: for example, darkness: for this does not imply that 
God is darkness but that He is not light, but above light. 

God then is called Mind and Reason and Spirit and Wisdom and 
Power, as the cause of these, and as immaterial, and maker of all, 
and omnipotent. And these names are common to the whole 
Godhead, whether affirmative or negative. And they are also used of 
each of the subsistences of the Holy Trinity in the very same and 
identical way and with their full significance. For when I think of one 
of the subsistences, I recognise it to be perfect God and perfect 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-12.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:35

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.12. 

essence: but when I combine and reckon the three together, I know 
one perfect God. For the Godhead is not compound but in three 
perfect subsistences, one perfect indivisible and uncompound God. 
And when I think of the relation of the three subsistences to each 
other, I perceive that the Father is super-essential Sun, source of 
goodness, fathomless sea of essence, reason, wisdom, power, light, 
divinity: the generating and productive source of good hidden in it. 
He Himself then is mind, the depth of reason, begetter of the Word, 
and through the Word the Producer of the revealing Spirit. And to put 
it shortly, the Father has no reason, wisdom, power, will, save the 
Son Who is the only power of the Father the immediate cause of the 
creation of the universe: as perfect subsistence begotten of perfect 
subsistence in a manner known to Himself, Who is and is named the 
Son. And the Holy Spirit is the power of the Father revealing the 
hidden mysteries of His Divinity, proceeding from the Father through 
the Son in a manner known to Himself, but different from that of 
generation. Wherefore the Holy Spirit is the perfecter of the creation 
of the universe. All the terms, then, that are appropriate to the 
Father, as cause, source, begetter, are to be ascribed to the Father 
alone: while those that are appropriate to the caused, begotten Son, 
Word, immediate power, will, wisdom, are to be ascribed to the Son: 
and those that are appropriate to the caused, processional, 
manifesting, perfecting power, are to be ascribed to the Holy Spirit. 
The Father is the source and cause of the Son and the Holy Spirit: 
Father of the Son alone and producer of the Holy Spirit. The Son is 
Son, Word, Wisdom, Power, Image, Effulgence, Impress of the Father 
and derived from the Father. But the Holy Spirit is not the Son of the 
Father but the Spirit of the Father as proceeding from the Father. For 
there is no impulse without Spirit. And we speak also of the Spirit of 
the Son, not as through proceeding from Him, but as proceeding 
through Him from the Father. For the Father alone is cause. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-12.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:35

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.13. 

CHAPTER XIII. Concerning the place of God: and that the 
Deity alone is uncircumscribed. 

Bodily place is the limit of that which contains, by which that which 
is contained is contained: for example, the air contains but the body 
is contained. But it is not the whole of the containing air which is the 
place of the contained body, but the limit of the containing air, where 
it comes into contact with the contained body: and the reason is 
clearly because that which contains is not within that which it 
contains. 

But there is also mental place where mind is active, and mental and 
incorporeal nature exists: where mind dwells and energises and is 
contained not in a bodily but in a mental fashion. For it is without 
form, and so cannot be contained as a body is. God, then, being 
immaterial and uncircumscribed, has not place. For He is His own 
place, filling all things and being above all things, and Himself 
maintaining all things. Yet we speak of God having place and the 
place of God where His energy becomes manifest. For He penetrates 
everything without mixing with it, and imparts to all His energy in 
proportion to the fitness and receptive power of each: and by this I 
mean, a purity both natural and voluntary. For the immaterial is purer 
than the material, and that which is virtuous than that which is linked 
with vice. Wherefore by the place of God is meant that which has a 
greater share in His energy and grace. For this reason the Heaven is 
His throne. For in it are the angels who do His will and are always 
glorifying Him. For this is His rest and the earth is His footstool. For 
in it He dwelt in the flesh among men. And His sacred flesh has been 
named the foot of God. The Church, too, is spoken of as the place of 
God: for we have set this apart for the glorifying of God as a sort of 
consecrated place wherein we also hold converse with Him. Likewise 
also the places in which His energy becomes manifest to us, whether 
through the flesh or apart from flesh, are spoken of as the places of 
God. 

But it must be understood that the Deity is indivisible, being 
everywhere wholly in His entirety and not divided up part by part like 
that which has body, but wholly in everything and wholly above 
everything. Marg. MS. Concerning the place of angel and spirit, and 
concerning the uncircumscribed. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-13.htm (1 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:36

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.13. 

The angel, although not contained in place with figured form as is 
body, yet is spoken of as being in place because he has a mental 
presence and energises in accordance with his nature, and is not 
elsewhere but has his mental limitations there where he energises. 
For it is impossible to energise at the same time in different places. 
For to God alone belongs the power of energising everywhere at the 
same time. The angel energises in different places by the quickness 
of his nature and the promptness and speed by which he can change 
his place: but the Deity, Who is everywhere and above all, energises 
at the same time in diverse ways with one simple energy. 

Further the soul is bound up with the body. whole with whole and not 
part with part: and it is not contained by the body but contains it as 
fire does iron, and being in it energises with its own proper energies. 

That which is comprehended in place or time or apprehension is 
circumscribed: while that which is contained by none of these is 
uncircumscribed. Wherefore the Deity alone is uncircumscribed, 
being without beginning and without end, and containing all things, 
and in no wise apprehended. For He alone is incomprehensible and 
unbounded, within no one's knowledge and contemplated by Himself 
alone. But the angel is circumscribed alike in time (for His being had 
commencement) and in place (but mental space, as we said above) 
and in apprehension. For they know somehow the nature of each 
other and have their bounds perfectly defined by the Creator. Bodies 
in short are circumscribed both in beginning and end, and bodily 
place and apprehension. 

Marg. MS. From various sources concerning God and the father, and 
the Son, and the Holy Spirit. And concerning the Word and the Spirit. 

The Deity, then, is quite unchangeable and invariable. For all things 
which are not in our hands He hath predetermined by His 
foreknowledge, each in its own proper and peculiar time and place. 
And accordingly the Father judgeth no one, but hath given all 
judgment to the Son. For clearly the Father and the Son and also the 
Holy Spirit judged as God. But the Son Himself will descend in the 
body as man, and will sit on the throne of Glory (for descending and 
sitting require circumscribed body), and will judge all the world in 
justice. 

All things are far apart from God, not in place but in nature. In our 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-13.htm (2 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:36

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.13. 

case, thoughtfulness, and wisdom, and counsel come to pass and 
go away as states of being. Not so in the case of God: for with Him 
there is no happening or ceasing to be: for He is invariable and 
unchangeable: and it would not be right to speak of contingency in 
connection with Him. For goodness is concomitant with essence. He 
who longs alway after God, he seeth Him: for God is in all things. 
Existing things are dependent on that which is, and nothing can be 
unless it is in that which is. God then is mingled with everything, 
maintaining their nature: and in His holy flesh the God-Word is made 
one in subsistence and is mixed with our nature, yet without 
confusion. 

No one seeth the Father, save the Son and the Spirit. 

The Son is the counsel and wisdom and power of the Father. For one 
may not speak of quality in connection with God, from fear of 
implying that He was a compound of essence and quality. 

The Son is from the Father, and derives from Him all His properties: 
hence He cannot do ought of Himself. For He has not energy peculiar 
to Himself and distinct from the Father. 

That God Who is invisible by nature is made visible by His energies, 
we perceive from the organisation and government of the world. 

The Son is the Father's image, and the Spirit the Son's, through 
which Christ dwelling in man makes him after his own image. 

The Holy Spirit is God, being between the unbegotten and the 
begotten, and united to the Father through the Son. We speak of the 
Spirit of God, the Spirit of Christ, the mind of Christ, the Spirit of the 
Lord, the very Lord, the Spirit of adoption, of truth, of liberty, of 
wisdom (for He is the creator of all these): filling all things with 
essence, maintaining all things, filling the universe with essence, 
while yet the universe is not the measure of His power. 

God is everlasting and unchangeable essence, creator of all that is, 
adored with pious consideration. 

God is also Father, being ever unbegotten, for He was born of no 
one, but hath begotten His co-eternal Son: God is likewise Son, 
being always with the Father, born of the Father timelessly, 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-13.htm (3 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:36

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.13. 

everlastingly, without flux or passion, or separation from Him. God is 
also Holy Spirit, being sanctifying power, subsistential, proceeding 
from the Father without separation, and resting in the Son, identical 
in essence with Father and Son. 

Word is that which is ever essentially present with the Father. Again, 
word is also the natural movement of the mind, according to which it 
is moved and thinks and considers, being as it were its own light and 
radiance. Again, word is the thought that is spoken only within the 
heart. And again, word is the utterance that is the messenger of 
thought. God therefore is Word essential and enhypostatic: and the 
other three kinds of word are faculties of the soul, and are not 
contemplated as having a proper subsistence of their own. The first 
of these is the natural offspring of the mind, ever welling up naturally 
out of it: the second is the thought: and the third is the utterance. 

The Spirit has various meanings. There is the Holy Spirit: but the 
powers of the Holy Spirit are also spoken of as spirits: the good 
messenger is also spirit: the demon also is spirit: the soul too is 
spirit: and sometimes mind also is spoken of as spirit. Finally the 
wind is spirit and the air is spirit. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-13.htm (4 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:36

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.14. 

CHAPTER XIV. The properties of the divine nature. 

Uncreate, without beginning, immortal, infinite, eternal, immaterial, 
good, creative, just, enlightening, immutable, passionless, 
uncircumscribed, immeasurable, unlimited, undefined, unseen, 
unthinkable, wanting in nothing, being His own rule and authority, allruling, life-giving, omnipotent, of infinite power, con-raining and 
maintaining the universe and making provision for all: all these and 
such like attributes the Deity possesses by nature, not having 
received them from elsewhere, but Himself imparting all good to His 
own creations according to the capacity of each. 

The subsistences dwell and are established firmly in one another. 
For they are inseparable and cannot part from one another, but keep 
to their separate courses within one another, without coalescing or 
mingling, but cleaving to each other. For the Son is in the Father and 
the Spirit: and the Spirit in the Father and the Son: and the Father in 
the Son and the Spirit, but there is no coalescence or commingling 
or confusion And there is one and the same motion: for there is one 
impulse and one motion of the three subsistences, which is not to be 
observed in any created nature. 

Further the divine effulgence and energy, being one anti simple and 
indivisible, assuming many varied forms in its goodness among 
what is divisible and allotting to each the component parts of its own 
nature, still remains simple and is multiplied without division among 
the divided, and gathers and converts the divided into its own 
simplicity. For all things long after it and have their existence in it. It 
gives also to all things being according to their several natures, and 
it is itself the being of existing things, the life of living things, the 
reason of rational beings, the thought of thinking beings. But it is 
itself above mind and reason and life and essence. 

Further the divine nature has the property of penetrating all things 
without mixing with them and of being itself impenetrable by 
anything else. Moreover, there is the property of knowing all things 
with a simple knowledge and of seeing all things, simply with His 
divine, all-surveying, immaterial eye, both the things of the present, 
and the things of the past, and the things of the future, before they 
come into being. It is also sinless, and can cast sin out, and bring 
salvation: and all that it wills, it can accomplish, but does not will all 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-14.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:36

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.0, C.14. 

it could accomplish. For it could destroy the universe but it does not 
will so to do. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa0-14.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:36

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.1. 

BOOK II 

CHAPTER I. Concerning aeon or age. 

HE created the ages Who Himself was. before the ages, Whom the 
divine David thus addresses, From age to age Than art. The divine 
apostle also says, Through Whom He created the ages. 

It must then be understood that the word age has various meanings, 
for it denotes many things. The life of each man is called an age. 
Again, a period of a thousand years is called an age. Again, the 
whole course of the present life is called an age: also the future life, 
the immortal life after the resurrection, is spoken of as an age. Again, 
the word age is used to denote, not time nor yet a part of time as 
measured by the movement and course of the sun, that is to say, 
composed of days and nights, but the sort of temporal motion and 
interval that is co-extensive with eternity. For age is to things eternal 
just what time is to things temporal. 

Seven ages of this world are spoken of, that is, from the creation of 
the heaven and earth till the general consummation and resurrection 
of men. For there is a partial consummation, viz., the death of each 
man: but there is also a general and complete consummation, when 
the general resurrection of men will come to pass. And the eighth 
age is the age to come. 

Before the world was formed, when there was as yet no sun dividing 
day from night, there was not an age such as could be measured, but 
there was the sort of temporal motion and interval that is coextensive with eternity. And in this sense there is but one age, and 
God is spoken of as aiwnios and proaiwnios, for the age or aeon 
itself is His creation. For God, Who alone is without beginning, is 
Himself the Creator of all things, whether age or any other existing 
thing. And when I say God, it is evident that I mean the Father and 
His Only. begotten Son, our Lord, Jesus Christ, and His all-holy 
Spirit, our one God. 

But we speak also of ages of ages, inasmuch as the seven ages of 
the present world include many ages in the sense of lives of men, 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-1.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:36

 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.1. 

and the one age embraces all the ages, and the present and the 
future are spoken of as age of age. Further, everlasting (i.e. aiwnios) 
life and everlasting punishment prove that the age or neon to come 
is unending. For time will not be counted by days and nights even 
after the resurrection, but there will rather be one day with no 
evening, wherein the Sun of Justice will shine brightly on the just, 
but for the sinful there will be night profound and limitless. In what 
way then will the period of one thousand years be counted which, 
according to Origen, is required for the complete restoration? Of all 
the ages, therefore, the sole creator is God Who hath also created 
the universe and Who was before the ages. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-1.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:36

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.2. 

CHAPTER II. Concerning the creation. 

Since, then, God, Who is good and more than good, did not find 
satisfaction in self-contemplation, but in fits exceeding goodness 
wished certain things to come into existence which would enjoy His 
benefits and share in His goodness, He brought all things out of 
nothing into being and created them, both what is invisible and what 
is visible. Yea, even man, who is a compound of the visible and the 
invisible. And it is by thought that He creates, and thought is the 
basis of the work, the Word filling it and the Spirit perfecting it. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...ry/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-2.htm2006-06-01 18:06:37

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.3. 

CHAPTER IlI Concerning angels. 

He is Himself the Maker and Creator of the angels: for He brought 
them out of nothing into being and created them after His own 
image, an incorporeal race, a sort of spirit or immaterial fire: in the 
words of the divine David, He maketh His angels spirits, and His 
ministers a flame of fire: and He has described their lightness and 
the ardour, and heat, and keenness and sharpness with which they 
hunger for God and serve Him, and how they are borne to the 
regions above and are quite delivered from all material thought. 

An angel, then, is an intelligent essence, in perpetual motion, with 
free-will, incorporeal, ministering to God, having obtained by grace 
an immortal nature: and the Creator alone knows the form and 
limitation of its essence. But all that we can understand is, that it is 
incorporeal and immaterial. For all that is compared with God Who 
alone is incomparable, we find to be dense and material. For in 
reality only the Deity is immaterial and incorporeal. 

The angel's nature then is rational, and intelligent, and endowed with 
free-will, change. able in will, or fickle. For all that is created is 
changeable, and only that which is un-created is unchangeable. Also 
all that is rational is endowed with free-will. As it is, then, rational 
and intelligent, it is endowed with free-will: and as it is created, it is 
changeable, having power either to abide or progress in goodness, 
or to turn towards evil. 

It is not susceptible of repentance because it is incorporeal. For it is 
owing to the weakness of his body that man comes to have 
repentance. 

It is immortal, not by natures but by grace. For all that has had 
beginning comes also to its natural end. But God alone is eternal, or 
rather, He is above the Eternal: for He, the Creator of times, is not 
under the dominion of time, but above time. 

They are secondary intelligent lights derived from that first light 
which is without beginning, for they have the power of illumination; 
they have no need of tongue or hearing, but without uttering words 
they communicate to each other their own thoughts and counsels. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-3.htm (1 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:37

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.3. 

Through the Word, therefore, all the angels were created, and 
through the sanctification by the Holy Spirit were they brought to 
perfection, sharing each in proportion to his worth and rank in 
brightness and grace. 

They are circumscribed: for when they are in the Heaven they are not 
on the earth: and when they are sent by God down to the earth they 
do not remain in the Heaven. They are not hemmed in by walls and 
doors, and bars and seals, for they are quite unlimited. Unlimited, I 
repeat, for it is not as they really are that they reveal themselves to 
the worthy men to whom God wishes them to appear, but in a 
changed form which the beholders are capable of seeing. For that 
alone is naturally and strictly unlimited which is un-created. For 
every created tiring is limited by God Who created it. 

Further, apart from their essence they receive the sanctification from 
the Spirit: through the divine grace they prophesy: they have no 
need of marriage for they are immortal. 

Seeing that they are minds they are in mental places, and are not 
circumscribed after the fashion of a body. For they have not a bodily 
form by nature, nor are they tended in three dimensions. But to 
whatever post they may be assigned, there they are present after the 
manner of a mind and energise, and cannot be present and energise 
in various places at the same time. 

Whether they are equals in essence or differ from one another we 
know not. God, their Creator, Who knoweth all things, alone 
knoweth. But they differ from each other in brightness and position, 
whether it is that their position is dependent on their brightness, or 
their brightness on their position: and they impart brightness to one 
another, because they excel one another in rank and nature. And 
clearly the higher share their brightness and knowledge with the 
lower. 

They are mighty and prompt to fulfil the will of the Deity, and their 
nature is endowed with such celerity that wherever the Divine glance 
bids them there they are straightway found. They are the guardians 
of the divisions of the earth: they are set over nations and regions, 
allotted to them by their Creator: they govern all our affairs and bring 
us succour. And the reason surely is because they are set over us by 
the divine will and command and are ever in the vicinity of God. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-3.htm (2 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:37

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.3. 

With difficulty they are moved to evil, yet they are not absolutely 
immoveable: but now they are altogether immoveable, not by nature 
but by grace and by their nearness to the Only Good. 

They behold God according to their capacity, and this is their food. 

They are above us for they are incorporeal, and are free of all bodily 
passion, yet are not passionless: for the Deity alone is passionless. 

They take different forms at the bidding of their Master, God, and 
thus reveal themselves to men and unveil the divine mysteries to 
them. 

They have Heaven for their dwelling-place, and have one duty, to 
sing God's praise and carry out His divine will. 

Moreover, as that most holy, and sacred, and gifted theologian, 
Dionysius the Areopagite, says, All theology, that is to say, the holy 
Scripture, has nine different names for the heavenly essences. These 
essences that divine master in sacred things divides into three 
groups, each containing three. And the first group, he says, consists 
of those who are in God's presence and are said to be directly and 
immediately one with Him, viz., the Seraphim with their six wings, the 
many-eyed Cherubim and those that sit in the holiest thrones. The 
second group is that of the Dominions, and the Powers, and the 
Authorities; and the third, and last, is that of the Rulers and 
Archangels and Angels 

Some, indeed, like Gregory the Theologian, say that these were 
before the creation of other things. He thinks that the angelic and 
heavenly powers were first and that thought was their function. 
Others, again, hold that they were created after the first heaven was 
made. But all are agreed that it was before the foundation of man. 
For myself, I am in harmony with the theologian. For it was fitting 
that the mental essence should be the first created, and then that 
which can be perceived, and finally man himself, in whose being 
both parts are united. 

But those who say that the angels are creators of any kind of 
essence whatever are the mouth of their father, the devil. For since 
they are created things they are not creators. But He Who creates 
and provides for and maintains all things is God, Who alone is 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-3.htm (3 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:37

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.3. 

uncreate and is praised and glorified in the Father, the Son, and the 
Holy Spirit. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-3.htm (4 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:37

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.4. 

CHAPTER IV. Concerning the devil and demons. 

He who from among these angelic powers was set over the earthly 
realm, and into whose hands God committed the guardianship of the 
earth, was not made wicked in nature but was good, and made for 
good ends, and received from his Creator no trace whatever of evil in 
himself. But he did not sustain the brightness and the honour which 
the Creator had bestowed on him, and of his free choice was 
changed from what was in harmony to what was at variance with his 
nature, and became roused against God Who created him, and 
determined to rise in rebellion against Him: and he was the first to 
depart from good and become evil. For evil is nothing else than 
absence of goodness, just as darkness also is absence of light. For 
goodness is the light of the mind, and, similarly, evil is the darkness 
of the mind. Light, therefore, being the work of the Creator and being 
made good (for God saw all that He made, and behold they were 
exceeding good) produced darkness at His free-will. But along with 
him an innumerable host of angels subject to him were torn away 
and followed him and shared in his fall. Wherefore, being of the 
same nature as the angels, they became wicked, turning away at 
their own free choice from good to evil 

Hence they have no power or strength against any one except what 
God in His dispensation hath conceded to them, as for instance, 
against Job and those swine that are mentioned in the Gospels. But 
when God has made the concession they do prevail, and are 
changed and transformed into any form whatever in which they wish 
to appear. 

Of the future both the angels of God and the demons are alike 
ignorant: yet they make predictions. God reveals the future to the 
angels and commands them to prophesy, and so what they say 
comes to pass. But the demons also make predictions, sometimes 
because they see what is happening at a distance, and sometimes 
merely making guesses: hence much that they say is false and they 
should not be believed, even although they do often, in the way we 
have said, tell what is true. Besides they know the Scriptures. 

All wickedness, then, and all impure passions are the work of their 
mind. But while the liberty to attack man has been granted to them, 
they have not the strength to over master any one: for we have it in 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-4.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:37

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.4. 

our power to receive or not to receive the attack. Wherefore there 
has been prepared for the devil and his demons, and those who 
follow him, fire unquenchable and everlasting punishment. 

Note, further, that what in the case of man is death is a fall in the 
case of angels. For after the fall there is no possibility of repentance 
for them, just as after death there is for men no repentance. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-4.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:37

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.5. 

CHAPTER V. Concerning the visible creation. 

Our God Himself, Whom we glorify as Three in One, created the 
heaven and the earth and all that they contain, and brought all things 
out of nothing into being: some He made out of no pre-existing basis 
of matter, such as heaven, earth, air, fire, water: and the rest out of 
these elements that He had created, such as living creatures, plants, 
seeds. For these are made up of earth, and water, and air, and fire, at 
the bidding of the Creator. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...ry/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-5.htm2006-06-01 18:06:37

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.6. 

CHAPTER VI. Concerning the Heaven. 

The heaven is the circumference of things created, both visible and 
invisible. For within its boundary are included and marked off both 
the mental faculties of the angels and all the world of sense. But the 
Deity alone is uncircumscribed, filling all things, and surrounding all 
things, and hounding all things, for He is above all things, and has 
created all things. 

Since, therefore, the Scripture speaks of heaven, and heaven of 
heaven, and heavens of heavens, and the blessed Paul says that he 
was snatched away to the third heaven, we say that in the 
cosmogony of the universe we accept the creation of a heaven which 
the foreign philosophers, appropriating the views of Moses, call a 
starless sphere. But further, God called the firmament also heaven, 
which He commanded to be in the midst of the waters, setting it to 
divide the waters that are above the firmament from the waters that 
are below the firmament. And its nature, according to the divine 
Basilius, who is versed in the mysteries of divine Scripture, is 
delicate as smoke. Others, however, hold that it is watery in nature, 
since it is set in the midst of the waters: others say it is composed of 
the four elements: and lastly, others speak of it as a filth body, 
distinct from the four elements. 

Further, some have thought that the heaven encircles the universe 
and has the form of a sphere, and that everywhere it is the highest 
point, and that the centre of the space enclosed by it is the lowest 
part: and, further, that those bodies that are light and airy are allotted 
by the Creator the upper region: while those that are heavy and tend 
to descend occupy the lower region, which is the middle. The 
element, then, that is lightest and most inclined to soar upwards is 
fire, and hence they hold that its position is immediately after the 
heaven, and they call it ether, and after it comes the lower air. But 
earth and water, which are heavier and have more of a downward 
tendency, are suspended in the centre. Therefore, taking them in the 
reverse order, we have in the lowest situation earth and water: but 
water is lighter than earth, and hence is more easily set in motion: 
above these on all hands, like a covering; is the circle of air, and all 
round the air is the circle of ether, and outside air is the circle of the 
heaven. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-6.htm (1 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:38

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.6. 

Further, they say that the heaven moves in a circle and so 
compresses all that is within it, that they remain firm and not liable to 
fall asunder. 

They say also that there are seven zones of the heaven, one higher 
than the other. And its nature, they say, is of extreme fineness, like 
that of smoke, and each zone contains one of the planets. For there 
are said to be seven planets: Sol, Luna, Jupiter, Mercury, Mars, 
Venus and Saturn. But sometimes Venus is called Lucifer and 
sometimes Vesper. These are called planets because their 
movements are the reverse of those of the heaven. For while the 
heaven and all other stars move from east to west, these alone move 
from west to east. And this can easily be seen in the case of the 
moon, which moves each evening a little backwards. 

All, therefore, who hold that the heaven is in the form of a sphere, 
say that it is equally removed and distant from the earth at all points, 
whether above, or sideways, or below. And by 'below' and ' 
sideways' I mean all that comes within the range of our senses. For it 
follows from what has been said, that the heaven occupies the whole 
of the upper region and the earth the whole of the lower. They say, 
besides, that the heaven encircles the earth in the manner of a 
sphere, and bears along with it in its most rapid revolutions sun, 
moon and stars, and that when the sun is over the earth it becomes 
day there, and when it is under the earth it is night. And, again, when 
the sun goes under the earth it is night here, but day yonder. 

Others have pictured the heaven as a hemisphere. This idea is 
suggested by these words of David, the singer of God, Who 
stretchest out the heavens like a curtain, by which word he clearly 
means a tent: and by these from the blessed Isaiah, Who hath 
established the heavens like a vault: and also because when the sun, 
moon, and stars set they make a circuit round the earth from west to 
north, and so reach once more the east. Still, whether it is this way 
or that, all things have been made and established by the divine 
command, and have the divine will and counsel for a foundation that 
cannot be moved. For He Himself spoke and they were made: He 
Himself commanded and they were created. He hath also established 
them for ever and ever: He hath made a decree which will not pass. 

The heaven of heaven, then, is the first heaven which is above the 
firmament. So here we have two heavens, for God called the 
firmament also Heaven. And it is customary in the divine Scripture to 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-6.htm (2 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:38

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.6. 

speak of the air also as heavens, because we see it above us. Bless 
Him, it says, all ye birds of the heaven, meaning of the air. For it is 
the air and not the heaven that is the region in which birds fly. So 
here we have three heavens, as the divine Apostle said. But if you 
should wish to look upon the seven zones as seven heavens there is 
no injury done to the word of truth. For it is usual in the Hebrew 
tongue to speak of heaven in the plural, that is, as heavens, and 
when a Hebrew wishes to say heaven of heaven, he usually says 
heavens of heavens, and this clearly means heaven of heaven, which 
is above the firmament, and the waters which are above the heavens, 
whether it is the air and the firmament, or the seven zones of the 
firmament, or the firmament itself which are spoken of in the plural 
as heavens according to the Hebrew custom. 

All things, then, which are brought into existence are subject to 
corruption according to the law of their nature, and so even the 
heavens themselves are corruptible. But by the grace of God they 
are maintained and preserved. Only the Deity, however, is by nature 
without beginning and without end. Wherefore it has been said, They 
will perish, but Thou dost endure: nevertheless, the heavens will not 
be utterly destroyed. For they will wax old and be wound round as a 
covering, and will be changed, and there will be a new heaven and a 
new earth. 

For the great part the heaven is greater than the earth, but we need 
not investigate the essence of the heaven, for it is quite beyond our 
knowledge. 

It must not be supposed that the heavens or the luminaries are 
endowed with life. For they are inanimate and insensible. So that 
when the divine Scripture saith, Let the heavens rejoice and the 
earth be glad, it is the angels in heaven and the men on earth that are 
invited to rejoice. For the Scripture is familiar with the figure of 
personification, and is wont to speak of inanimate things as though 
they were animate: for example, The sea saw it and fled: Jordan was 
driven back. And again, What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou 
fleddest? thou, O Jordan, that thou was driven back? Mountains, too, 
and hills are asked the reason of their leaping in the same way as we 
are wont to say, the city was gathered together, when we do not 
mean the buildings, but the inhabitants of the city: again, the 
heavens declare the glory of God, does not mean that they send 
forth a voice that can be heard by bodily ears, but that from their 
own greatness they bring before our minds the power of the Creator: 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-6.htm (3 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:38

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.6. 

and when we contemplate their beauty we praise the Maker as the 
Master-Craftsman. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-6.htm (4 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:38

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.7. 

CHAPTER VII. Concerning light, fire, the luminaries, sun, 
moon and stars. 

Fire is one of the four elements, light and with a greater tendency to 
ascend than the others. It has the power of burning and also of 
giving light, and it was made by the Creator on the first day. For the 
divine Scripture says, And God said, Let there be light, and there 
was light. Fire is not a different thing from what light is, as some 
maintain. Others again hold that this fire of the universe is above the 
air and call it ether. In the beginning, then, that is to say on the first 
day, God created light, the ornament and glory of the whole visible 
creation. For take away light and all things remain in 
undistinguishable darkness, incapable of displaying their native 
beauty. And God called the light day, but the darkness He called 
night. Further, darkness is not any essence, but an accident: for it is 
simply absence of light. The air, indeed, has not light in its essence. 
It was, then, this very absence of light from the air that God called 
darkness: and it is not the essence of air that is darkness, but the 
absence of light which clearly is rather an accident than an essence. 
And, indeed, it was not night, but day, that was first named, so that 
day is first and after that comes night. Night, therefore, follows day. 
And from the beginning of day till the next day is one complete 
period of day and night. For the Scripture says, And the evening and 
the morning were one day. 

When, therefore, in the first three days the light was poured forth and 
reduced at the divine command, both day and night came to pass. 
But on the fourth day God created the great luminary, that is, the 
sun, to have rule and authority over the day: for it is by it that day is 
made: for it is day when the sun is above the earth, and the duration 
of a day is the course of the sun over the earth from its rising till its 
setting. And He also created the lesser luminaries, that is, the moon 
and the stars, to have rule and authority over the night, and to give 
light by night. For it is night when the sun is under the earth, and the 
duration of night is the course of the sun under the earth from its 
rising till its setting. The moon, then, and the stars were set to 
lighten the night: not that they are in the daytime under the earth, for 
even by day stars are in the heaven over the earth but the sun 
conceals both the stars and the moon by the greater brilliance of its 
light and prevents them from being seen. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-7.htm (1 of 9)2006-06-01 18:06:39

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.7. 

On these luminaries the Creator bestowed the first-created light: not 
because He was in need of other light, but that that light might not 
remain idle. For a luminary is not merely light, but a vessel for 
containing light. 

There are, we are told, seven planets amongst these luminaries, and 
these move in a direction opposite to that of the heaven: hence the 
name planets. For, while they say that the heaven moves from east 
to west, the planets move from west to east; but the heaven bears 
the seven planets along with it by its swifter motion. Now these are 
the names of the seven planets: Luna, Mercury, Venus, Sol, Mars, 
Jupiter, Saturn, and in each zone of heaven is, we are told, one of 
these seven planets: 

In the 
first 
and 
highest / 
Saturn 

In the 
second / 
Jupiter 

In the 
third / 
Mars 

In the 
fourth / 
Sol 

In the 
fifth / 
Venus 

In the 
sixth / 
Mercury 

In the 
seventh 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-7.htm (2 of 9)2006-06-01 18:06:39

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.7. 

and 
lowest / 
Luna 

The course which the Creator appointed for them to run is unceasing 
and remaineth fixed as He established them. For the divine David 
says, The moan and the stars which Thou establishedst, and by the 
word 'establishedst,' he referred to the fixity and unchangeableness 
of the order and series granted to them by God. For He appointed 
them for seasons, and signs, and days and years. It is through the 
Sun that the four seasons are brought about. And the first of these is 
spring: for in it God created all things, and even down to the present 
time its presence is evidenced by the bursting of the flowers into 
bud, and this is the equinoctial period, since day and night each 
consist of twelve hours. It is caused by the sun rising in the middle, 
and is mild and increases the blood, and is warm and moist, and 
holds a position midway between winter and summer, being warmer 
and drier than winter, but colder and moister than summer. This 
season lasts from March 21st till June 24th. Next, when the rising of 
the sun moves towards more northerly parts, the season of summer 
succeeds, which has a place midway between spring and autumn, 
combining the warmth of spring with the dryness of autumn: for it is 
dry and warm, and increases the yellow bile. In it falls the longest 
day, which has fifteen hours, and the shortest night of all, having 
only nine hours. This season lasts from June 24th till September 
25th. Then when the sun again returns to the middle, autumn takes 
the place of summer. It has a medium amount of cold and heat, 
dryness and moisture, and holds a place midway between summer 
and winter, combining the dryness of summer with the cold of 
winter. For it is cold and dry, and increases the black bile. This 
season, again, is equinoctial, both day and night consisting of twelve 
hours, and it lasts from September 25th till December 25th. And 
when the rising of the sun sinks to its smallest and lowest point, i.e. 
the south, winter is reached, with its cold and moisture. It occupies a 
place midway between autumn and spring, combining the cold of 
autumn and the moisture of spring. In it falls the shortest day, which 
has only nine hours, and the longest night, which has fifteen: and it 
lasts from December 25th till March 21st. For the Creator made this 
wise provision that we should not pass from the extreme of cold, or 
heat, or dryness, or moisture, to the opposite extreme, and thus 
incur grievous maladies. For reason itself teaches us the danger of 
sudden changes. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-7.htm (3 of 9)2006-06-01 18:06:39

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.7. 

So, then, it is the sun that makes the seasons, and through them the 
year: it likewise makes the days and nights, the days when it rises 
and is above the earth, and the nights when it sets below the earth: 
and it bestows on the other luminaries, both moon and stars, their 
power of giving forth light. 

Further, they say that there are in the heaven twelve signs made by 
the stars, and that these move in an opposite direction to the sun 
and moon, and the other five planets, and that the seven planets 
pass across these twelve signs. Further, the sun makes a complete 
month in each sign and traverses the twelve signs in the same 
number of months. These, then, are the names of the twelve signs 
and their respective months: 

The Ram, 
which 
receives 
the sun on 
the 21st of 
March. 

The Bull, 
on the 
23rd of 
April. 

The Twins, 
on the 
24th of 
May. 

The Crab, 
on the 
24th of 
June. 

The Virgin, 
on the 
25th of 
July. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-7.htm (4 of 9)2006-06-01 18:06:39

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.7. 

The 
Scales, on 
the 25th of 
September. 

The 
Scorpion,
on the 
25th of 
October. 

The 
Archer, on 
the 25th of 
November. 

Capricorn, 
on the 
25th of 
December. 

Aquarius, 
on the 
25th of 
January. 

The Fish, 
on the 
24th of 
February. 

But the moon traverses the twelve signs each month, since it 
occupies a lower position and travels through the signs at a quicker 
rate. For if you draw one circle within another, the inner one will be 
found to be the lesser: and so it is that owing to the moon occupying 
a lower position its course is shorter and is sooner completed 

Now the Greeks declare that all our affairs are controlled by the 
rising and setting and collision of these stars, viz., the sun and 
moon: for it is with these matters that astrology has to do. But we 
hold that we get from them signs of rain and drought, cold and heat, 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-7.htm (5 of 9)2006-06-01 18:06:39

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.7. 

moisture and dryness, and of the various winds, and so forth, but no 
sign whatever as to our actions. For we have been created with free 
wills by our Creator and are masters over our own actions. Indeed, if 
all our actions depend on the courses of the stars, all we do is done 
of necessity: and necessity precludes either virtue or vice. But if we 
possess neither virtue nor vice, we do not deserve praise or 
punishment, and God, too, will turn out to be unjust, since He gives 
good things to some and afflicts others. Nay, He will no longer 
continue to guide or provide for His own creatures, if all things are 
carried and swept along in the grip of necessity. And the faculty of 
reason will be superfluous to us: for if we are not masters of any of 
our actions, deliberation is quite superfluous. Reason, indeed, is 
granted to us solely that we might take counsel, and hence all 
reason implies freedom of will. 

And, therefore, we hold that the stars are not the causes of the 
things that occur, nor of the origin of things that come to pass, nor 
of the destruction of those things that perish. They are rather signs 
of showers and changes of air. But, perhaps, some one may say that 
though they are not the causes of wars, yet they are signs of them. 
And, in truth, the quality of the air which is produced by sun, and 
moon, and stars, produces in various ways different temperaments, 
and habits, and dispositions. But the habits are amongst the things 
that we have in our own hands, for it is reason that rules, and 
directs, and changes them. 

It often happens, also, that comets arise. These are signs of the 
death of kings, and they are not any of the stars that were made in 
the beginning, but are formed at the same tithe by divine command 
and again dissolved. And so not even that star which the Magi saw at 
the birth of the Friend and Saviour of man, our Lord, Who became 
flesh for our sake, is of the number of those that were made in the 
beginning. And this is evidently the case because sometimes its 
course was from east to west, and sometimes from north to south; at 
one moment it was hidden, and at the next it was revealed: which is 
quite out of harmony with the order and nature of the stars. 

It must be understood, then, that the moon derives its light from the 
sun; not that God was unable to grant it light of its own, but in order 
that rhythm and order may be unimpressed upon nature, one part 
ruling, the other being ruled, and that we might thus be taught to live 
in community and to share our possessions with one another, and to 
be under subjection, first to our Maker and Creator, our God and 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-7.htm (6 of 9)2006-06-01 18:06:39

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.7. 

Master, and then also to the rulers set in authority over us by Him: 
and not to question why this man is ruler and not I myself, but to 
welcome all that comes from God in a gracious and reasonable 
spirit. 

The sun and the moon, moreover, suffer eclipse, and this 
demonstrates the folly of those who worship the creature in place of 
the Creator, and teaches us how changeable and alterable all things 
are For all things are changeable save God, and whatever is 
changeable is liable to corruption in accordance with the laws of its 
own nature. 

Now the cause of the eclipse of the sun is that the body of the moon 
is interposed like a partition-wall and casts a shadow, and prevents 
the light from being shed down on us: and the extent of the eclipse 
is proportional to the size of the moon's body that is found to 
conceal the sun. But do not marvel that the moon's body is the 
smaller. For many declare that the sun is many times larger even 
than the earth, and the holy Fathers say that it is equal to the earth: 
yet often a small cloud, or even a small hill or a wall quite conceals 
it. 

The eclipse of the moon, on the other hand, is due to the shadow the 
earth casts on it when it is a fifteen days' moon and the sun and 
moon happen to be at the opposite poles of the highest circle, the 
sun being under the earth and the moon above the earth. For the 
earth casts a shadow and the sun's light is prevented from 
illuminating the moon, and therefore it is then eclipsed. 

It should be understood that the moon was made full by the Creator, 
that is, a fifteen days' moon: for it was fitting that it should be made 
complete. But on the fourth day, as we said, the sun was created. 
Therefore the moon was eleven days in advance of the sun, because 
from the fourth to the fifteenth day there are eleven days. Hence it 
happens that in each year the twelve months of the moon contain 
eleven days fewer than the twelve months of the sun. For the twelve 
months of the sun contain three hundred and sixty-five and a quarter 
days, and so because the quarter becomes a whole, in four years an 
extra day is completed, which is called bis-sextile. And that year has 
three hundred and sixty-six days. The years of the moon, on the 
other hand, have three hundred and fifty-four days. For the moon 
wanes from the time of its origin, or renewal, till it is fourteen and 
three-quarter days' old, and proceeds to wane till the twenty-ninth 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-7.htm (7 of 9)2006-06-01 18:06:39

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.7. 

and a half day, when it is completely void of light And then when it is 
once more connected with the sun it is reproduced and renewed, a 
memorial of our resurrection. Thus in each year the moon gives 
away eleven days to the sun, and so in three years the intercalary 
month of the Hebrews arises, and that year comes to consist of 
thirteen months, owing to the addition of these eleven days. 

It is evident that both sun and moon and stars are compound and 
liable to corruption according to the laws of their various natures. 
But of their nature we are ignorant. Some, indeed, say that fire when 
deprived of matter is invisible, and thus, that when it is quenched it 
vanishes altogether. Others, again, say that when it is quenched it is 
transformed into air. 

The circle of the zodiac has an oblique motion and is divided into 
twelve sections called zodia, or signs: each sign has three divisions 
of ten each, i.e. thirty divisions, and each division has sixty very 
minute subdivisions. The heaven, therefore, has three hundred and 
sixty-five degrees: the hemisphere above the earth and that below 
the earth each having one hundred and eighty degrees. 

The 
abodes 
of the 
planets. 

The Ram and the Scorpion are the abode of Mars: the Bull and the 
Scales, of Venus: the Twins and the Virgin, of Mercury: the Crab, of 
the Moon: the Lion, of the Sun: the Archer and the Fish, of Jupiter: 
Capricorn and Aquarius, of Saturn. 

Their 
altitudes. 

The Ram has the altitude of the Sun: the Bull, of the Moon: the Crab, 
of Jupiter: the Virgin, of Mars: the Scales, of Saturn: Capricorn, of 
Mercury: the Fish, of Venus. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-7.htm (8 of 9)2006-06-01 18:06:39

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.7. 

The 
phases 
of the 
moon. 

It is in conjunction whenever it is in the same degree as the sun: it is 
born when it is fifteen degrees distant from the sun: it rises when it 
is crescent-shaped, and this occurs twice, at which times it is sixty 
degrees distant from the sun: it is half-full twice, when it is ninety 
degrees from the sun: twice it is gibbous, when it is one hundred 
and twenty degrees from the sun: it is twice a full moon, giving full 
light, when it is a hundred and fifty degrees from the sun: it is a 
complete moon when it is a hundred and eighty degrees distant from 
the sun. We say twice, because these phases occur both when the 
moon waxes and when it wanes. In two and a half days the moon 
traverses each sign. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-7.htm (9 of 9)2006-06-01 18:06:39

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.8. 

CHAPTER VIII. Concerning air and winds. 

Air is the most subtle element, and is moist and warm: heavier, 
indeed, than fire: but lighter than earth and water: it is the cause of 
respiration and voice: it is colourless, that is, it has no colour by 
nature: it is clear and transparent, for it is capable of receiving light: 
it ministers to three of our senses, for it is by its aid that we see, hear 
and smell: it has the power likewise of receiving heat and cold, 
dryness and moisture, and its movements in space are up, down, 
within, without, to the right and to the left, and the cyclical 
movement. 

It does not derive its light from itself, but is illuminated by sun, and 
moon, and stars, and fire. And this is just what the Scripture means 
when it says, And darkeness was upon the deep; for its object is to 
shew that the air has not derived its light from itself, but that it is 
quite a different essence from light. 

And wind is a movement of air: or wind is a rush of air which 
changes its name as it changes the place whence it rushes. 

Its place is in the air. For place is the circumference of a body. But 
what is it that surrounds bodies but air? There are, moreover, 
different places in which the movement of air originates, and from 
these the winds get their names. There are in all twelve winds. It is 
said that air is just fire after it has been extinguished, or the vapour 
of heated water. At all events, in its own special nature the air is 
warm, but it becomes cold owing to the proximity of water and earth, 
so that the lower parts of it are cold, and the higher warm. 

These then are the winds: Caecias, or Meses, arises in the region 
where the sun rises in summer. Subsolanus, where the sun rises at 
the equinoxes. Eurus, where it rises in winter. Africus, where it sets 
in winter. Favonius, where it sets at the equinoxes, and Corns, or 
Olympias, or Iapyx, where it sets in summer. Then come Auster and 
Aquilo, whose blasts oppose one another. Between Aquilo and 
Caecias comes Boreas: and tween Eurus and Auster, Phoenix or 
Euronotus; between Auster and Africus, Libonotus or Leucouotus: 
and lastly, between Aquilo and Corus, Thrascias, or Cercius, as it is 
called by the inhabitants of that region. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-8.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:39

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.8. 

[These, then, are the races which dwell at the ends of the world: 
beside Subsolanus are the Bactriani: beside Eurus, the Indians: 
beside Phoenix, the Red Sea and Ethiopia: beside Libonotus, the 
Garamantes, who are beyond Systis: beside Africus, the Ethiopians 
and the Western Mauri: beside Favonius, the columns of Hercules 
and the beginnings of Libya and Europe: beside Corus, Iberia, which 
is now called Spain: beside Thrascia, the Gauls and the 
neighbouring nations: beside Aquilo, the Scythians who are beyond 
Thrace: beside Boreas, Pontus, Maeotis and the Sarmatae: beside 
Caecias, the Caspian Sea and the Sacai.] 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-8.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:39

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.9. 

CHAPTER IX. Concerning the waters. 

Water also is one of the four elements, the most beautiful of God's 
creations. It is both wet and cold, heavy, and with a tendency to 
descend, and flows with great readiness. It is this the Holy Scripture 
has in view when it says, And darkness was upon the face of the 
deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. For 
the deep is nothing else than a huge quantity of water whose limit 
man cannot comprehend. In the beginning, indeed, the water lay all 
over the surface of the earth. And first God created the firmament to 
divide the water above the firmament from the water below the 
firmament. For in the midst of the sea of waters the firmament was 
established at the Master's decree. And out of it God bade the 
firmament arise, and it arose. Now for what reason was it that God 
placed water above the firmament? It was because of the intense 
burning heat of the sun and ether. For immediately under the 
firmament is spread out the ether, and the sun and moon and stars 
are in the firmament, and so if water had not been put above it the 
firmament would have been consumed by the heat. 

Next, God bade the waters be gathered together into one mass. But 
when the Scripture speaks of one mass it evidently does not mean 
that they were gathered together into one place: for immediately it 
goes on to say, And the gatherings of the waters He called seas: but 
the words signify that the waters were separated off in a body from 
the earth into distinct groups. Thus the waters were gathered 
together into their special collections and the dry land was brought 
to view. And hence arose the two seas that surround Egypt, for it lies 
between two seas. These collections contain various seas and 
mountains, and islands, and promontories, and harbours, and 
surround various bays and beaches, and coastlands. For the word 
beach is used when the nature of the tract is sandy, while coastland 
signifies that it is rocky and deep close into shore, getting deep all 
on a sudden In like manner arose also the sea that lies where the sun 
rises, the name of which is the Indian Sea: also the northern sea 
called the Caspian. The lakes also were formed in the same manner. 

The ocean, then, is like a river encircling the whole earth, and I think 
it is concerning it that the divine Scripture says, A river went ant of 
Paradise. The water of the ocean is sweet and potable. It is it that 
furnishes the seas with water which, because it stays a long time in 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-9.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:39

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.9. 

the seas and stands unmoved, becomes bitter: for the sun and the 
waterspouts draw up always the finer parts. Thus it is that clouds are 
formed and showers take place, because the filtration makes the 
water sweet. 

This is parted into four first divisions, that is to say, into four rivers. 
The name of the first is Pheison, which is the Indian Ganges; the 
name of the second is Geon, which is the Nile flowing from Ethiopia 
down to Egypt: the name of the third is Tigris, and the name of the 
fourth is Euphrates. There are also very many other mighty rivers of 
which some empty themselves into the sea and others are used up 
in the earth. Thus the whole earth is bored through and mined, and 
has, so to speak, certain veins through which it sends up in springs 
the water it has received from the sea. The water of the spring thus 
depends for its character on the quality of the earth. For the sea 
water is filtered and strained through the earth and thus becomes 
sweet. But if the place from which the spring arises is bitter or briny, 
so also is the water that is sent up. Moreover, it often happens that 
water which has been closely pent up bursts through with violence, 
and thus it becomes warm. And this is why they send forth waters 
that are naturally warm. 

By the divine decree hollow places are made in the earth, and so into 
these the waters are gathered. And this is how mountains are 
formed. God, then, bade the first water produce living breath, since it 
was to be by water and the Holy Spirit that moved upon the waters in 
the beginning, that man was to be renewed. For this is what the 
divine Basilius said: Therefore it produced living creatures, small 
and big; whales and dragons, fish that swim in the waters, and 
feathered fowl. The birds form a link between water and earth and 
air: for they have their origin in the water, they live on the earth and 
they fly in the air. Water, then, is the most beautiful element and rich 
in usefulness, and purifies from all filth, and not only from the filth of 
the body but from that of the soul, if it should have received the 
grace of the Spirit. 

Concerning 
the seas. 

The AEgean Sea is received by the Hellespont, which ends at 
Abydos and Sestus: next, the Propontis, which ends at Chalcedon 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-9.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:39

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.9. 

and Byzantium: here are the straits where the Pontus arises. Next, 
the lake of Maeotis. 

Again, from the beginning of Europe and Libya it is the Iberian Sea, 
which extends from the pillars of Hercules to the Pyrenees mountain. 
Then the Ligurian Sea as far as the borders of Etruria. Next, the 
Sardinian Sea, which is above Sardinia and inclines downwards to 
Libya. Then the Etrurian Sea, which begins at the extreme limits of 
Liguria and ends at Sicily. Then the Libyan Sea. Then the Cretan, and 
Sicilian, and Ionian, and Adriatic Seas, the last of which is poured 
out of the Sicilian Sea, which is called the Corinthian Gulf, or the 
Alcyonian Sea. The Saronic Sea is surrounded by the Sunian and 
Scylaean Seas. Next is the Myrtoan Sea and the Icarian Sea, in which 
are also the Cyclades. Then the Carpathian, and Pamphylian, and 
Egyptian Seas: and, thereafter, above the Icarian Sea, the AEgean 
Sea pours itself out. There is also the coast of Europe from the 
mouth of the Tanais River to the Pillars of Hercules, 609,709 stadia: 
and that of Libya from the Tigris, as far as the mouth of the Canobus, 
209,252 stadia: and lastly, that of Asia from the Canobus to the 
Tanais, which, including the Gulf, is 4,111 stadia. And so the full 
extent of the seaboard of the world that we inhabit with the gulfs is 
1,309,072 stadia. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-9.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:39

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.10. 

CHAPTER X. Concerning earth and its products. 

The earth is one of the four elements, dry, cold, heavy, motionless, 
brought into being by God, out of nothing on the first day. For in the 
beginning, he said, God created the heaven and the earths: but the 
seat and foundation of the earth no man has been able to declare. 
Some, indeed, hold that its seat is the waters: thus the divine David 
says, To Him Who established the earth on the waters. Others place 
it in the air. Again some other says, fare Who hangeth the earth on 
nothing. And, again, David, the singer of God, says, as though the 
representative of God, I bear up the pillars of it, meaning by "pillars" 
the force that sustains it. Further, the expression, He hath rounded it 
upon the seas, shews clearly that the earth is on all hands 
surrounded with water. But whether we grant that it is established on 
itself, or on air or on water, or on nothing, we must not turn aside 
from reverent thought, but must admit that all things are sustained 
and preserved by the power of the Creator. 

In the beginning, then, as the Holy Scripture says, it was hidden 
beneath the waters, and was unwrought, that is to say, not 
beautified. But at God's bidding, places to hold the waters appeared, 
and then the mountains came into existence, and at the divine 
command the earth received its own proper adornment, and was 
dressed in all manner of herbs and plants, and on these, by the 
divine decree, was bestowed the power of growth and nourishment, 
and of producing seed to generate their like. Moreover, at the 
bidding of the Creator it produced also all manner of kinds of living 
creatures, creeping things, and wild beasts, and cattle. All, indeed, 
are for the seasonable use of man: but of them some are for food, 
such as stags, sheep, deer, and such like: others for service such as 
camels, oxen, horses, asses, and such like: and others for 
enjoyment, such as apes, and among birds, jays and parrots, and 
such like. Again, amongst plants and herbs some are fruit bearing, 
others edible, others fragrant and flowery, given to us for our 
enjoyment, for example, the rose and such like, and others for the 
healing of disease. For there is not a single animal or plant in which 
the Creator has not implanted some form of energy capable of being 
used to satisfy man's needs. For He Who knew all things before they 
were, saw that in the future man would go forward in the strength of 
his own will, and would be subject to corruption, and, therefore, He 
created all things for his seasonable use, alike those in the 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-10.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:40

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.10. 

firmament, and those on the earth, and those in the waters. 

Indeed, before the transgression all things were under his power. For 
God set him as ruler over all things on the earth and in the waters. 
Even the serpent was accustomed to man, and approached him 
more readily than it did other living creatures, and held intercourse 
with him with delightful motions. And hence it was through it that the 
devil, the prince of evil, made his most wicked suggestion to our first 
parents. Moreover, the earth of its own accord used to yield fruits, 
for the benefit of the animals that were obedient to man, and there 
was neither rain nor tempest on the earth. But after the 
transgression, when he was compared with the unintelligent cattle 
and became like to them, after he had contrived that in him irrational 
desire should have rule over reasoning mind and had become 
disobedient to the Master's command, the subject creation rose up 
against him whom the Creator had appointed to be ruler: and it was 
appointed for him that he should till with sweat the earth from which 
he had been taken. 

But even now wild beasts are not without their uses, for, by the 
terror they cause, they bring man to the knowledge of his Creator 
and lead him to call upon His name. And, further, at the 
transgression the thorn sprung out of the earth in accordance with 
the Lord's express declaration and was conjoined with the pleasures 
of the rose, that it might lead us to remember the transgression on 
account of which the earth was condemned to bring forth for us 
thorns and prickles. 

That this is the case is made worthy of belief from the fact that their 
endurance is secured by the word of the Lord, saying, Be fruitful and 
multiply, and replenish the earth. 

Further, some hold that the earth is in the form of a sphere, others 
that it is in that of a cone. At all events it is much smaller than the 
heaven, and suspended almost like a point in its midst. And it will 
pass away and be changed. But blessed is the man who inherits the 
earth promised to the meek. 

For the earth that is to be the possession of the holy is immortal. 
Who, then, can fitly marvel at the boundless and incomprehensible 
wisdom of the Creator? Or who can render sufficient thanks to the 
Giver of so many blessings ? 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-10.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:40

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.10. 

[There are also provinces, or prefectures, of the earth which we 
recognise: Europe embraces thirty four, and the huge continent of 
Asia has forty-eight of these provinces, and twelve canons as they 
are called.] 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-10.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:40

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.11. 

CHAPTER XI. Concerning Paradise. 

Now when God was about to fashion man oat of the visible and 
invisible creation in His own image and likeness to reign as king and 
ruler over all the earth and all that it contains, He first made for him, 
so to speak, a kingdom in which he should live a life of happiness 
and prosperity. And this is the divine paradise, planted in Eden by 
the hands of God, a very storehouse of joy and gladness of heart (for 
"Eden" means luxuriousness). Its site is higher in the East than all 
the earth: it is temperate and the air that surrounds it is the rarest 
and purest: evergreen plants are its pride, sweet fragrances abound, 
it is flooded with light, and in sensuous freshness and beauty it 
transcends imagination: in truth the place is divine, a meet home for 
him who was created in God's image: no creature lacking reason 
made its dwelling there but man alone, the work of God's own hands. 

In its midst God planted the tree of life and the tree of knowledge. 
The tree of knowledge was for trial, and proof, and exercise of man's 
obedience and disobedience: and hence it was named the tree of the 
knowledge of good and evil, or else it was because to those who 
partook of it was given power to know their own nature. Now this is a 
good thing for those who are mature, but an evil thing for the 
immature and those whose appetites are too strong, being like solid 
food to tender babes still in need of milk. For our Creator, God, did 
not intend us to be burdened with care and troubled about many 
things, nor to take thought about, or make provision for, our own life. 
But this at length was Adam's fate: for he tasted and knew that he 
was naked and made a girdle round about him: for he took fig-leaves 
and girded himself about. But before they took of the fruit, They were 
both naked. Adam and Eve, and were not ashamed. For God meant 
that we should be thus free from passion, and this is indeed the 
mark of a mind absolutely void of passion. Yea, He meant us further 
to be free from care and to have but one work to perform, to sing as 
do the angels, without ceasing or intermission, the praises of the 
Creator, and to delight in contemplation of Him and to cast all our 
care on Him. This is what the Prophet David proclaimed to us when 
He said, Cast thy burden on the Lord, and He will sustain thee. And, 
again, in the Gospels, Christ taught His disciples saying, Take no 
thought for your life what ye shall eat, nor for your body what ye 
shall put on. And further, Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and His 
righteousness and all these things shall be added unto you. And to 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-11.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:40

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.11. 

Martha He said, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about 
many things: but one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that 
good part, which shall not be taken away from her, meaning, clearly, 
sitting at His feet and listening to His words. 

The tree of life, on the other hand, was a tree having the energy that 
is the cause of life, or to be eaten only by those who deserve to live 
and are not subject to death. Some, indeed, have pictured Paradise 
as a realm of sense, and others as a realm of mind. But it seems to 
me, that, just as man is a creature, in whom we find both sense and 
mind blended together, in like manner also man's most holy temple 
combines the properties of sense and mind, and has this twofold 
expression: for, as we said, the life in the body is spent in the most 
divine and lovely region, while the life in the soul is passed in a place 
far more sublime and of more surpassing beauty, where God makes 
His home, and where He wraps man about as with a glorious 
garment, and robes him in His grace, and delights and sustains him 
like an angel with the sweetest of all fruits, the contemplation of 
Himself. Verily it has been filly named the tree of life. For since the 
life is not cut short by death, the sweetness of the divine 
participation is imparted to those who share it. And this is, in truth, 
what God meant by every tree, saying, Of every tree in Paradise thou 
mayest freely eat. For the 'every' is just Himself in Whom and 
through Whom the universe is maintained. But the tree of the 
knowledge of good and evil was for the distinguishing between the 
many divisions of contemplation, and this is just the knowledge of 
one's own nature, which, indeed, is a good thing for those who are 
mature and advanced in divine contemplation (being of itself a 
proclamation of the magnificence of God), and have no fear of 
falling, because they have through time come to have the habit of 
such contemplation, but it is an evil tiring to those still young and 
with stronger appetites, who by reason of their insecure bold on the 
better part, and because as yet they are not firmly established in the 
seat of the one and only good, are apt to be torn and dragged away 
from this to the care of their own body. 

Thus, to my thinking, the divine Paradise is twofold, and the Godinspired Fathers handed down a true message, whether they taught 
this doctrine or that. Indeed, it is possible to understand by every 
tree the knowledge of the divine power derived from created things. 
In the words of the divine Apostle, For the invisible things of Him 
from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by 
the things that are made. But of all these thoughts and speculations 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-11.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:40

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.11. 

the sublimest is that dealing with ourselves, that is, with our own 
composition. As the divine David says, The knowledge of Thee from 
me, that is from my constitution, was made a wonder. But for the 
reasons we have already mentioned, such knowledge was 
dangerous for Adam who had been so lately created. 

The tree of life too may be understood as that more divine thought 
that has its origin in the world of sense, and the ascent through that 
to the originating and constructive cause of all. And this was the 
name He gave to every tree, implying fulness and indivisibility, and 
conveying only participation in what is good. But by the tree of the 
knowledge of good and evil, we are to understand that sensible and 
pleasurable food which, sweet though it seems, in reality brings him 
who partakes of it into communion with evil. For God says, Of every 
tree in Paradise thou mayest freely eat. It is, me-thinks, as if God 
said, Through all My creations thou art to ascend to Me thy creator, 
and of all the fruits titan mayest pluck one, that is, Myself who ant 
the true life: let every thing bear for thee the fruit of life, and let 
participation in Me be the support of your own being. For in this way 
than wilt be immortal. But of the tree of the knowledge of good and 
evil, thou shall not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof 
thou shall surely die s. For sensible food is by nature for the 
replenishing of that which gradually wastes away and it passes into 
the drought and perisheth: and he cannot remain incorruptible who 
partakes of sensible food. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-11.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:40

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.12. 

CHAPTER XII. Concerning Man. 

IN this way, then, God brought into existence mental essence, by 
which I mean, angels and all the heavenly orders. For these clearly 
have a mental and incorporeal nature: "incorporeal" I mean in 
comparison with the denseness of matter. For the Deity alone in 
reality is immaterial and incorporeal. But further He created in the 
same way sensible essence, that is heaven and earth and the 
intermediate region; and so He created both the kind of being that is 
of His own nature (for the nature that has to do with reason is related 
to God, and apprehensible by mind alone), and the kind which, 
inasmuch as it clearly falls under the province of the senses, is 
separated from Him by the greatest interval. And it was also fit that 
there should be a mixture of both kinds of being, as a token of still 
greater wisdom and of the opulence of the Divine expenditure as 
regards natures, as Gregorius, the expounder of God's being and 
ways, puts it, and to be a sort of connecting link between the visible 
and invisible natures. And by the word "fit" I mean, simply that it was 
an evidence of the Creator's will, for that will is the law and 
ordinance most meet, and no one will say to his Maker, "Why hast 
Thou so fashioned me?" For the potter is able at his will to make 
vessels of various patterns out of his clay, as a proof of his own 
wisdom. 

Now this being the case, He creates with His own hands man of a 
visible nature and an invisible, after His own image and likeness: on 
the one hand man's body He formed of earth, and on the other his 
reasoning and thinking soul He bestowed upon him by His own 
inbreathing, and this is what we mean by "after His image." For the 
phrase "after His image" clearly refers to the side of his nature which 
consists of mind and free will, whereas "after His likeness "means 
likeness in virtue so far as that is possible. 

Further, body and soul were formed at one and the same time, not 
first the one and then the other, as Origen so senselessly supposes. 

God then made man without evil, upright, virtuous, free from pain 
and care, glorified with every virtue, adorned with all that is good, 
like a sort of second microcosm within the great world. another 
angel capable of worship, compound, surveying the visible creation 
and initiated into the mysteries of the realm of thought, king over the 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-12.htm (1 of 5)2006-06-01 18:06:40

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.12. 

things of earth, but subject to a higher king, of the earth and of the 
heaven, temporal and eternal, belonging to the realm of sight and to 
the realm of thought, midway between greatness and lowliness, 
spirit and flesh: for he is spirit by grace, but flesh by overweening 
pride: spirit that he may abide and glorify his Benefactor, and flesh 
that he may suffer, and suffering may be admonished and 
disciplined when he prides himself in his greatness: here, that is, in 
the present life, his life is ordered as an animal's, but elsewhere, that 
is, in the age to come, he is changed and--to complete the mystery--
becomes deified by merely inclining himself towards God; becoming 
deified, in the way of participating in the divine glory and not in that 
of a change into the divine being. 

But God made him by nature sinless, and endowed him with free will. 
By sinless, I mean not that sin could find no place in him (for that is 
the case with Deity alone), bat that sin is the result of the free 
volition he enjoys rather than an integral part of his nature; that is to 
say, he has the power to continue and go forward in the path of 
goodness, by co-operating with the divine grace, and likewise to turn 
from good and take to wickedness, for God has conceded this by 
conferring freedom of will upon him. For there is no virtue in what is 
the result of mere force. 

The soul, accordingly, is a living essence, simple, incorporeal, 
invisible in its proper nature to bodily eyes, immortal, reasoning and 
intelligent, formless, making use of an organised body, and being 
the source of its powers of life, and growth, and sensation, and 
generation, mind being but its purest part and not in any wise alien 
to it; (for as the eye to the body, so is the mind to the soul); further it 
enjoys freedom and volition and energy, and is mutable, that is, it is 
given to change, because it is created. All these qualities according 
to nature it has received of the grace of the Creator, of which grace it 
has received both its being and this particular kind of nature. 

Marg. The different applications of "incorporeal." We understand two 
kinds of what is incorporeal and invisible and formless: the one is 
such in essence, the other by free gift: and likewise the one is such 
in nature, and the other only in comparison with the denseness of 
matter. God then is incorporeal by nature, but the angels and 
demons and souls are said to be so by free gift, and in comparison 
with the denseness of matter. 

Further, body is that which has three dimensions, that is to say, it 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-12.htm (2 of 5)2006-06-01 18:06:40

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.12. 

has length and breadth and depth, or thickness. And every body is 
composed of the four elements; the bodies of living creatures, 
moreover, are composed of the four humours. 

Now there are, it should be known, four elements: earth which is dry 
and cold: water which is cold and wet: air which is wet and warm: 
fire which is warm and dry. In like manner there are also four 
humours, analogous to the four elements: black bile, which bears an 
analogy to earth, for it is dry and cold: phlegm, analogous to water, 
for it is cold and wet: blood, analogous to air, for it is wet and warm: 
yellow bile, the analogue to fire, for it is warm and city. Now, fruits 
are composed of the elements, and the humours are composed of 
the fruits, and the bodies of living creatures consist of the humours 
and dissolve back into them. For every thing that is compound 
dissolves back into its elements. 

Marg. That man has community alike with inanimate things and 
animate creatures, whether they are devoid of or possess the faculty 
of reason. 

Man, it is to be noted, has community with things inanimate, and 
participates in the life of unreasoning creatures, and shares in the 
mental processes of those endowed with reason. For the bond of 
union between man and inanimate things is the body and its 
composition out of the font elements: and the bond between man 
and plants consists, in addition to these things, of their powers of 
nourishment and growth and seeding, that is, generation: and finally, 
over and above these links man is connected with unreasoning 
animals by appetite, that is anger and desire, and sense and 
impulsive movement. 

There are then five senses, sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch. 
Further, impulsive movement consists in change from place to place, 
and in the movements of the body as a whole and in the emission of 
voice and the drawing of breath. For we have it in our power to 
perform or refrain from performing these actions. 

Lastly, man's reason unites him to incorporeal and intelligent 
natures, for he applies his reason and mind and judgment to 
everything, and pursues after virtues, and eagerly follows after piety, 
which is the crown of the virtues. And so man is a microcosm. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-12.htm (3 of 5)2006-06-01 18:06:40

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.12. 

Moreover, it should be known that division and flux and change are 
peculiar to the body alone. By change, I mean change in quality, that 
is in heat and cold and so forth: by flux, I mean change in the way of 
depletion, for dry things and wet things and spirit s suffer depletion, 
and require repletion: so that hunger and thirst are natural 
affections. Again, division is the separation of the humours, one 
from another, and the partition into form and matter. 

But piety and thought are the peculiar properties of the soul. And the 
virtues are common to soul and body, although they are referred to 
the soul as if the soul were making use of the body. 

The reasoning part, it should be understood, naturally bears rule 
over that which is void of reason. For the faculties of the soul are 
divided into that which has reason, and that which is without reason. 
Again, of that which is without reason there are two divisions: that 
which does not listen to reason, that is to say, is disobedient to 
reason, and that which listens and obeys reason. That which does 
not listen or obey reason is the vital or pulsating faculty, and the 
spermatic or generative faculty, and the vegetative or nutritive 
faculty: to this belong also the faculties of growth and bodily 
formation. For these are not under the dominion of reason but under 
that of nature. That which listens to and obeys reason, on the other 
hand is divided into anger anti desire. And the unreasoning part of 
the soul is called in common the pathetic and the appetitive. Further, 
it is to be understood, that impulsive movement s likewise belongs 
to the part that is obedient to reason. 

The part which does not pay heed to reason includes the nutritive 
and generative and pulsating faculties: and the name "vegetative" is 
applied to the faculties of increase and nutriment and generation, 
and the name "vital" to the faculty of pulsation. 

Of the faculty of nutrition, then, there are four forces: an attractive 
force which attracts nourishment: a retentive force by which 
nourishment is retained and not suffered to be immediately excreted: 
an alterative force by which the food is resolved into the humours: 
and an excretive force, by which the excess of food is excreted into 
the draught and cast forth. 

The forces again, inherent in a living creature are, it should be noted, 
partly psychical, partly vegetative, partly vital. The psychical forces 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-12.htm (4 of 5)2006-06-01 18:06:40

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.12. 

are concerned with free volition, that is to say, impulsive movement 
and sensation. Impulsive movement includes change of place and 
movement of the body as a whole, and phonation and respiration. 
For it is in our power to perform or refrain from performing these 
acts. The vegetative and vital forces, however, are quite outside the 
province of will. The vegetative, moreover, include the faculties of 
nourishment and growth, and generation, and the vital power is the 
faculty of pulsation. For these go on energising whether we will it or 
not. 

Lastly, we must observe that of actual things, some are good, and 
some are bad. A good thing in anticipation constitutes desire: while 
a good thing in realisation constitutes pleasure. Similarly an evil 
thing in anticipation begets fear, and in realisation it begets pain. 
And when we speak of good in this connection we are to be 
understood to mean both real and apparent good: and, similarly, we 
mean real and apparent evil. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-12.htm (5 of 5)2006-06-01 18:06:40

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.13. 

CHAPTER XIII. Concerning Pleasures. 

There are pleasures of the soul and pleasures of the body. The 
pleasures of the soul are those which are the exclusive possession 
of the soul, such as the pleasures of learning and contemplation. 
The pleasures of the body, however, are those which are enjoyed by 
soul and body in fellowship, and hence are called bodily pleasures: 
and such are the pleasures of food and intercourse and the like. But 
one could not find any class of pleasures belonging solely to the 
body. 

Again, some pleasures are true, others false. And the exclusively 
intellectual pleasures consist in knowledge and contemplation, while 
the pleasures of the body depend upon sensation. Further, of bodily 
pleasures, some are both natural and necessary, in the absence of 
which life is impossible, for example the pleasures of food which 
replenishes waste, and the pleasures of necessary clothing. Others 
are natural but not necessary, as the pleasures of natural and lawful 
intercourse. For though the function that these perform is to secure 
the permanence of the race as a whole, it is still possible to live a 
virgin life apart from them. Others, however, are neither natural nor 
necessary, such as drunkenness, lust, and surfeiting to excess. For 
these contribute neither to the maintenance of our own lives nor to 
the succession of the race, but on the contrary, are rather even a 
hindrance. He therefore that would live a life acceptable to God must 
follow after those pleasures which are both natural and necessary: 
and must give a secondary place to those which are natural but not 
necessary, and enjoy them only in fitting season, and manner, and 
measure; while the others must be altogether renounced. 

Those then are to be considered moral pleasures which are not 
bound up with pain, and bring no cause for repentance, and result in 
no other harm and keep within the bounds of moderation, and do not 
draw us far away from serious occupations, nor make slaves of us. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-13.htm2006-06-01 18:06:41

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.14. 

CHAPTER XIV. Concerning Pain. 

There are four varieties of pain, viz., anguish, griefs, envy, pity. 
Anguish is pain without utterance: grief is pain that is heavy to bear 
like a burden: envy is pain over the good fortune of others: pity is 
pain over the evil fortune of others. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-14.htm2006-06-01 18:06:41

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.15. 

CHAPTER XV. Concerning Fear. 

Fear is divided into six varieties: viz., shrinking, shame, disgrace, 
consternation, panic, anxiety. Shrinking is fear of some act about to 
take place. Shame is fear arising from the anticipation of blame: and 
this is the highest form of the affection. Disgrace is fear springing 
from some base act already done, and even for this form there is 
some hope of salvation. Consternation is fear originating in some 
huge prOduct of the imagination. Panic is fear caused by some 
unusual product of the imagination. Anxiety is fear of failure, that is, 
of misfortune: for when we fear that our efforts will not meet with 
success, we suffer anxiety. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-15.htm2006-06-01 18:06:41

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.16. 

CHAPTER XVI. Concerning Anger. 

Anger is the ebullition of the heart's blood produced by bilious 
exhalation or turbidity. Hence it is that the words colh and cols are 
both used in the sense of anger. Anger is sometimes lust for 
vengeance. For when we are wronged or think that we are wronged, 
we are distressed, and there arises this mixture of desire and anger. 

There are three forms of anger: rage, which the Greeks also call colh 
or cols, mhnis and kotos. When anger arises and begins to be 
roused, it is called rage or colh or cols. Wrath again implies that the 
bile endures, that is to say, that the memory of the wrong abides: 
and indeed the Greek word for it, mhnisis derived from menein, and 
means what abides and is transferred to memory. Rancour, on the 
other hand, implies watching for a suitable moment for revenge, and 
the Greek word for it is kotos from keisqai. 

Anger further is the satellite of reason, the vindicator of desire. For 
when we long after anything and are opposed in our desire by some 
one, we are angered at that person, as though we had been wronged: 
and reason evidently deems that there are just grounds for 
displeasure in what has happened, in the case of those who, like us, 
have in the natural course of things to guard their own position. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-16.htm2006-06-01 18:06:41

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.17. 

CHAPTER XVII. Concerning Imagination. 

Imagination is a faculty of the unreasoning part of the soul. It is 
through the organs of sense that it is brought into action, and it is 
spoken of as sensation. And further, what is imagined and perceived 
is that which comes within the scope of the faculty of imagination 
and sensation. For example, the sense of sight is the visual faculty 
itself, but the object of sight is that which comes within the scope of 
the sense of sight, such as a stone or any other such object. Further, 
an imagination is an affection of the unreasoning part of the soul 
which is occasioned by some object acting upon the sensation. But 
an appearance is an empty affection of the unreasoning part of the 
soul, not occasioned by any object acting upon the sensation. 
Moreover the organ of imagination is the anterior ventricle of the 
brain. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-17.htm2006-06-01 18:06:41

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.18. 

CHAPTER XVIII. Concerning Sensation. 

Sensation is that faculty of the soul whereby material objects can be 
apprehended or discriminated. And the sensoria are the organs or 
members through which sensations are conveyed. And the objects 
of sense are the things that come within the province of sensation. 
And lastly, the subject of sense is the living animal which possesses 
the faculty of sensation. Now there are five senses, and likewise five 
organs of sense. 

The first sense is sight: and the sensoria or organs of sight are the 
nerves of the brain and the eyes. Now sight is primarily perception of 
colour, but along with the colour it discriminates the body that has 
colour, and its size and form, and locality, and the intervening space 
and the number: also whether it is in motion or at rest, rough or 
smooth, even or uneven, sharp or blunt, and finally whether its 
composition is watery or earthy, that is, wet or dry. 

The second sense is hearing, whereby voices and sounds are 
perceived. And it distinguishes these as sharp or deep, or smooth or 
loud. Its organs are the soft nerves of the brain, and the structure of 
the ears. Further, man and the ape are the only animals that do not 
move their ears. 

The third sense is smell, which is caused by the nostrils transmitting 
the vapours to the brain: and it is bounded by the extreme limits of 
the anterior ventricle of the brain. It is the faculty by which vapours 
are perceived and apprehended. Now, the most generic distinction 
between vapours is whether they have a good or an evil odour, or 
form an intermediate class with neither a good nor an evil odour. A 
good odour is produced by the thorough digestion in the body of the 
humours. When they are only moderately digested the intermediate 
class is formed, and when the digestion is very imperfect or utterly 
wanting, an evil odour results. 

The fourth sense is taste: it is the faculty whereby the humours are 
apprehended or perceived, and its organs of sense are the tongue, 
and more especially the lips, and the palate (which the Greeks call 
ouraniskou), and in these are nerves that come from the brain and 
are spread out, and convey to the dominant part of the soul the 
perception or sensation they have encountered. The so-called 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-18.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:42

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.18. 

gustatory qualities of the humours are these:--sweetness, pungency, 
bitterness, astringency, acerbity, sourness, saltness, fattiness, 
stickiness; for taste is capable of discriminating all these. But water 
has none of these qualities, and is therefore devoid of taste. 
Moreover, astringency is only a more intense and exaggerated form 
of acerbity. 

The fifth sense is touch, which is common to all living things. Its 
organs are nerves which come from the brain and ramify all through 
the body. Hence the body as a whole, including even the other 
organs of sense, possesses the sense of touch. Within its scope 
come heat and cold, softness and hardness, viscosity and 
brittleness, heaviness and lightness: for it is by touch alone that 
these qualities are discriminated. On the other hand, roughness and 
smoothness, dryness and wetness, thickness and thinness, up and 
down, place and size, whenever that is such as to be embraced in a 
single application of the sense of touch, are all common to touch 
and sight, as well as denseness and rareness, that is porosity, and 
rotundity if it is small, and some other shapes. In like manner also by 
the aid of memory and thought perception of the nearness of a body 
is possible, and similarly perception of number up to two or three, 
and such small and easily reckoned figures. But it is by sight rather 
than touch that these things are perceived. 

The Creator, it is to be noted, fashioned all the other organs of sense 
in pairs, so that if one were destroyed, the other might fill its place. 
For there are two eyes, two ears, two orifices of the nose, and two 
tongues, which in some animals, such as snakes, are separate, but 
in others, like man, are united. But touch is spread over the whole 
body with the exception of bones, nerves, nails, horns, hairs, 
ligaments, and other such structures. 

Further, it is to be observed that sight is possible only in straight 
lines, whereas smell and hearing are not limited to straight lines 
only, but act in all directions. Touch, again, and taste act neither in 
straight lines, nor in every direction, but only when each comes near 
to the sensible objects that are proper to it. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-18.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:42

 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.18. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-18.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:42

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.19. 

CHAPTER XIX. Concerning Thought. 

The faculty of thought deals with judgments and assents, and 
impulse to action and disinclinations, and escapes from action: and 
more especially with thoughts connected with what is thinkable, and 
the virtues and the different branches of learning, and the theories of 
the arts and matters of counsel and choice. Further, it is this faculty 
which prophesies the future to us in dreams, and this is what the 
Pythagoreans, adopting the Hebrew view, hold to be the one true 
form of prophecy. The organ of thought then is the mid-ventricle of 
the brain, and the vital spirit it contains. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-19.htm2006-06-01 18:06:42

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.20. 

CHAPTER XX. Concerning Memory. 

The faculty of memory is the cause and storehouse of remembrance 
and recollection. For memory is a fantasy s that is left behind of 
some sensation and thought manifesting itself in action; or the 
preservation of a sensation and thought. For the soul comprehends 
objects of sense through the organs of sense, that is to say, it 
perceives, and thence arises a notion: and similarly it comprehends 
the objects of thought through the mind, and thence arises a 
thought. It is then the preservation of the types of these notions and 
thoughts that is spoken of as memory. 

Further, it is worthy of remark that the apprehension of matters of 
thought depends on learning, or natural process of thought, and not 
on sensation. For though objects of sense are retained in the 
memory by themselves, only such objects of thought are 
remembered as we have learned, and we have no memory of their 
essence. 

Recollection is the name given to the recovery of some memory lost 
by forgetfulness. For forgetfulness is just loss of memory. The 
faculty of imagination then, having apprehended material objects 
through the senses, transmits this to the faculty of thought or reason 
(for they are both the same), and this after it has received and 
passed judgment on it, passes it on to the faculty of memory. Now 
the organ of memory is the posterior ventricle of the brain, which the 
Greeks call the paregkefalis, and the vital spirit it contains. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-20.htm2006-06-01 18:06:42

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.21. 

CHAPTER XXI. Concerning Conception and Articulation. 

Again the reasoning part of the soul is divided into conception and 
articulation. Conception is an activity of the soul originating in the 
reason without resulting in utterance. Accordingly, often, even when 
we are silent we run through a whole speech in our minds, and hold 
discussions in our dreams. And it is this faculty chiefly which 
constitutes us all reasoning beings. For those who are dumb by birth 
or have lost their voice through some disease or injury, are just as 
much reasoning beings. But articulation by voice or in the different 
dialects requires energy: that is to say, the word is articulated by the 

tongue and mouth, and this is why it is named articulation. It is, 
indeed, the messenger of thought, and it is because of it that we are 
called speaking beings. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-21.htm2006-06-01 18:06:42

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.22. 

CHAPTER XXII. Concerning Passion and Energy. 

Passion is a word with various meanings. It is used in regard to the 
body, anti refers to diseases and wounds, and again, it is used in 
reference to the soul, and means desire anti anger. But to speak 
broadly and generally, passion is an animal affection which is 
succeeded by pleasure anti pain. For pain succeeds passion, but is 
not the same thing as passion. For passion is an affection of things 
without sense, but not so pain. Pain then is not passion, but the 
sensation of passion: and it must be considerable, that is to say, it 
must be great enough to come within the scope of sense. 

Again, the definition of passions of the soul is this: Passion is a 
sensible activity of the appetitive faculty, depending on the 
presentation to the mind of something good or bad. Or in other 
words, passion is an irrational activity of the soul, resulting from the 
notion of something good or bad. For the notion of something good 
results in desire, and the notion of something bad results in anger. 
But passion considered as a class, that is, passion in general, is 
defined as a movement in one thing caused by another. Energy, on 
the other hand, is a drastic movement, and by "drastic" is meant that 
which is moved of itself. Thus, anger is the energy manifested by the 
part of the soul where anger resides, whereas passion involves the 
two divisions of the soul, and in addition the whole body when it is 
forcibly impelled to action by anger. For there has been caused 
movement in one thing caused by another, and this is called 
passion. 

But in another sense energy is spoken of as passion. For energy is a 
movement in harmony with nature, whereas passion is a movement 
at variance with nature. According, then, to this view, energy may be 
spoken of as passion when it does not act in accord with nature, 
whether its movement is due to itself or to some other thing. Thus, in 
connection with the heart, its natural pulsation is energy, whereas its 
palpitation, which is an excessive and unnatural movement, is 
passion and not energy. 

But it is not every activity of the passionate part of the soul that is 
called passion, but only the more violent ones, and such as are 
capable of causing sensation: for the minor and unperceived 
movements are certainly not passions. For to constitute passion 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-22.htm (1 of 5)2006-06-01 18:06:43

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.22. 

there is necessary a considerable degree of force, and thus it is on 
this account that we add to the definition of passion that it is a 
sensible activity. For the lesser activities escape the notice of the 
senses, and do not cause passion. 

Observe also that our soul possesses twofold faculties, those of 
knowledge, and those of life. The faculties of knowledge are mind, 
thought, notion, presentation, sensation: and the vital or appetitive 
faculties are will and choice. Now, to make what has been said 
clearer, let us consider these things more closely, and first let us 
take the faculties of knowledge. 

Presentation and sensation then have already been sufficiently 
discussed above. It is sensation that causes a passion, which is 
called presentation, to arise in the soul, and from presentation 
comes notion. Thereafter thought, weighing the truth or falseness of 
the notion, determines what is true: and this explains the Greek word 
for thought, dianoia, which is derived from dianoeia, meaning to 
think and discriminate. That, however, which is judged and 
determined to be true, is spoken of as mind. 

Or to put it otherwise: The primary activity of the mind, observe, is 
intelligence, but intelligence applied to any object is called a 
thought, and when this persists and makes on the mind an 
impression of the object of thought, it is named reflection, and when 
reflection dwells on the same object and puts itself to the test, and 
closely examines the relation of the thought to the soul, it gets the 
name prudence. Further, prudence, when it extends its area forms 
the power of reasoning, and is called conception, and this is defined 
as the fullest activity of the soul, arising in that part where reason 
resides, and being devoid of outward expression: and from it 
proceeds the uttered word spoken by the tongue. And now that we 
have discussed the faculties of knowledge, let us turn to the vital or 
appetitive faculties. 

It should be understood that there is implanted in the soul by nature 
a faculty of desiring that which is in harmony with its nature, and of 
maintaining in close union all that belongs essentially to its nature: 
and this power is called will or qelhsis. For the essence both of 
existence and of living yearns after activity both as regards mind and 
sense, and in this it merely longs to realise its own natural and 
perfect being. And so this definition also is given of this natural will: 
will is an appetite, both rational and vital, depending only on what is 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-22.htm (2 of 5)2006-06-01 18:06:43

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.22. 

natural. So that will is nothing else than the natural and vital and 
rational appetite of all things that go to constitute nature, that is, just 
the simple faculty. For the appetite of creatures without reason, 
since it is irrational, is not called will. 

Again boulhsis or wish is a sort of natural will, that is to say, a 
natural and rational appetite for some definite thing. For there is 
seated in the soul of man a faculty of rational desire. When, then, 
this rational desire directs itself naturally to some definite object it is 
called wish. For wish is rational desire and longing for some definite 
thing. 

Wish, however, is used both in connection with what is within our 
power, and in connection with what is outside our power, that is, 
both with regard to the possible and the impossible. For we wish 
often to indulge lust or to be temperate, or to sleep and the like, and 
these are within our power to accomplish, and possible. But we wish 
also to be kings, and this is not within our power, or we wish 
perchance never to die, and this is an impossibility. 

The wish, then, has reference to the end alone, and not to the means 
by which the end is attained. The end is the object of our wish, for 
instance, to be a king or to enjoy good health: but the means by 
which the end is attained, that is to say, the manner in which we 
ought to enjoy good health, or reach the rank of king, are the objects 
of deliberation. Then after wish follow inquiry and speculation 
(zhthsis and skiYis), and after these, if the object is anything within 
our power, comes counsel or deliberation (boulh or bouleusis): 
counsel is an appetite for investigating lines of action lying within 
our own power. For one deliberates, whether one ought to prosecute 
any matter or not, and next, one decides which is the better, and this 
is called judgment (krisis). Thereafter, one becomes disposed to and 
forms a liking for that in favour of which deliberation gave judgment, 
and this is called inclination (gnwmh). For should one form a 
judgment and not be disposed to or form a liking for the object of 
that judgment, it is not called inclination. Then, again, after one has 
become so disposed, choice or selection (proairesis and epilogh) 
comes into play. For choice consists in the choosing and selecting 
of one of two possibilities in preference to the other. Then one is 
impelled to action, and this is called impulse (ormh): and thereafter it 
is brought into employment, and this is called use (crhsis). The last 
stage after we have enjoyed the use is cessation from desire. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-22.htm (3 of 5)2006-06-01 18:06:43

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.22. 

In the case, however, of creatures without reason, as soon as 
appetite is roused for any-tiring, straightway arises impulse to 
action. For the appetite of creatures without reason is irrational, and 
they are ruled by their natural appetite. Hence, neither the names of 
will or wish are applicable to the appetite of creatures without 
reason. For will is rational, free and natural desire, and in the case of 
man, endowed with reason as he is, the natural appetite is ruled 
rather than rules For his actions are free, and depend upon reason, 
since the faculties of knowledge and life are bound up together in 
man. He is free in desire, free in wish, free in examination and 
investigation, free in deliberation, free in judgment, free in 
inclination, free in choice, free in impulse, and free in action where 
thai is in accordance with nature. 

But in the case of God, it is to be remembered, we speak of wish, but 
it is not correct to speak of choice. For God does not deliberate, 
since that is a mark of ignorance, and no one deliberates about what 
he knows. But if counsel is a mark of ignorance, surely choice must 
also be so. God, then, since He has absolute knowledge of 
everything, does not deliberate. 

Nor in the case of the soul of the Lord do we speak of counsel or 
choice, seeing that He had no part in ignorance. For, although He 
was of a nature that is not cognisant of the future, yet because of His 
oneness in subsistence with God the Word, He had knowledge of all 
things, and that not by grace, but, as we have said, because He was 
one in subsistence. For He Himself was both God and Man, and 
hence He did not possess the will that acts by opinion or disposition. 
While He did possess the natural and simple will which is to be 
observed equally in all the personalities of men, His holy soul had 
not opinion (or, disposition) that is to say, no inclination opposed to 
His divine will, nor aught else contrary to His divine will. For opinion 
(or, disposition) differs as persons differ, except m the case of the 
holy and simple and uncompound and indivisible Godhead. There, 
indeed, since the subsistences are in nowise divided or separated, 
neither is the object of will divided. And there, since there is but one 
nature, there is also but one natural will. And again, since the 
subsistences are unseparated, the three subsistences have also one 
object of will, and one activity. In the case of men, however, seeing 
that their nature is one, their natural will is also one, but since their 
subsistences are separated and divided from each other, alike in 
place and time, and disposition to things, and in many other 
respects, for this reason their acts of will and their opinions are 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-22.htm (4 of 5)2006-06-01 18:06:43

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.22. 

different. But in the case of our Lord Jesus Christ, since He 
possesses different natures, His natural wills, that is, His volitional 
faculties belonging to Him as God and as Man are also different. But 
since the subsistence is one, and He Who exercises the will is one, 
the object of the will the gnomic will, is also one, His human will 
evidently following His divine will, and willing that which the divine 
will willed it to will. 

Further note, that will (qelhsis) and wish (boulhsis) are two different 
things: also the object of will (to qelhton) and the capacity for will 
(qelhtikon), and the subject that exercises will (o qelwn), are all 
different. For will is just the simple faculty of willing, whereas wish is 
will directed to some definite object. Again, the object of will is the 
matter underlying the will, that is to say, the thing that we will: for 
instance, when appetite is roused for food. The appetite pure and 
simple, however, is a rational will. The capacity for will, moreover, 
means that which possesses the volitional faculty, for example, man. 
Further, the subject that exercises will is the actual person who 
makes use of will. 

The word to qelhma, it is well to note, sometimes denotes the will, 
that is, the volitional faculty, and in this sense we speak of natural 
will: and sometimes it denotes the object of will, and we speak of will 
(qelhma gnwmikon) depending on inclination. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-22.htm (5 of 5)2006-06-01 18:06:43

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.23. 

CHAPTER XXIII. Concerning Energy. 

All the faculties we have already discussed, both those of knowledge 
and those of life, both the natural and the artificial, are, it is to be 
noted, called energies. For energy s is the natural force and activity 
of each essence: or again, natural energy is the activity innate in 
every essence: and so, clearly, things that have the same essence 
have also the same energy, and things that have different natures 
have also different energies. For no essence can be devoid of natural 
energy. 

Natural energy again is the force in each essence by which its nature 
is made manifest. And again: natural energy is the primal, eternallymoving force of the intelligent soul: that is, the eternally-moving 
word of the soul, which ever springs naturally from it. And yet again: 
natural energy is the force and activity of each essence which only 
that which is not lacks. 

But actions are also called energies: for instance, speaking, eating, 
drinking, and such like. The natural affections also are often called 
energies, for instance, hunger, thirst, and so forth. And yet again, the 
result of the force is also often called energy. 

Things are spoken of in a twofold way as being potential and actual. 
For we say that the child at the breast is a potential scholar, for he is 
so equipped that, if taught, he will become a scholar. Further, we 
speak of a potential and an actual scholar, meaning that the latter is 
versed in letters, while the former has the power of interpreting 
letters, but does not put it into actual use: again, when we speak of 
an actual scholar, we mean that he puts his power into actual use, 
that is to say, that he really interprets writings. 

It is, therefore, to be observed that in the second sense potentiality 
and actuality go together; for the scholar is in the one case potential, 
and in the other actual. 

The primal and only true energy of nature is the voluntary or rational 
and independent life which constitutes our humanity. I know not how 
those who rob the Lord of this can say that He became man. 

Energy is drastic activity of nature: and by drastic is meant that 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-23.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:43

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.23. 

which is moved of itself. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-23.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:43

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.24. 

CHAPTER XXIV. Concerning what is Voluntary and what is 
Involuntary. 

The voluntary implies a certain definite action, and so-called 
involuntariness also implies a certain definite action. Further, many 
attribute true involuntariness not only to suffering, but even to 
action. We must then understand action to be rational energy. 
Actions are followed by praise or blame, and some of them are 
accompanied with pleasure and others with pain; some are to be 
desired by the actor, others are to be shunned: further, of those that 
are desirable, some are always so, others only at some particular 
time. And so it is also with those that are to be shunned. Again, 
some actions enlist pity and are pardonable, others are hateful and 
deserve punishment. Voluntariness, then, is assuredly followed by 
praise or blame, and renders the action pleasurable and desirable to 
the actor, either for all time or for the moment of its performance. 
Involuntariness, on the other 

hand, brings merited pity or pardon in its train, and renders the act 
painful and undesirable to the doer, and makes him leave it in a state 
of incompleteness even though force is brought to bear upon him. 

Further, what is involuntary, depends in part on force and in part on 
ignorance. It depends on force when the creative beginning in cause 
is from without, that is to say, when one is forced by another without 
being at all persuaded, or when one does not contribute to the act on 
one's own impulse, or does not co-operate at all, or do on one's own 
account that which is exacted by force. Thus we may give this 
definition: "An involuntary act is one in which the beginning is from 
without, and where one does not contribute at all on one's own 
impulse to that which one is force" And by beginning we mean the 
creative cause. All involuntary act depends, on the other hand, on 
ignorance, when one is not the cause of the ignorance one's self, but 
events just so happen. For, if one commits murder while drunk, it is 
an act of ignorance, but yet not involuntary: for one was one's self 
responsible for the cause of the ignorance, that is to say, the 
drunkenness. But if while shooting at the customary range one slew 
one's father who happened to be passing by, this would be termed 
an ignorant and involuntary act. 

As, then, that which is involuntary is in two parts, one depending on 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-24.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:43

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.24. 

force, the other on ignorance, that which is voluntary is the opposite 
of both. For that which is voluntary is the result neither of force nor 
of ignorance. A voluntary act, then, is one of which the beginning or 
cause originates in an actor, who knows each individual 
circumstance through which and in which the action takes place. By 
"individual" is meant what the rhetoricians call circumstantial 
elements: for instance, the actor, the sufferer, the action (perchance 
a murder), the instrument, the place, the time, the manner, the 
reason of the action. 

Notice that there are certain things that occupy a place intermediate 
between what is voluntary and what is involuntary. Although they are 
unpleasant and painful we welcome them as the escape from a still 
greater trouble; for instance, to escape shipwreck we cast the cargo 
overboard. 

Notice also that children and irrational creatures perform voluntary 
actions, but these do not involve the exercise of choice: further, all 
our actions that are done in anger and without previous deliberation 
are voluntary actions, but do not in the least involve free choice. 
Also, if a friend suddenly appears on the scene, or if one 
unexpectedly lights on a treasure, so far as we are concerned it is 
quite voluntary, but there is no question of choice in the matter. For 
all these things are voluntary, because we desire pleasure from 
them, but they do not by any means imply choice, because they are 
not the result of deliberation. And deliberation must assuredly 
precede choice, as we have said above. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-24.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:43

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.25. 

CHAPTER XXV. Concerning what is in our own power, that is, 
concerning Free-will. 

The first enquiry involved in the consideration of free-will, that is, of 
what is in our own power, is whether anything is in our power: for 
there are many who deny this. The second is, what are the things 
that are in our power, and over what things do we have authority? 
The third is, what is the reason for which God Who created us 
endued us with free-will? So then we shall take up the first question, 
and firstly we shall prove that of those things which even our 
opponents grant, some are within our power. And let us proceed 
thus. 

Of all the things that happen, the cause is said to be either God, or 
necessity, or fate, or nature, or chance, or accident. But God's 
function has to do with essence and providence: necessity deals 
with the movement of things that ever keep to the same course: fate 
with the necessary accomplishment of the things it brings to pass 
(for fate itself implies necessity): nature with birth, growth, 
destruction, plants and animals; chance with what is rare and 
unexpected. For chance is defined as the meeting and concurrence 
of two causes, originating in choice but bringing to pass something 
other than what is natural: for example, if a man finds a treasure 
while digging a ditch: for the man who hid the treasure did not do so 
that the other might find it, nor did the finder dig with the purpose of 
finding the treasure: but the former hid it that he might take it away 
when he wished, and the other's aim was to dig the ditch: whereas 
something happened quite different from what both had in view. 
Accident again deals with casual occurrences that take place among 
lifeless or irrational things, apart from nature and art. This then is 
their doctrine. Under which, then, of these categories are we to bring 
what happens through the agency of man, if indeed man is not the 
cause and beginning of action? for it would not be right to ascribe to 
God actions that are sometimes base and unjust: nor may we 
ascribe these to necessity, for they are not such as ever continue the 
same: nor to fate, for fate implies not possibility only but necessity: 
nor to nature, for nature's province is animals and plants: nor to 
chance, for the actions of men are not rare and unexpected: nor to 
accident, for that is used in reference to the casual occurrences that 
take place in the world of lifeless and irrational things. We are left 
then with this fact, that the man who acts and makes is himself the 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-25.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:44

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.25. 

author of his own works, and is a creature endowed with free-will. 

Further, if man is the author of no action, the faculty of deliberation 
is quite superfluous for to what purpose could deliberation be put if 
man is the master of none of his actions? for all deliberation is for 
the sake of action. But to prove that the fairest and most precious of 
man's endowments is quite superfluous would be the height of 
absurdity. If then man deliberates, he deliberates with a view to 
action. For all deliberation is with a view to and on account of action. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-25.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:44

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.26. 

CHAPTER XXVI. Concerning Events. 

Of events, some are in our hands, others are not. Those then are in 
our hands which we are free to do or not to do at our will, that is all 
actions that are done voluntarily (for those actions are not called 
voluntary the doing of which is not in our hands), and in a word, all 
that are followed by blame or praise and depend on motive and law. 
Strictly all mental and deliberative acts are in our hands. Now 
deliberation is concerned with equal possibilities: and an 'equal 
possibility' is an action that is itself within our power and its 
opposite, and our mind makes choice of the alternatives, and this is 
the origin of action. The actions, therefore, that are in our hands are 
these equal possibilities: e.g. to be moved or not to be moved, to 
hasten or not to hasten, to long for unnecessaries or not to do so, to 
tell lies or not to tell lies, to give or not to give, to rejoice or not to 
rejoice as fits the occasion, and all such actions as imply virtue or 
vice in their performance, for we are free to do or not to do these at 
our pleasure. Amongst equal possibilities also are included the arts, 
for we have it in our power to cultivate these or not as we please. 

Note, however, that while the choice of what is to be done is ever in 
our power, the action itself often is prevented by some dispensation 
of the divine Providence. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-26.htm2006-06-01 18:06:44

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.27. 

CHAPTER XXVII. Concerning the reason of our endowment 
with Free-will. 

We hold, therefore, that free-will comes on the scene at the same 
moment as reason, and that change and alteration are congenital to 
all that is produced. For all that is produced is also subject to 
change. For those things must be subject to change whose 
production has its origin in change. And change consists in being 
brought into being out of nothing, and in transforming a substratum 
of matter into something different. Inanimate things, then, and things 
without reason undergo the aforementioned bodily changes, while 
the changes of things endowed with reason depend on choice. For 
reason consists of a speculative and a practical part. The speculative 
part is the contemplation of the nature of things, and the practical 
consists in deliberation and defines the true reason for what is to be 
done. The speculative side is called mind or wisdom, and the 
practical side is called reason or prudence. Every one, then, who 
deliberates does so in the belief that the choice of what is to be done 
lies in his hands, that he may choose what seems best as the result 
of his deliberation, and having chosen may act upon it. And if this is 
so, free-will must necessarily be very closely related to reason. For 
either man is an irrational being, or, if he is rational, he is master of 
his acts and endowed with free-will. Hence also creatures without 
reason do not enjoy free-will: for nature leads them rather than they 
nature, and so they do not oppose the natural appetite, but as soon 
as their appetite longs after anything they rush headlong after it. But 
man, being rational, leads nature rather than nature him, and so 
when he desires aught he has the power to curb his appetite or to 
indulge it as he pleases. Hence also creatures devoid of reason are 
the subjects neither of praise nor blame, while man is the subject of 
both praise and blame. 

Note also that the angels, being rational, are endowed with free-will, 
and, inasmuch as they are created, are liable to change. This in fact 
is made plain by the devil who, although made good by the Creator, 
became of his own free-will the inventor of evil, and by the powers 
who revolted with him, that is the demons, and by the other troops of 
angels who abode in goodness. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-27.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:44

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.27. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-27.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:44

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.28. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. Concerning what is not in our hands. 

Of things that are not in our hands some have their beginning or 
cause in those that are in our power, that is to say, the recompenses 
of our actions both in the present and in the age to come, but all the 
rest are dependent on the divine will. For the origin of all things is 
from God, but their destruction has been introduced by our 
wickedness for our punishment or benefit. For God did not create 
death, neither does He take delight in the destruction of living things. 
But death is the work rather of man, that is, its origin is in Adam's 
transgression, in like manner as all other punishments. But all other 
things must be referred to God. For our birth is to be referred to His 
creative power; and our continuance to His conservative power; and 
our government and safety to His providential power; and the eternal 
enjoyment of good things by those who preserve the laws of nature 
in which we are formed is to be ascribed to His goodness. But since 
some deny the existence of Providence, let us further devote a few 
words to the discussion of Providence. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-28.htm2006-06-01 18:06:45

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.29. 

CHAPTER XXIX. Concerning Providence. 

Providence, then, is the care that God takes over existing things. 
And again: Providence is the will of God through which all existing 
things receive their fitting issue. But if Providence is God's will, 
according to true reasoning all things that come into being through 
Providence must necessarily be both most fair and most excellent, 
and such that they cannot be surpassed. For the same person must 
of necessity be creator of and provider for what exists: for it is not 
meet nor fitting that the creator of what exists and the provider 
should be separate persons. For in that case they would both 
assuredly be deficient, the one in creating, the other in providing. 
God therefore is both Creator and Provider, and His creative and 
preserving and providing power is simply His good-will. For 
whatsoever the Lard pleased that did He in heaven and in earth, and 
no one resisted His will. He willed that all things should be and they 
were. He wills the universe to be framed and it is framed, and all that 
He wills comes to pass. 

That He provides, and that He provides excellently, one can most 
readily perceive thus. God alone is good and wise by nature. Since 
then He is good, He provides: for he who does not provide is not 
good. For even men and creatures without reason provide for their 
own offspring according to their nature, and he who does not 
provide is blamed. Again, since He is wise, He takes the best care 
over what exists. 

When, therefore, we give heed to these things we ought to be filled 
with wonder at all the works of Providence, and praise them all, and 
accept them all without enquiry, even though they are in the eyes of 
many unjust, because the Providence of God is beyond our ken and 
comprehension, while our reasonings and actions and the future are 
revealed to His eyes alone. And by "all" I mean those that are not in 
our hands: for those that are in our power are outside the sphere of 
Providence and within that of our Free-will. 

Now the works of Providence are partly according to the good-will(of 
God) and partly according to permission. Works of good-will include 
alL those that are undeniably good, while works of permission 
are ....... For Providence often permits the just man to encounter 
misfortune in order that he may reveal to otHers the virtue that lies 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-29.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:45

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.29. 

concealed within him, as was the case with Job. At other times it 
allows something strange to be done in order that something great 
and marvellous might be accomplished through the seeminglystrange act, as when the salvation of men was brought about 
through the Cross. In another way it allows the pious man to suffer 
sore trials in order that he may not depart from a right conscience 
nor lapse into pride on account of the power and grace granted to 
him, as was the case with Paul. 

One man is forsaken for a season with a view to another's 
restoration, in order that others when they see his state may be 
taught a lesson, as in the case of Lazarus and the rich man. For it 
belongs to our nature to be east down when we see persons in 
distress. Another is deserted by Providence in order that another 
may be glorified, and not for his own sin or that of his parents, just 
as the man who was blind from his birth ministered to the glory of 
the Son of Man. Again another is permitted to suffer in order to stir 
up emulation in the breasts of others, so that others by magnifying 
the glory of the sufferer may resolutely welcome suffering in the 
hope of future glory and the desire for future blessings, as in the 
case of the martyrs. Another is allowed to fall at times into some act 
of baseness in order that another worse fault may be thus corrected, 
as for instance when God allows a man who takes pride in his virtue 
and righteousness to fall away into fornication in order that he may 
be brought through this fall into the perception of his own weakness 
and be humbled and approach and make confession to the Lord. 

Moreover, it is to be observed that the choice of what is to be done is 
in our own hands: but the final issue depends, in the one case when 
our actions are good, on the cooperation of God, Who in His justice 
brings help according to His foreknowledge to such as choose the 
good with a right conscience, and, in the other case when our 
actions are to evil, on the desertion by God, Who again in His justice 
stands aloof in accordance with His foreknowledge. 

Now there are two forms of desertion: for there is desertion in the 
matters of guidance and training, and there is complete and 
hopeless desertion. The former has in view the restoration and 
safety and glory of the sufferer, or the rousing of feelings of 
emulation and imitation in others, or the glory of God: but the latter 
is when man, after God has done all that was possible to save him, 
remains of his own set purpose blind and uncured, or rather 
incurable, and then he is handed over to utter destruction, as was 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-29.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:45

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.29. 

Judas. May God be gracious to us, and deliver us from such 
desertion. 

Observe further that the ways of God's providence are many, and 
they cannot be explained in words nor conceived by the mind. 

And remember that all the assaults of dark and evil fortune 
contribute to the salvation of those who receive them with 
thankfulness, and are assuredly ambassadors of help. 

Also one must bear in mind that God's original wish was that all 
should be saved and come to His Kingdom. For it was not for 
punishment that He formed us but to share in His goodness, 
inasmuch as He is a good God. But inasmuch as He is a just God, 
His will is that sinners should suffer punishment. 

The first then is called God's antecedent will and pleasure, and 
springs from Himself, while the second is called God's consequent 
will and permission, and has its origin in us. And the latter is twofold; one part dealing with matters of guidance and training, and 
having in view our salvation, and the other being hopeless and 
leading to our utter punishment, as we said above. And this is the 
case with actions that are not left in our hands. 

But of actions that are in our hands the good ones depend on His 
antecedent goodwill and pleasure, while the wicked ones depend 
neither on His antecedent nor on His consequent will, but are a 
concession to free-will For that which is the result of compulsion has 
neither reason nor virtue in it. God makes provision for all creation 
and makes all creation the instrument of His help and training, yea 
often even the demons themselves, as for example in the cases of 
Job and the swine. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-29.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:45

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.30. 

CHAPTER XXX. Concerning Prescience and Predestination. 

We ought to understand that while God knows all things beforehand, 
yet He does not predetermine all things. For He knows beforehand 
those things that are in our power, but He does not predetermine 
them. For it is not His will that there should be wickedness nor does 
He choose to compel virtue. So that predetermination is the work of 
the divine command based on fore-knowledge. But on the other hand 
God predetermines those things which are not within our power in 
accordance with His prescience. For already God in His prescience 
has prejudged all things in accordance with His goodness and 
justice. 

Bear in mind, too, that virtue is a gift from God implanted in our 
nature, and that He Himself is the source and cause of all good, and 
without His co-operation and help we cannot will or do any good 
thing, But we have it in our power either to abide in virtue and follow 
God, Who calls us into ways of virtue, or to stray from paths of 
virtue, which is to dwell in wickedness, and to follow the devil who 
summons but cannot compel us. For wickedness is nothing else 
than the withdrawal of goodness, just as darkness is nothing else 
than the withdrawal of light While then we abide in the natural state 
we abide in virtue, but when we deviate from the natural state, that is 
from virtue, we come into an unnatural state and dwell in 
wickedness. 

Repentance is the returning from the unnatural into the natural state, 
from the devil to God, through discipline and effort. 

Man then the Creator made male, giving him to share in His own 
divine grace, and bringing him thus into communion with Himself: 
and thus it was that he gave in the manner of a prophet the names to 
living flyings, with authority as though they were given to be his 
slaves. For having been endowed with reason and mind, and free-will 
after the image of God, he was filly entrusted with dominion over 
earthly things by the common Creator and Master of all. 

But since God in His prescience knew that man would transgress 
and become liable to destruction, He made from him a female to be a 
help to him like himself; a help, indeed, for the conservation of the 
race after the transgression from age to age by generation. For the 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-30.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:45

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.30. 

earliest formation is called 'making' and not 'generation.' For 'making 
' is the original formation at God's hands, while 'generation' is the 
succession from each Other made necessary by the sentence of 
death imposed on us 'on account of the transgression. 

This man He placed in Paradise, a home that was alike spiritual and 
sensible. For he lived in the body on the earth in the realm of sense, 
while he dwelt in the spirit among the angels, cultivating divine 
thoughts, and being supported by them: living in naked simplicity a 
life free from artificiality, and being led up through His creations to 
the one and only Creator, in Whose contemplation he found joy and 
gladness. 

When therefore He had furnished his nature with free-will, He 
imposed a law on him, not to taste of the tree of knowledge. 
Concerning this tree, we have said as much as is necessary in the 
chapter about Paradise, at least as much as it was in our power to 
say. And with this command He gave the promise that, if he should 
preserve the dignity of the soul by giving the victory to reason, and 
acknowledging his Creator and observing His command, he should 
share eternal blessedness and live to all eternity, proving mightier 
than death: but if forsooth he should subject the soul to the body, 
and prefer the delights of the body, comparing himself in ignorance 
of his true dignity to the senseless beasts, and shaking off Iris 
Creator's yoke, and neglecting His divine injunction, he will be liable 
to death and corruption, and will be compelled to labour throughout 
a miserable life. For it was no profit to man to obtain incorruption 
while still untried and unproved, lest he should fall into pride and 
under the judgment of the devil. For through his incorruption the 
devil, when he had fallen as the result of his own free choice, was 
firmly established in wickedness, so that there was no room for 
repentance and no hope of change: just as, moreover, the angels 
also, when they had made free choice of virtue became through 
grace immoveably rooted in goodness. 

It was necessary, therefore, that man should first be put to the test 
(for man untried and unproved would be worth nothing), and being 
made perfect by the trial through the observance of the command 
should thus receive incorruption as the prize of his virtue. For being 
intermediate between God and matter he was destined, if he kept the 
command, to be delivered from his natural relation to existing things 
and to be made one with God's estate, and to be immoveably 
established in goodness, but, if he transgressed and inclined the 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-30.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:45

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.1, C.30. 

rather to what was material, and tore his mind from the Author of his 
being, I mean God, his fate was to be corruption, and he was to 
become subject to passion instead of passionless, and mortal 
instead of immortal, and dependent on connection and unsettled 
generation. And in his desire for life he would cling to pleasures as 
though they were necessary to maintain it, and would fearlessly 
abhor those who sought to deprive him of these, and transfer his 
desire from God to matter, and his anger from the real enemy of his 
salvation to his own brethren. The envy of the devil then was the 
reason of man's fall. For that same demon, so full of envy and with 
such a hatred of good, would not suffer us to enjoy the pleasures of 
heaven, when he himself was kept below on account of his 
arrogance, and hence the false one tempts miserable man with the 
hope of Godhead, and leading him up to as great a height of 
arrogance as himself, he hurls him down into a pit of destruction just 
as deep. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa1-30.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:45

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.1. 

BOOK III 

CHAPTER I. Concerning the Divine OEconomy and God's care over 
us, and concerning our salvation. 

MAN, then, was thus snared by the assault of the arch-fiend, and 
broke his Creator's command, and was stripped of grace and put off 
his confidence with God, and covered himself with the asperities of a 
toilsome life (for this is the meaning of the fig-leaves); and was 
clothed about with death, that is, mortality and the grossness of 
flesh (for this is what the garment of skins signifies); and was 
banished from Paradise by God's just judgment, and condemned to 
death, and made subject to corruption. Yet, notwithstanding all this, 
in His pity, God, Who gave him his being, and Who in His 
graciousness bestowed on him a life of happiness, did not disregard 
man. But He first trained him in many ways and called him back, by 
groans and trembling, by the deluge of water, and the utter 
destruction of almost the whole race, by confusion and diversity of 
tongues, by the rule of angels, by the burning of cities, by figurative 
manifestations of God, by wars and victories and defeats, by signs 
and wonders, by manifold faculties, by the law and the prophets: for 
by all these means God earnestly strove to emancipate man from the 
wide-spread and enslaving bonds of sin, which had made life such a 
mass of iniquity, and to effect man's return to a life of happiness. For 
it was sin that brought death like a wild and savage beast into the 
world s to the ruin of the human life. But it behoved the Redeemer to 
be without sin, and not made liable through sin to death, and further, 
that His nature should be strengthened and renewed, and trained by 
labour and taught the way of virtue which leads away from 
corruption to the life eternal and, in the end, is revealed the mighty 
ocean of love to man that is about Him. For the very Creator and 
Lord Himself undertakes a struggle in behalf of the work of His own 
hands, and learns by toil to become Master. And since the enemy 
snares man by the hope of Godhead, he himself is snared in turn by 
the screen of flesh, and so are shown at once the goodness and 
wisdom, the justice and might of God. God's goodness is revealed in 
that He did not disregard the frailty of His own handiwork, but was 
moved with compassion for him in his fall, and stretched forth His 
hand to him: and His justice in that when man was overcome He did 
not make another victorious over the tyrant, nor did He snatch man 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-1.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:46

 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.1. 

by might from death, but in His goodness and justice He made him, 
who had become through his sins the slave of death, himself once 
more conqueror and rescued like by like, most difficult though it 
seemed: and His wisdom is seen in His devising the most fitting 
solution of the difficulty. For by the good pleasure of our God and 
Father, the Only-begotten Son and Word of God and God, Who is in 
the bosom of the God and Father, of like essence with the Father and 
the Holy Spirit, Who was before the ages, Who is without beginning 
and was in the beginning, Who is in the presence of the God and 
Father, and is God and made in the form of God, bent the heavens 
and descended to earth: that is to say, He humbled without 
humiliation His lofty station which yet could not be humbled, and 
condescends to His servants, with a condescension ineffable and 
incomprehensible: (for that is what the descent signifies). And God 
being perfect becomes perfect man, and brings to perfection the 
newest of all new things, the only new thing under the Sun, through 
which the boundless might of God is manifested. For what greater 
thing is there, than that God should become Man? And the Word 
became flesh without being changed, of the Holy Spirit, and Mary the 
holy and ever-virgin one, the mother of God. And He acts as 
mediator between God and man, He the only lover of man conceived 
in the Virgin's chaste womb without will or desire, or any connection 
with man or pleasurable generation, but through the Holy Spirit and 
the first offspring of Adam. And He becomes obedient to the Father 
Who is like unto us, and finds a remedy for our disobedience in what 
He had assumed from us, and became a pattern of obedience to us 
without which it is not possible to obtain salvation. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-1.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:46

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.2. 

CHAPTER II. Concerning the manner in which the Word was 
conceived, and concerning His divine incarnation. 

The angel of the Lord was sent to the holy Virgin, who was 
descended from David's line. Far it is evident that our Lord sprang 
out of Judah, of which tribe no one turned his attention to the altar, 
as the divine apostle said: but about this we will speak more 
accurately later. And bearing glad tidings to her, he said, Hail thou 
highly favoured one, the Lord is with thee. And she was troubled at 
his word, and the angel said to her, Fear not, Mary, for thou hast 
found favour with God, and shalt bring forth a Son and shalt call His 
name Jesus; for He shall save His people from their sins. Hence it 
comes that Jesus has the interpretation Saviour. And when she 
asked in her perplexity, How can this be, seeing I know not a man? 
the angel again answered her, The Holy Spirit shall came upon thee, 
and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee. Therefore also 
that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of 
God. And she said to him, Behold the handmaid of the Lord: be it 
unto me according to Thy word. 

So then, after the assent of the holy Virgin, the Holy Spirit descended 
on her, according to the word of the Lord which the angel spoke, 
purifying her, and granting her power to receive the divinity of the 
Word, and likewise power to bring forth. And then was she 
overshadowed by the enhypostatic Wisdom and Power of the most 
high God, the Son of God Who is of like essence with the Father as 
of Divine seed, and from her holy and most pure blood He formed 
flesh animated with the spirit of reason and thought, the first-fruits of 
our compound nature: not by procreation but by creation through 
the Holy Spirit: not developing the fashion of the body by gradual 
additions but perfecting it at once, He Himself, the very Word of God, 
standing to the flesh in the relation of subsistence. For the divine 
Word was not made one with flesh that had an independent preexistence, but taking up His abode in the womb of the holy Virgin, He 
unreservedly in His own subsistence took upon Himself through the 
pure blood of the eternal Virgin a body of flesh animated with the 
spirit of reason and thought, thus assuming to Himself the first-fruits 
of man's compound nature, Himself, the Word, having become a 
subsistence in the flesh. So that He is at once flesh, and at the same 
time flesh of God the Word, and likewise flesh animated, possessing 
both reason and thought. Wherefore we speak not of man as having 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-2.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:46

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.2. 

become God, but of God as having become Man. For being by nature 
perfect God, He naturally became likewise perfect Man: and did not 
change His nature nor make the dispensation an empty show, but 
became, without confusion or change or division, one in subsistence 
with the flesh, which was conceived of the holy Virgin, and animated 
with reason and thought, and had found existence in Him, while He 
did not change the nature of His divinity into the essence of flesh, 
nor the essence of flesh into the nature of His divinity, and did not 
make one compound nature out of His divine nature and the human 
nature He had assumed. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-2.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:46

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.3. 

CHAPTER III. Concerning Christ's two natures, in apposition 
to those who hold that He has only one. 

For the two natures were united with each other without change or 
alteration, neither the divine nature departing from its native 
simplicity, nor yet the human being either changed into the nature of 
God or reduced to non-existence, nor one compound nature being 
produced out of the two. For the compound nature cannot be of the 
same essence as either of the natures out of which it is 
compounded, as made one thing out of others: for example, the body 
is composed of the four elements, but is not of the same essence as 
fire or air, or water or earth, nor does it keep these names. If, 
therefore, after the union, Christ's nature was, as the heretics hold, a 
compound unity, He had changed from a simple into a compound 
nature, and is not of the same essence as the Father Whose nature is 
simple, nor as the mother, who is not a compound of divinity and 
humanity. Nor will He then be in divinity and humanity: nor will He be 
called either God or Man, but simply Christ: and the word Christ will 
be the name not of the subsistence, but of what in their view is the 
one nature. 

We, however, do not give it as our view that Christ's nature is 
compound, nor yet that He is one thing made of other things and 
differing from them as man is made of sold and body, or as the body 
is made of the four elements, but hold that, though He is constituted 
of these different parts He is yet the same. For we confess that He 
alike in His divinity and in His humanity both is and is said to be 
perfect God, the same Being, and that He consists of two natures, 
and exists in two natures. Further, by the word "Christ" we 
understand the name of the subsistence, not in the sense of one 
kind, but as signifying the existence of two natures. For in His own 
person He anointed Himself; as God anointing His body with His own 
divinity, and as Man being anointed. For He is Himself both God and 
Man. And the anointing is the divinity of His humanity. For if Christ, 
being of one compound nature, is of like essence to the Father, then 
the Father also must be compound and of like essence with the 
flesh, which is absurd and extremely blasphemous. 

How, indeed, could one and the same nature come to embrace 
opposing and essential differences? For how is it possible that the 
same nature should be at once created and uncreated, mortal and 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-3.htm (1 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:46

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.3. 

immortal, circumscribed and uncircumscribed? 

But if those who declare that Christ has only one nature should say 
also that that nature is a simple one, they must admit either that He 
is God pure and simple, and thus reduce the incarnation to a mere 
pretence, or that He is only man, according to Nestorius. And how 
then about His being "perfect in divinity and perfect in humanity"? 
And when can Christ be said to be of two natures, if they hold that 
He is of one composite nature after the union? For it is surely clear 
to every one that before the union Christ's nature was one. 

But this is what leads the heretics astray, viz., that they look upon 
nature and subsistence as the same thing. For when we speak of the 
nature of men as one, observe that in saying this we are not looking 
to the question of soul and body. For when we compare together the 
soul and the body it cannot be said that they are of one nature. But 
since there are very many subsistences of men, and yet all have the 
same kind of nature: for all are composed of soul and body, and all 
have part in the nature of the soul, and possess the essence of the 
body, and the common form: we speak of the one nature of these 
very many and different subsistences; while each subsistence, to 
wit, has two natures, and fulfils itself in two natures, namely, soul 
and body. 

But a common form cannot be admitted in the case of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. For neither was there ever, nor is there, nor will there 
ever be another Christ constituted of deity and humanity, and 
existing in deity and humanity at once perfect God and perfect man. 
And thus in the case of our Lord Jesus Christ we cannot speak of 
one nature made up of divinity and humanity, as we do in the case of 
the individual made up of soul and body. For in the latter case we 
have to do with an individual, but Christ is not an individual. For 
there is no predicable form of Christlihood, so to speak, that He 
possesses. And therefore we hold that there has been a union of two 
perfect natures, one divine and one human; not with disorder or 
confusion, or intermixture, or commingling, as is said by the Godaccursed Dioscorus and by Eutyches and Severus, and all that 
impious company: and not in a personal or relative manner, or as a 
matter of dignity or agreement in will, or equality in honour, or 
identity in name, or good pleasure, as Nestorius, hated of God, said, 
and Diodorus and Theodorus of Mopsuestia, and their diabolical 
tribe: but by synthesis; that is, in subsistence, without change or 
confusion or alteration or difference or separation, and we confess 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-3.htm (2 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:46

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.3. 

that in two perfect natures there is but one subsistence of the Son of 
God incarnate; holding that there is one and the same subsistence 
belonging to His divinity and His humanity, and granting that the two 
natures are preserved in Him after the union, but we do not hold that 
each is separate and by itself, but that they are united to each other 
in one compound subsistence. For we look upon the union as 
essential, that is, as true and not imaginary. We say that it is 
essential, moreover, not in the sense of two natures resulting in one 
compound nature, but in the sense of a true union of them in one 
compound subsistence of the Son of God, and we hold that their 
essential difference is preserved. For the created remaineth created, 
and the uncreated, uncreated: the mortal remaineth mortal; the 
immortal, immortal: the circumscribed, circumscribed: the 
uncircumscribed, uncircumscribed: the visible, visible: the invisible, 
invisible. "The one part is all glorious with wonders: while the other 
is the victim of insults." 

Moreover, the Word appropriates to Himself the attributes of 
humanity: for all that pertains to His holy flesh is His: and He imparts 
to the flesh His own attributes by way of communication in virtue of 
the interpenetration of the parts one with another, and the oneness 
according to subsistence, and inasmuch as He Who lived and acted 
both as God and as man, taking to Himself either form and holding 
intercourse with the other form, was one and the same. Hence it is 
that the Lord of Glory is said to have been crucified, although His 
divine nature never endured the Cross, and that the Son of Man is 
allowed to have been in heaven before the Passion, as the Lord 
Himself said. For the Lord of Glory is one and the same with Him 
Who is in nature and in truth the Son of Man, that is, Who became 
man, and both His wonders and His sufferings are known to us, 
although His wonders were worked in His divine capacity, and His 
sufferings endured as man. For we know that, just as is His one 
subsistence, so is the essential difference of the nature preserved. 
For how could difference be preserved if the very things that differ 
from one another are not preserved? For difference is the difference 
between things that differ. In so far as Christ's natures differ from 
one another, that is, in the matter of essence, we hold that Christ 
unites in Himself two extremes: in respect of His divinity He is 
connected with the Father and the Spirit, while in respect of His 
humanity He is connected with His mother and all mankind. And in 
so far as His natures are united, we hold that He differs from the 
Father and the Spirit on the one hand, and from the mother and the 
rest of mankind on the other. For the natures are united in His 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-3.htm (3 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:46

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.3. 

subsistence, having one compound subsistence, in which He differs 
from the Father and the Spirit, and also from the mother and us. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-3.htm (4 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:46

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.4. 

CHAPTER IV. Concerning the manner of the Mutual 
Communication. 

Now we have often said already that essence is one thing and 
subsistence another, and that essence signifies the common and 
general form of subsistences of the same kind, such as God, man, 
while subsistence marks the individual, that is to say, Father, Son, 
Holy Spirit, or Peter, Paul. Observe, then, that the names, divinity 
and humanity, denote essences or natures: while the names, God 
and man, are applied both in connection with natures, as when we 
say that God is incomprehensible essence, and that God is one, and 
with reference to subsistences, that which is more specific having 
the name of the more general applied to it, as when the Scripture 
says, Therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee, or again, There 
was a certain man in the land of Uz, for it was only to Job that 
reference was made. 

Therefore, in the case of our Lord Jesus Christ, seeing that we 
recognise that He has two natures but only one subsistence 
compounded of both, when we contemplate His natures we speak of 
His divinity and His humanity, but when we contemplate the 
subsistence compounded of the natures we sometimes use terms 
that have reference to His double nature, as "Christ," and "at once 
God and man," and "God Incarnate;" and sometimes those that 
imply only one of His natures, as "God" alone, or "Son of God," and 
"man" alone, or "Son of Man;" sometimes using names that imply 
His loftiness and sometimes those that imply His lowliness. For He 
Who is alike God and man is one, being the former from the Father 
ever without cause, but having become the latter afterwards for His 
love towards man. 

When, then, we speak of His divinity we do not ascribe to it the 
properties of humanity. For we do not say that His divinity is subject 
to passion or created. Nor, again, do we predicate of His flesh or of 
His humanity the properties of divinity: for we do not say that His 
flesh or His humanity is uncreated. But when we speak of His 
subsistence, whether we give it a name implying both natures, or 
one that refers to only one of them, we still attribute to it the 
properties of both natures. For Christ, which name implies both 
natures, is spoken of as at once God and man, created and 
uncreated, subject to suffering anti incapable of suffering: and when 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-4.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:47

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.4. 

He is named Son of God and God, in reference to only one of His 
natures, He still keeps the properties of the co-existing nature, that 
is, the flesh, being spoken of as God who suffers, and as the Lord of 
Glory crucified, not in respect of His being God but in respect of His 
being at the same time man. Likewise also when He is called Man 
and Son of Man, He still keeps the properties and glories of the 
divine nature, a child before the ages, and man who knew no 
beginning; it is not, however, as child or man but as God that He is 
before the ages, and became a child in the end. And Ibis is the 
manner of the mutual communication, either nature giving in 
exchange to the other its own properties through the identity of the 
subsistence and the interpenetration of the parts with one another. 
Accordingly we can say of Christ: This our God was seen upon the 
earth and lived amongst men, and This man is uncreated and 
impossible and uncircumscribed. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-4.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:47

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.5. 

CHAPTER V. Concerning the number of the Natures. 

In the case, therefore, of the Godhead we confess that there is but 
one nature, but hold that there are three subsistences actually 
existing, anti hold that all things that are of nature and essence are 
simple, and recognise the difference of the subsistences only in the 
three properties of independence of cause and Fatherhood, of 
dependence on cause and Sonship, of dependence on cause and 
procession. And we know further that these are indivisible and 
inseparable from each other and united into one, and 
interpenetrating one another without confusion. Yea, I repeat, united 
without confusion, for they are three although united, and they are 
distinct, although inseparable. For although each has an 
independent existence, that is to say, is a perfect subsistence and 
has an individuality of its own, that is, has a special mode of 
existence, yet they are one in essence and in the natural properties. 
and in being inseparable and indivisible from the Father's 
subsistence, and they both are and are said to be one God. In the 
very same way, then, in the case of the divine and ineffable 
dispensation, exceeding all thought and comprehension, I mean the 
Incarnation of the One God the Word of the Holy Trinity, and our 
Lord Jesus Christ, we confess that there are two natures, one divine 
and one human, joined together with one another and united in 
subsistence, so that one compound subsistence is formed out of the 
two natures: but we hold that the two natures are still preserved, 
even after the union, in the one compound subsistence, that is, in 
the one Christ, and that these exist in reality and have their natural 
properties; for they are united without confusion, and are 
distinguished and enumerated without being separable. And just as 
the three subsistences of the Holy Trinity are united without 
confusion, and are distinguished and enumerated without being 
separable, the enumeration not entailing division or separation or 
alienation or cleavage among them (for we recognise one God the 
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit), so in the same way the natures 
of Christ also, although they are united, yet are united without 
confusion; and although they interpenetrate one another, yet they do 
not permit of change or transmutation of one into the other. For each 
keeps its own natural individuality strictly unchanged. And thus it is 
that they can be enumerated without the enumeration introducing 
division. For Christ, indeed, is one, perfect both in divinity and in 
humanity. For it is not the nature of number to cause separation or 
unity, but its nature is to indicate the quantity of what is enumerated, 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-5.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:47

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.5. 

whether these are united or separated: for we have unity, for 
instance, when fifty stones compose a wall, but we have separation 
when the fifty stones lie on the ground; and again, we have unity 
when we speak of coal having two natures, namely, fire and wood, 
but we have separation in that the nature of fire is one thing, and the 
nature of wood another thing; for these things are united and 
separated not by number, but in another way. So, then, just as even 
though the three subsistences of the Godhead are united with each 
other, we cannot speak of them as one subsistence because we 
should confuse and do away with the difference between the 
subsistences, so also we cannot speak of the two natures of Christ 
as one nature, united though they are in subsistence, because we 
should then confuse and do away with and reduce to nothing the 
difference between the two natures. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-5.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:47

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.6. 

CHAPTER VI. That in one of its subsistences the divine nature 
is united in its entirety to the human nature, in its entirety and 
not only part to part. 

What is common and general is predicated of the included 
particulars. Essence, then, is common as being a form, while 
subsistence is particular. It is particular not as though it had part of 
the nature and had not the rest, but particular in a numerical sense, 
as being individual. For it is in number and not in nature that the 
difference between subsistences is said to lie. Essence, therefore, is 
predicated of subsistence, because in each subsistence of the same 
form the essence is perfect. Wherefore subsistences do not differ 
from each other in essence but in the accidents which indeed are the 
characteristic properties, but characteristic of subsistence and not 
of nature. For indeed they define subsistence as essence along with 
accidents. So that the subsistence contains both the general and the 
particular, and has an independent existence, while essence has not 
an independent existence but is contemplated in the subsistences. 
Accordingly when one of the subsistences suffers, the whole 
essence, being capable of suffering, is held to have suffered in one 
of its subsistences as much as the subsistence suffered, but it does 
not necessarily follow, however, that all the subsistences of the 
same class should suffer along with the suffering subsistence. 

Thus, therefore, we confess that the nature of the Godhead is wholly 
and perfectly in each of its subsistences, wholly in the Father, wholly 
in the Son, and wholly in the Holy Spirit. Wherefore also the Father is 
perfect God, the Son is perfect God, and the Holy Spirit is perfect 
God. In like manner, too, in the Incarnation of the Trinity of the One 
God the Word of the Holy Trinity, we hold that in one of its 
subsistences the nature of the Godhead is wholly and perfectly 
united with the whole nature of humanity, and not part united to part. 
The divine Apostle in truth says that in Him dwelleth all the fulness 
of the Godhead bodily, that is to say in His flesh. And His divinelyinspired disciple, Dionysius, who had so deep a knowledge of things 
divine, said that the Godhead as a whole had fellowship with us in 
one of its own subsistences. But we shall not be driven to hold that 
all the subsistences of the Holy Godhead, to wit the three, are made 
one in subsistence with all the subsistences of humanity. For in no 
other respect did the Father and the Holy Spirit take part in the 
incarnation of God the Word than according to good will and 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-6.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:47

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.6. 

pleasure But we hold that to the whole of human nature the whole 
essence of the Godhead was united. For God the Word omitted none 
of the things which He implanted in our nature when He formed us in 
the beginning, but took them all upon Himself, body and soul both 
intelligent and rational, and all their properties. For the creature that 
is devoid of one of these is not man. But He in His fulness took upon 
Himself me in my fulness, and was united whole to whole that He 
might in His grace bestow salvation on the whole man. For what has 
not been taken cannot be healed. 

The Word of God, then, was united to flesh through the medium of 
mind which is intermediate between the purity of God and the 
grossness of flesh. For the mind holds sway over soul and body, but 
while the mind is the purest part of the soul God is that of the mind. 
And when it is allowed by that which is more excellent, the mind of 
Christ gives proof of its own authority, but it is under the dominion 
of and obedient to that which is more excellent, and does those 
things which the divine will purposes. 

Further the mind has become the seat of the divinity united with it in 
subsistence, just as is evidently the case with the body too, not as 
an inmate, which is the impious error into which the heretics fall 
when they say that one bushel cannot contain two bushels, for they 
are judging what is immaterial by material standards. How indeed 
could Christ be called perfect God and perfect man, and be said to 
be of like essence with the Father and with us, if only part of the 
divine nature is joined in Him to part of the human nature? 

We hold, moreover, that our nature has been raised from the dead 
and has ascended to the heavens and taken its seat at the right hand 
of the Father: not that all the persons of men have risen from the 
dead and taken their seat at the right hand of the Father, but that this 
has happened to the whole of our nature in the subsistence of 
Christ. Verily the divine Apostle says, God hath raised us up 
together and made us sit together in Christ. 

And this further we hold, that the union took place through common 
essences. For every essence is common to the subsistences 
contained in it, and there cannot be found a partial and particular 
nature, that is to say, essence: for otherwise we would have to hold 
that the same subsistences are at once the same and different in 
essence, and that the Holy Trinity in respect of the divinity is at once 
the same and different in essence. So then the same nature is to be 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-6.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:47

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.6. 

observed in each of the subsistences, and when we said that the 
nature of the word became flesh, as did the blessed Athanasius and 
Cyrillus, we mean that the divinity was joined to the flesh. Hence we 
cannot say "The nature of the Word suffered;" for the divinity in it 
did not suffer, but we say that the human nature, not by any means, 
however, meaning all the subsistences of men, suffered in Christ, 
and we confess further that Christ suffered in His human nature. So 
that when we speak of the nature of the Word we mean the Word 
Himself. And the Word has both the general element of essence and 
the particular element of subsistence. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-6.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:47

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.7. 

CHAPTER VII. Concerning the one compound subsistence of 
God the Word. 

We hold then that the divine subsistence of God the Word existed 
before all else and is without time and eternal, simple and 
uncompound, uncreated, incorporeal, invisible, intangible, 
uncircumscribed, possessing all the Father possesses, since He is 
of the same essence with Him, differing from the Father's 
subsistence in the manner of His generation and the relation of the 
Father's subsistence, being perfect also and at no time separated 
from the Father's subsistence: and in these last. days, without 
leaving the Father's bosom, took up His abode in an 
uncircumscribed manner in the womb of the holy Virgin, without the 
instrumentality of seed, and in an incomprehensible manner known 
only to Himself, and causing the flesh derived from the holy Virgin to 
subsist in the very subsistence that was before all the ages. 

So then He was both in all things and above all things and also dwelt 
in the womb of the holy Mother of God, but in it by the energy of the 
incarnation. He therefore became flesh and He took upon Himself 
thereby the first-fruits of our compound nature, viz., the flesh 
animated with the intelligent and national soul, so that the very 
subsistence of God the Word was changed into the subsistence of 
the flesh, and the subsistence of the Word, which was formerly 
simple, became compound, yea compounded of two perfect natures, 
divinity and humanity, and bearing the characteristic and distinctive 
property of the divine Sonship of God the Word in virtue of which it 
is distinguished from the Father and the Spirit, and also the 
characteristic and distinctive properties of the flesh, in virtue of 
which it differs from the Mother and the rest of mankind, bearing 
further the properties of the divine nature in virtue of which it is 
united to the Father and the Spirit, and the marks of the human 
nature in virtue of which it is united to the Mother and to us. And 
further it differs from the Father and the Spirit and the Mother and us 
in being at once God and man. For this we know to be the most 
special property of the subsistence of Christ. 

Wherefore we confess Him, even after the incarnation, the one Son 
of God, and likewise Son of Man, one Christ, one Lord, the onlybegotten Son and Word of God, one Lord Jesus. We reverence His 
two generations, one from the Father before time and beyond cause 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-7.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:47

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.7. 

and reason and time and nature, and one in the end for our sake, and 
like to us and above us; for our sake because it was for our 
salvation, like to us in that He was man born of woman at full tithe, 
and above us because it was not by seed, but by the Holy Spirit and 
the Holy Virgin Mary, transcending the laws of parturition. We 
proclaim Him not as God only, devoid of our humanity, nor yet as 
man only, stripping Him of His divinity, nor as two distinct persons, 
but as one and the same, at once God and man, perfect God and 
perfect man, wholly God anti wholly man, the same being wholly 
God, even though He was also flesh and wholly man, even though 
He was also most high God. And by "perfect God" and "perfect man" 
we mean to emphasize the fulness and unfailingness of the natures: 
while by "wholly God" and "wholly man" we mean to lay stress on 
the singularity and individuality of the subsistence. 

And we confess also that there is one incarnate nature of God the 
Word, expressing by the word "incarnate" the essence of the flesh, 
according to the blessed Cyril. And so the Word was made flesh and 
yet did not abandon His own proper immateriality: He became wholly 
flesh and yet remained wholly uncircumscribed. So far as He is body 
He is diminished and contracted into narrow limits, but inasmuch as 
He is God He is uncircumscribed, His flesh not being coextensive 
with His uncircumscribed divinity. 

He is then wholly perfect God, but yet is not simply God: for He is 
not only God but also man. And He is also wholly perfect man but 
not simply man, for He is not only man but also God. For "simply" 
here has reference to His nature, and "wholly" to His subsistence, 
just as "another thing" would refer to nature, while "another" would 
refer to subsistence. 

But observe that although we hold that the natures of the Lord 
permeate one another, yet we know that the permeation springs from 
the divine nature. For it is that that penetrates and permeates all 
things, as it wills, while nothing penetrates it: and it is it, too, that 
imparts to the flesh its own peculiar glories, while abiding itself 
impossible and without participation in the affections of the flesh. 
For if the sun imparts to us his energies and yet does not participate 
in ours, how much the rather must this be true of the Creator anti 
Lord of the Sun. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-7.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:47

 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.7. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-7.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:47

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.8. 

CHAPTER VIII. In reply to those who ask whether the natures 
of the Lord are brought under a continuous or a 
discontinuous quantity. 

If any one asks concerning the natures of the Lord if they are 
brought under a continuous or discontinuous quantity, we will say 
that the natures of the Lord are neither one body nor one superficies, 
nor one line, nor time, nor place, so as to be reduced to a continuous 
quantity. For these are the things that are reckoned continuously. 

Further note that number deals with things that differ, and it is quite 
impossible to enumerate things that differ from one another in no 
respect: and just so far as they differ are they enumerated: for 
instance, Peter and Paul are not counted separately in so far as they 
are one. For since they are one in respect of their essence they 
cannot be spoken of as two natures, but as they differ in respect of 
subsistence they are spoken of as two subsistences. So that number 
deals with differences, and just as the differing objects differ from 
one another so far they are enumerated. 

The natures of the Lord, then, are united without confusion so far as 
regards subsistence, and they are divided without separation 
according to the method and manner of difference. And it is not 
according to the manner in which they are united that they are 
enumerated, for it is not in respect of subsistence that we hold that 
there are two natures of Christ: but according to the manner in which 
they are divided without separation they are enumerated, for it is in 
respect of the method and manner of difference that there are two 
natures of Christ. For being united in subsistence and permeating 
one another, they are united without confusion, each preserving 
throughout its own peculiar and natural difference. Hence, since they 
are enumerated according to the manner of difference, and that 
alone, they must be brought under a discontinuous quantity. 

Christ, therefore, is one, perfect God and perfect man: and Him we 
worship along with the Father and the Spirit, with one obeisance, 
adoring even His immaculate flesh and not holding that the flesh is 
not meet for worship: for in fact it is worshipped in the one 
subsistence of the Word, which indeed became subsistence for it. 
But in this we do not do homage to that which is created. For we 
worship Him, not as mere flesh, but as flesh united with divinity, and 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-8.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:48

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.8. 

because His two natures are brought under the one person and one 
subsistence of God the Word. I fear to touch coal because of the fire 
bound up with the wood. I worship the twofold nature of Christ 
because of the divinity that is in Him bound up with flesh. For I do 
not introduce a fourth person into the Trinity. God forbid! but I 
confess one person of God the Word and of His flesh, and the Trinity 
remains Trinity, even after the incarnation of the Word. 

In reply to 
those who 
ask whether 
the two 
natures are 
brought 
under a 
continuous 
or a 
discontinuous 
quantity. 

The natures of the Lord are neither one body nor one superficies, 
nor one line, nor place, nor time, so as to be brought under a 
continuous quantity: for these are the things that are reckoned 
continuously. But the natures of the Lord are united without 
confusion in respect of subsistence, and are divided without 
separation according to the method and manner of difference. And 
according to the manner in which they are united they are not 
enumerated. For we do not say that the natures of Christ are two 
subsistences or two in respect of subsistence. But according to the 
manner in which they are divided without division, are they 
enumerated. For there are two natures according to the method and 
manner of difference. For being united in subsistence and 
permeating one another they are united without confusion, neither 
having been changed into the other, but each preserving its own 
natural difference even after the union. For that which is created 
remained created, and that which is uncreated, uncreated. By the 
manner of difference, then, and in that alone, they are enumerated, 
and thus are brought under discontinuous quantity. For things which 
differ from each other in no respect cannot be enumerated, but just 
so far as they differ are they enumerated; for instance, Peter and 
Paul are not enumerated in those respects in which they are one: for 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-8.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:48

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.8. 

being one in respect of their essence they are not two natures nor 
are they so spoken of. But inasmuch as they differ in subsistence 
they are spoken of as two subsistences.So that difference is the 
cause of number. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-8.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:48

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.9. 

CHAPTER IX. In reply to the question whether there is Nature 
that has no Subsistence. 

For although there is no nature without subsistence, nor essence 
apart from person (since in truth it is in persons and subsistences 
that essence and nature are to be contemplated), yet it does not 
necessarily follow that the natures that are united to one another in 
subsistence should have each its own proper subsistence. For after 
they have come together into one subsistence, it is possible that 
neither should they be without subsistence, nor should each have its 
own peculiar subsistence, but that both should have one and the 
same subsistence. For since one and the same subsistence of the 
Word has become the subsistence of the natures, neither of them is 
permitted to be without subsistence, nor are they allowed to have 
subsistences that differ from each other, or to have sometimes the 
subsistence of this nature and sometimes of that, but always without 
division or separation they both have the same subsistence--a 
subsistence which is not broken up into parts or divided, so that one 
part should belong to this, and one to that, but which belongs wholly 
to this and wholly to that in its absolute entirety. For the flesh of God 
the Word did not subsist as an independent subsistence, nor did 
there arise another subsistence besides that of God the Word, but as 
it existed in that it became rather a subsistence which subsisted in 
another, than one which was an independent subsistence. 
Wherefore, neither does it lack subsistence altogether, nor yet is 
there thus introduced into the Trinity another subsistence. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...ry/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-9.htm2006-06-01 18:06:48

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.10. 

CHAPTER X. Concerning the Trisagium ("the Thrice Holy"). 

This being so, we declare that the addition which the vain-minded 
Peter the Fuller made to the Trisagium or "Thrice Holy" Hymn is 
blasphemous; for it introduces a fourth person into the Trinity, 
giving a separate place to the Son of God, Who is the truly 
subsisting power of the Father, and a separate place to Him Who 
was crucified as though He were different from the "Mighty One," or 
as though the Holy Trinity was considered possible, and the Father 
and the Holy Spirit suffered on the Cross along with the Son. Have 
done with this blasphemous and nonsensical interpolation! For we 
hold the words "Holy God" to refer to the Father, without limiting the 
title of divinity to Him alone, but acknowledging also as God the Son 
and the Holy Spirit: and the words "Holy and Mighty" we ascribe to 
the Son, without stripping the Father and the Holy Spirit of might: 
and the words "Holy and Immortal" we attribute to the Holy Spirit, 
without depriving the Father and the Son of immortality. For, indeed, 
we apply all the divine names simply and unconditionally to each of 
the subsistences in imitation of the divine Apostle's words. But to us 
there is but one God, the Father, of Whom are all things, and we in 
Him: and one Lord Jesus Christ by Whom are all things, and we by 
Him And, nevertheless, we follow Gregory the Theologian when he 
says, "But to us there is but one God, the Father, of Whom are all 
things, and one Lord Jesus Christ, through Whom are all things, and 
one Holy Spirit, in Whom are all things:" for the words "of Whom" 
and "through Whom" and "in Whom" do not divide the natures (for 
neither the prepositions nor the order of the names could ever be 
changed), but they characterise the properties of one unconfused 
nature. And this becomes clear from the fact that they are once more 
gathered into one, if only one reads with care these words of the 
same Apostle, Of Him and through Him and in Him are all things: to 
Him be the glory for ever and ever. Amen. 

For that the "Trisagium" refers not to the Son alone, but to the Holy 
Trinity, the divine and saintly Athanasius and Basil and Gregory, and 
all the band of the divinely-inspired Fathers bear witness: because, 
as a matter of fact, by the threefold holiness the Holy Seraphim 
suggest to us the three subsistences of the superessential Godhead. 
But by the one Lordship they denote the one essence and dominion 
of the supremely-divine Trinity. Gregory the Theologian of a truth 
says, "Thus, then, the Holy of Holies, which is completely veiled by 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-10.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:48

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.10. 

the Seraphim, and is glorified with three consecrations, meet 
together in one lordship and one divinity." This was the most 
beautiful and sublime philosophy of still another of our 
predecessors. 

Ecclesiastical historians, then, say that once when the people of 
Constantinople were offering prayers to God to avert a threatened 
calamity, during Proclus' tenure of the office of Archbishop, it 
happened that a boy was snatched up from among the people, and 
was taught by angelic teachers the "Thrice Holy" Hymn, "Thou Holy 
God, Holy and Mighty One, Holy and Immortal One, have mercy upon 
us:" and when once more he was restored to earth, he told what he 
had learned, and all the people sang the Hymn, and so the 
threatened calamity was averted. And in the fourth holy and great 
(Ecumenical Council, I mean the one at Chalcedon, we are told that it 
was in this form that the Hymn was sung; for the minutes of this holy 
assembly so record it. It is, therefore, a matter for laughter and 
ridicule that this "Thrice Holy" Hymn, taught us by the angels, and 
confirmed by the averting of calamity, ratified and established by so 
great an assembly of the holy Fathers, and sung first by the 
Seraphim as a declaration of the three subsistences of the Godhead, 
should be mangled and forsooth emended to suit the view of the 
stupid Fuller as though he were higher than the Seraphim. But oh! 
the arrogance! not to say folly! But we say it thus, though demons 
should rend us in pieces, "Do Thou, Holy God, Holy and Mighty One, 
Holy and Immortal One, have mercy upon us." 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-10.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:48

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.11. 

CHAPTER XI. Concerning the Nature as viewed in Species and 
in Individual, and concerning the difference between Union 
and Incarnation: and how this is to be understood, "The one 
Nature of God the Word Incarnate." 

Nature is regarded either abstractly as a matter of pure thought (for it 
has no independent existence): or commonly in all subsistences of 
the same species as their bond of union, and is then spoken of as 
nature viewed in species: or universally as the same, but with the 
addition of accidents, in one subsistence, and is spoken of as nature 
viewed in the individual, this being identical with nature viewed in 
species. God the Word Incarnate, therefore, did not assume the 
nature that is regarded as an abstraction in pure thought (for tiffs is 
not incarnation, but only an imposture and a figment of incarnation), 
nor the nature viewed in species (for He did not assume all the 
subsistences): but the nature viewed in the individual, which is 
identical with that viewed in species. For He took on Himself the 
elements of our compound nature, and these not as having an 
independent existence or as being originally an individual, and in 
this way assumed by Him, but as existing in His own subsistence. 
For the subsistence of God the Word in itself became the 
subsistence of the flesh, and accordingly "the Word became flesh" 
clearly without any change, and likewise the flesh became Word 
without alteration, and God became man. For the Word is God, and 
man is God, through having one and the same subsistence. And so it 
is possible to speak of tile same thing as being the nature of the 
Word and the nature in the individual. For it signifies strictly and 
exclusively neither the individual, that is, the subsistence, nor the 
common nature of the subsistences, but the common nature as 
viewed and presented in one of the subsistences. 

Union, then, is one thing, and incarnation is something quite 
different. For union signifies only the conjunction, but not at all that 
with which union is effected. But incarnation (which is just the same 
as if one said "the putting on of man's nature") signifies that tile 
conjunction is with flesh, that is to say, with man, just as the heating 
of iron implies its union with fire. Indeed, the blessed Cyril himself, 
when he is interpreting the phrase, "one nature of God the Word 
Incarnate," says in the second epistle to Sucensus, "For if we simply 
said 'the one nature of the Word' and then were silent, and did not 
add the word 'incarnate.' but, so to speak, quite excluded the 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-11.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:49

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.11. 

dispensation, there would be some plausibility in the question they 
feign to ask, 'If one nature is the whole, what becomes of the 
perfection in humanity, or how has the essence like us come to 
exist?' But inasmuch as the perfection in humanity and the 
disclosure of the essence like us are conveyed in the word 
'incarnate,' they must cease from relying on a mere straw" Here, 
then, he placed the nature of the Word over nature itself. For if He 
had received nature instead of subsistence, it would not have been 
absurd to have omitted the "incarnate." For when we say simply one 
subsistence of God the Word, we do not err. In like manner, also, 
Leontius the Byzantine considered this phrase to refer to nature, and 
not to subsistence. But in the Defence which he wrote in reply to the 
attacks that Theodoret made on the second anathema, the blessed 
Cyril says this: "The nature of the Word, that is, the subsistence, 
which is the Word itself." So that "the nature of the Word" means 
neither the subsistence alone, nor "the common nature of the 
subsistence," but "the common nature viewed as a whole in the 
subsistence of the Word." 

It has been said, then, that the nature of the Word became flesh, that 
is, was united to flesh: but that the nature of the Word suffered in the 
flesh we have never heard up till now, though we have been taught 
that Christ suffered in the flesh. So that "the nature of the Word" 
does not mean "the subsistence." It remains, therefore, to say that to 
become flesh is to be united with the flesh, while the Word having 
become flesh means that the very subsistence of the Word became 
without change the subsistence of the flesh. It has also been said 
that God became man, and man God. For the Word which is God 
became without alteration man. But that the Godhead became man, 
or became flesh, or put on the nature of man, this we have never 
heard. This, indeed, we have learned, that the Godhead was united to 
humanity in one of its subsistences, and it has been stated that God 
took on a different form or essence, to wit our own. For the name 
God is applicable to each of the subsistences, but we cannot use the 
term Godhead in reference to subsistence. For we are never told that 
the Godhead is the Father alone, or the Son alone, or the Holy Spirit 
alone. For "Godhead" implies "nature," while "Father" implies 
subsistence just as "Humanity" implies nature, and "Peter" 
subsistence. But "God" indicates the common element of the nature, 
and is applicable derivatively to each of the subsistences, just as 
"man" is. For He Who has divine nature is God, and he who has 
human nature is man. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-11.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:49

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.11. 

Besides all this, notice that the Father and the Holy Spirit take no 
part at all in the incarnation of the Word except in connection with 
the miracles, and in respect of good will and purpose. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-11.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:49

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.12. 

CHAPTER XII. That the holy Virgin is the Mother of God: an 
argument directed against the Nestorians. 

Moreover we proclaim the holy Virgin to be in strict truth the Mother 
of God. For inasmuch as He who was born of her was true God, she 
who bare the true God incarnate is the true mother of God. For we 
hold that God was born of her, not implying that the divinity of the 
Word received from her the beginning of its being, but meaning that 
God the Word Himself, Who was begotten of the Father timelessly 
before the ages, and was with the Father and the Spirit without 
beginning anti through eternity, took up His abode in these last days 
for the sake of our salvation in the Virgin's womb, and was without 
change made flesh and born of her. For the holy Virgin did not bare 
mere man but true God: and not mere God but God incarnate, Who 
did not bring down His body from Heaven, nor simply passed 
through the Virgin as channel, but received from her flesh of like 
essence to our own and subsisting in Himself. For if the body had 
come down from heaven and had not partaken of our nature, what 
would have been the use of His becoming man? For the purpose of 
God the Word becoming man was that the very same nature, which 
had sinned and fallen and become corrupted, should triumph over 
the deceiving tyrant and so be freed from corruption, just as the 
divine apostle puts it, For since by man came death, by man came 
also the resurrection of the dead. If the first is true the second must 
also be true. 

Although, however, he says, The first Adam is of the earth earthy; 
the second Adam is Lord from Heaven, he does not say that His 
body is from heaven, but emphasises the fact that He is not mere 
man. For, mark, he called Him both Adam and Lord, thus indicating 
His double nature. For Adam is, being interpreted, earth-born: and it 
is clear that man's nature is earth-born since he is formed from 
earth, but the title Lord signifies His divine essence. 

And again the Apostle says: God sent forth His only-begotten Son, 
made of a woman. He did not say "made by a woman." Wherefore the 
divine apostle meant that the only-begotten Son of God and God is 
the same as He who was made man of the Virgin, and that He who 
was born of the Virgin is the same as the Son of God and God. 

But He was born after the bodily fashion inasmuch as He became 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-12.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:49

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.12. 

man, and did not take up His abode in a man formed beforehand, as 
in a prophet, but became Himself in essence and truth man, that is 
He caused flesh animated with the intelligent and reasonable to 
subsist in His own subsistence, and Himself became subsistence for 
it. For this is the meaning of "made of a woman." For how could the 
very Word of God itself have been made under the law, if He did not 
become man of like essence with ourselves? 

Hence it is with justice and truth that we call the holy Mary the 
Mother of God. For this name embraces the whole mystery of the 
dispensation. For if she who bore Him is the Mother of God, 
assuredly He Who was born of her is God and likewise also man. For 
how could God, Who was before the ages, have been born of a 
woman unless He had become man ? For the son of man must 
clearly be man himself. But if He Who was born of a woman is 
Himself God, manifestly He Who was born of God the Father in 
accordance with the laws of an essence that is divine and knows no 
beginning, and He Who was in the last days born of the Virgin in 
accordance with the laws of an essence that has beginning and is 
subject to time, that is, an essence which is human, must be one and 
the same. The name in truth signifies the one subsistence and the 
two natures and the two generations Of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

But we never say that the holy Virgin is the Mother of Christ because 
it was in order to do away with the title Mother of God, and to bring 
dishonour on the Mother of God, who alone is in truth worthy of 
honour above all creation, that the impure and abominable Judaizing 
Nestorius, that vessel of dishonour, invented this name for an insult. 
For David the king, and Aaron, the high priest, are also called Christ, 
for it is customary to make kings and priests by anointing: and 
besides every God-inspired man may be called Christ. but yet be is 
not by nature God: yea, the accursed Nestorius insulted Him Who 
was born of the Virgin by calling Him God-bearer. May it be far from 
us to speak of or think of Him as God-bearer only, Who is in truth 
God incarnate. For the Word Himself became flesh, having been in 
truth conceived of the Virgin, but coming forth as God with the 
assumed nature which, as soon as He was brought forth into being, 
was deified by Him, so that these three things took place 
simultaneously, the assumption of our nature, the coming into being, 
and the deification of the assumed nature by the Word. And thus it is 
that the holy Virgin is thought of and spoken of as the Mother of 
God, not only because of the nature of the Word, but also because of 
the deification of man's nature, the miracles of conception and of 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-12.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:49

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.12. 

existence being wrought together, to wit, the conception the Word, 
and the existence of the flesh in the Word Himself. For the very 
Mother of God in some marvellous manner was the means of 
fashioning the Framer of all things and of bestowing manhood on the 
God and Creator of all, Who deified the nature that He assumed, 
while the union preserved those things that were united just as they 
were united, that is to say, not only the divine nature of Christ but 
also His human nature, not only that which is above us but that 
which is of us. For He was not first made like us and only later 
became higher than us, but ever from His first coating into being He 
existed with the double nature, because He existed in the Word 
Himself from the beginning of the conception. Wherefore He is 
human in His own nature, but also, in some marvellous manner, of 
God and divine. Moreover He has the properties of the living flesh: 
for by reason of the dispensation the Word received these which are, 
according to the order of natural motion, truly natural. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-12.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:49

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.13. 

CHAPTER XIII. Concerning the properties of the two Natures. 

Confessing, then, the same Jesus Christ, our Lord, to be perfect God 
and perfect man, we hold that the same has all the attributes of the 
Father save that of being ingenerate, and all the attributes of the first 
Adam, save only his sin, these attributes being body and the 
intelligent and rational soul; and further that He has, corresponding 
to the two natures, the two sets of natural qualities belonging to the 
two natures: two natural volitions, one divine and one human, two 
natural, energies, one divine and one human, two natural free-wills, 
one divine and one human, and two kinds of wisdom and knowledge, 
one divine and one human. For being of like essence with God and 
the Father, He wills and energises freely as God, and being also of 
like essence with us He likewise wills and energises freely as man. 
For His are the miracles and His also are the passive states. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-13.htm2006-06-01 18:06:49

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.14. 

CHAPTER XIV. Concerning the volitions and free-will of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

Since, then, Christ has two natures, we hold that He has also two 
natural wills and two natural energies. But since His two natures 
have one subsistence, we hold that it is one and the same person 
who wills and energises naturally in both natures, of which, and in 
which, and also which is Christ our Lord: and moreover that He wills 
and energises without separation but as a united whole. For He wills 
and energises in either form in close communion with the other. For 
things that have the same essence have also the same will and 
energy, while things that are different in essence are different in will 
and energy; and vice versa, things that have the same will anti 
energy have the same essence, while things that are different in will 
and energy are different in essence. 

Wherefore in the case of the Father and Son and Holy Spirit we 
recognise, from their sameness in will and energy, their sameness in 
nature. But in the case of the divine dispensation we recognise from 
their difference in will and energy the difference of the two natures, 
and as we perceive the difference of the two natures we confess that 
the wills and energies also are different. For just as the number of 
the natures of one and the same Christ, when considered and 
spoken of with piety, do not cause a division of the one Christ but 
merely bring out the fact that the difference between the natures is 
maintained even in the union, so it is with the number of wills and 
energies that belong essentially to His natures. (For He was 
endowed with the powers of willing and energising in both natures, 
for the sake of our salvation) It does not introduce division: God 
forbid! but merely brings out the fact that the differences between 
them are safeguarded and preserved even in the union. For we hold 
that wills and energies are faculties belonging to nature, not to 
subsistence; I mean those faculties of will and energy by which He 
Who wills and energises does so. For if we allow that they belong to 
subsistence, we will be forced to say that the three subsistences of 
the Holy Trinity have different wills and different energies. 

For it is to be noted s that willing and the manner of willing are not 
the same thing. For to will is a faculty of nature, just as seeing is, for 
all men possess it; but the manner of willing does not depend on 
nature but on our judgment, just as does also the manner of seeing, 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-14.htm (1 of 7)2006-06-01 18:06:50

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.14. 

whether well or ill. For all men do not will in the same way, nor do 
they all see in the same way. And this also we will grant in 
connection with energies. For the manner of willing, or seeing, or 
energising, is the mode of using the faculties of will and sight and 
energy, belonging only to him who uses them, and marking him off 
from others by the generally accepted difference. 

Simple willing then is spoken of as volition or the faculty of will, 
being a rational propension and natural will; but in a particular way 
willing, or that which underlies volition, is the object of will, and will 
dependent on judgment. Further that which has innate in it the 
faculty of volition is spoken of as capable of willing: as for instance 
the divine is capable of willing, and the human in like manner. But he 
who exercises volition, that is to say the subsistence, for instance 
Peter, is spoken of as willing. 

Since, then, Christ is one and His subsistence is one, He also Who 
wills both as God and as man is one and the same. And since He has 
two natures endowed with volition, inasmuch as they are rational (for 
whatever is rational is endowed with volition and free-will), we shall 
postulate two volitions or natural wills in Him. For He in His own 
person is capable of volition in accordance with both His natures. 
For He assumed that faculty of volition which belongs naturally to 
us. And since Christ, Who in His own person wills according to 
either nature, is one, we shall postulate the same object of will in His 
case, not as though He wills only those things which He willed 
naturally as God (for it is no part of Godhead to will to eat or drink 
and so forth), but as willing also those things which human nature 
requires for its support, and this without involving any opposition in 
judgment, but simply as the result of the individuality of the natures. 
For then it was that He thus willed naturally, when His divine volition 
so willed and permitted the flesh to suffer and do that which was 
proper to it. 

But that volition is implanted in man by nature is manifest from this. 
Excluding the divine life, there are three forms of life: the vegetative, 
the sentient, and the intellectual. The properties of the vegetative life 
are the functions of nourishment, and growth, and production: that 
of the sentient life is impulse: and that of the rational and intellectual 
life is freedom of will. If, then, nourishment belongs by nature to the 
vegetative life and impulse to the sentient, freedom of will by nature 
belongs to the rational and intellectual life. But freedom of will is 
nothing else than volition. The Word, therefore, having become flesh, 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-14.htm (2 of 7)2006-06-01 18:06:50

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.14. 

endowed with life and mind and free-will, became also endowed with 
volition. 

Further, that which is natural is not the result of training: for no one 
learns how to think, or live, or hunger, or thirst, or sleep. Nor do we 
learn how to will: so that willing is natural. 

And again: if in the case of creatures devoid of reason nature rules, 
while nature is ruled in man who is moved of his own free-will and 
volition, it follows, then, that man is by nature endowed with volition. 

And again: if man has been made after the image of the blessed and 
super-essential Godhead, and if the divine nature is by nature 
endowed with free-will and volition, it follows that man, as its image, 
is free by nature and volitive. For the fathers defined freedom as 
volition. 

And further: if to will is a part of the nature of every man and not 
present in some and absent in others, and if that which is seen to be 
common to all is a characteristic feature of the nature that belongs to 
the individuals of the class, surely, then, man is by nature endowed 
with volition. 

And once more: if the nature receives neither more nor less, but all 
are equally endowed with volition and not some more than others, 
then by nature man is endowed with volition. So that since man is by 
nature endowed with volition, the Lord also must be by nature 
endowed with volition, not only because He is God, but also because 
He became man. For just as He assumed our nature, so also He has 
assumed naturally our will. And in this way the Fathers said that He 
formed our will in Himself. 

If the will is not natural, it must be either hypostatic or unnatural. But 
if it is hypostatic, the Son must thus, forsooth, have a different will 
from what the Father has: for that which is hypostatic is 
characteristic of subsistence only. And if it is unnatural, will must be 
a defection from nature: for what is unnatural is destructive of what 
is natural. 

The God and Father of all things wills either as Father or as God. 
Now if as Father, His will will be different from that of the Son, for the 
Son is not the Father. But if as God, the Son is God and likewise the 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-14.htm (3 of 7)2006-06-01 18:06:50

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.14. 

Holy Spirit is God, and so volition is part of His nature, that is, it is 
natural. 

Besides, if according to the view of the Fathers, those who have one 
and the same will have also one and the same essence, and if the 
divinity and humanity of Christ have one and the same will, then 
assuredly these have also one and the same essence. 

And again: if according to the view of the Fathers the distinction 
between the natures is not seen in the single will, we mast either, 
when we speak of the one will, cease to speak of the different 
natures in Christ or, when we speak of the different natures of Christ, 
cease to speak of the one will. 

And further, the divine Gospel says, The Lord came into the borders 
of Tyre and Sidon and entered into a house, and would have no man 
know it; but He could not be hid. If, then, His divine will is 
omnipotent, but yet, though He would, He could not be hid, surely it 
was as man that He would and could not, and so as man He must be 
endowed with volition. 

And once again, the Gospel tells us that, He, having come into the 
place, said 'I thirst': and they gave Him same vinegar mixed with gall, 
and when He had tasted it fare would not drink. If, then, on the one 
hand it was as God that tie suffered thirst and when He had tasted 
would not drink, surely He must be subject to passion s also as God, 
for thirst and taste are passions. But if it was not as God but 
altogether as man that He was athirst, likewise as man He must be 
endowed with volition. 

Moreover, the blessed Paul the Apostle says, He became obedient 
unto death, even the death of the cross. But obedience is subjection 
of the real will, not of the unreal will. For that which is irrational is 
not said to be obedient or disobedient. But the Lord having become 
obedient to the Father, became so not as God but as man. For as 
God He is not said to be obedient or disobedient. For these things 
are of the things that are trader one's band, as the inspired 
Gregorius said. Wherefore, then, Christ is endowed with volition as 
man. 

While, however, we assert that will is natural, we hold not that it is 
dominated by necessity, but that it is free. For if it is rational, it must 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-14.htm (4 of 7)2006-06-01 18:06:50

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.14. 

be absolutely free. For it is not only the divine and uncreated nature 
that is free from the bonds of necessity, but also the intellectual and 
created nature. And this is manifest: for God, being by nature good 
and being by nature the Creator and by nature God, is not all this of 
necessity. For who is there to introduce this necessity? 

It is to be observed further, that freedom of will is used in several 
senses, one in connection with God, another in connection with 
angels, and a third in connection with men. For used in reference to 
God it is to be understood in a superessential manner, and in 
reference to angels it is to be taken in the sense that the election is 
concomitant with the state, and admits of the interposition of no 
interval of time at all: for while the angel possesses free-will by 
nature, he uses it without let or hindrance, having neither antipathy 
on the part of the body to overcome nor any assailant. Again, used in 
reference to men, it is to be taken in the sense that the state is 
considered to be anterior in time to the election. For than is free and 
has free-will by nature, but he has also the assault of the devil to 
impede him and the motion of the body: and thus through the 
assault and the weight of the batty, election comes to be later than 
the state. 

If, then, Adam obeyed of his own will and ate of his own will, surely 
in us the will is the first part to suffer. And if the will is the first to 
suffer, and the Word Incarnate did not assume this with the rest of 
our nature, it follows that we have not been freed from sin. 

Moreover, if the faculty of free-will which is in nature is His work and 
yet He did not assume it, He either condemned His own 
workmanship as not good, or grudged us the comfort it brought, and 
so deprived us of the full benefit, and shewed that He was Himself 
subject to passion since He was not willing or not able to work out 
our perfect salvation. 

Moreover, one cannot speak of one compound thing made of two 
wills in the same way as a subsistence is a composition of two 
natures. Firstly because the compositions are of things in 
subsistence (hypotasis), not of things viewed in a different category, 
not in one proper to them: and secondly, because if we speak of 
composition of wills and energies, we will be obliged to speak of 
composition of the other natural properties, such as the uncreated 
and the created, the invisible and the visible, and so on. And what 
will be the name of the will that is compounded out of two wills? For 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-14.htm (5 of 7)2006-06-01 18:06:50

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.14. 

the compound cannot be called by the name of the elements that 
make it up. For otherwise we should call that which is compounded 
of natures nature and not subsistence. And further, if we say that 
there is one compound will in Christ, we separate Him in will from 
the Father, for the Father's will is not compound. It remains, 
therefore, to say that the subsistence of Christ atone is compound 
and common, as in the case of the natures so also in that of the 
natural properties. 

And we cannot, if we wish to be accurate, speak of Christ as having 
judgment (gnwmh) and preference. For judgment is a disposition 
with reference to the decision arrived at after investigation and 
deliberation concerning something unknown, that is to say, after 
counsel and decision. And after judgment comes preference, which 
chooses out and selects the one rather than the other. But the Lord 
being not mere man but also God, and knowing all things, had no 
need of inquiry. and investigation, and counsel, and decision, and by 
nature made whatever is good His own and whatever is bad foreign 
to Him. For thus says Isaiah the prophet, Before the child shall know 
to prefer the evil, he shall choose the good; because before the child 
knows good or evil, he refuses wickedness by choosing the good. 
For the word "before" proves that it is not with investigation and 
deliberation, as is the way with us, but as God and as subsisting in a 
divine manner in the flesh, that is to say, being united in subsistence 
to the flesh, and because of His very existence and all-embracing 
knowledge, that He is possessed of good in His own nature. For the 
virtues are natural qualities, and are implanted in all by nature and in 
equal measure, even if we do not all in equal measure employ our 
natural energies. By the transgression we were driven from the 
natural to the unnatural. But the Lord led us back from the unnatural 
into the natural. For this is what is the meaning of in our image, after 
our likeness. And the discipline and trouble of this life were not 
designed as a means for our attaining virtue which was foreign to 
our nature, but to enable us to cast aside the evil that was foreign 
and contrary to our nature: just as on laboriously removing from 
steel the rust which is not natural to it but acquired through neglect, 
we reveal the natural brightness of the steel. 

Observe further that the word judgment (gnwmh) is used in many 
ways and in many senses. Sometimes it signifies exhortation: as 
when the divine apostle says, Now concerning virgins I have no 
commandment of the Lord; yet I give my judgment: sometimes it 
means counsel, as when the prophet David says, They have taken 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-14.htm (6 of 7)2006-06-01 18:06:50

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.14. 

crafty counsel against Thy people: sometimes it means a decree, as 
when we read in Daniel, Concerning whom (or, what) went this 
shameless decree forth? At other times it is used in the sense of 
belief, or opinion, or purpose, and, to put it shortly, the word 
judgment has twenty-eight different meanings. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-14.htm (7 of 7)2006-06-01 18:06:50

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.15. 

CHAPTER XV. Concerning the energies in our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

We hold, further, that there are two energies in our Lord Jesus 
Christ. For He possesses on the one hand, as God and being of like 
essence with the Father, the divine energy, and, likewise, since He 
became man and of like essence to us, the energy proper to human 
nature. 

But observe that energy and capacity for energy, and the product of 
energy, and the agent of energy, are all different. Energy is the 
efficient (drastikh) and essential activity of nature: the capacity for 
energy is the nature from which proceeds energy: the product of 
energy is that which is effected by energy: and the agent of energy is 
the person or subsistence which uses the energy. Further, 
sometimes energy is used in the sense of the product of energy, and 
the product of energy in that of energy, just as the terms creation 
and creature are sometimes transposed. For we say "all creation," 
meaning creatures. 

Note also that energy is an activity and is energised rather than 
energises; as Gregory the Theologian says m his thesis concerning 
the Holy Spirit: "If energy exists, it must manifestly be energised and 
will not energise: and as soon as it has been energised, it will 
cease." 

Life itself, it should be observed, is energy, yea, the primal energy of 
the living creature and so is the whole economy of the living 
creature, its functions of nutrition and growth, that is, the vegetative 
side of its nature, and the movement stirred By impulse, that is, the 
sentient side, and its activity of intellect and free-will. Energy, 
moreover, is the perfect realisation of power. If, then, we 
contemplate all these in Christ, surely we must also hold that He 
possesses human energy. 

The first thought that arises in us is called energy: and it is simple 
energy not involving any relationship, the mind sending forth the 
thoughts peculiar to it in an independent and invisible way, for if it 
did not do so it could not justly be called mind. Again, the revelation 
and unfolding of thought by means of articulate speech is said to be 
energy. But this is no longer simple energy that revolves no 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-15.htm (1 of 8)2006-06-01 18:06:51

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.15. 

relationship, but it is considered in relation as being composed of 
thought and speech. Further, the very relation which be who does 
anything bears to that which is brought about is energy; and the very 
thing that is effected is called energy. The first belongs to the soul 
alone, the second to the soul making use of the body, the third to the 
body animated by mind, and the last is the effect. For the mind sees 
beforehand what is to be and then performs it thus by means of the 
body. And so the hegemony belongs to the soul, for it uses the body 
as an instrument, leading and restraining it. But the energy of the 
body is quite different, for the booty is led and moved by the soul. 
And with regard to the effect, the touching and handling and, so to 
speak, the embrace of what is effected, belong to the body, while the 
figuration and formation belong to the soul. And so in connection 
with our Lord Jesus Christ, the power of miracles is the energy of 
His divinity, while the work of His hands and the willing and the 
saying, I will, be thou clean, are the energy of His humanity. And as 
to the effect, the breaking of the loaves, and the fact that the leper 
heard the "I will," belong to His humanity, while the multiplication of 
the loaves and the purification of the leper belong to His divinity. For 
through both, that is through the energy of the booty anti the energy 
of the soul. He displayed one and the same, cognate and equal 
divine energy. For just as we saw that His natures were united and 
permeate one another, and yet do not deny that they are different but 
even enumerate them, although we know they are inseparable, so 
also in connection with the wills and the energies we know their 
union, and we recognise their difference and enumerate them 
without introducing separation. For just as the flesh was deified 
without undergoing change in its own nature, in the same way also 
will and energy are deified without transgressing their own proper 
limits. For whether He is the one or the other, He is one and the 
same, and whether He wills and energises in one way or the other, 
that is as God or as man, He is one and the same. 

We must, then, maintain that Christ has two energies in virtue of His 
double nature. For things that have diverse natures, have also 
different energies, and things that have diverse energies, have also 
different natures. And so conversely, things that have the same 
nature have also the same energy, and things that have one and the 
same energy have also one and the same essence, which is the view 
of the Fathers, who declare the divine meaning. One of these 
alternatives, then, must be true: either, if we hold that Christ has one 
energy. we must also hold that He has but one essence, or, if we are 
solicitous about truth. and confess that He has according to the 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-15.htm (2 of 8)2006-06-01 18:06:51

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.15. 

doctrine of the Gospels and the Fathers two essences, we must also 
confess that He has two energies corresponding to and 
accompanying them. For as He is of like essence with God and the 
Father in divinity, He will be His equal also in energy. And as He 
likewise is of like essence with us in humanity He will be our equal 
also in energy. For the blessed Gregory, bishop of Nyssa, says, 
"Things that have one and the same energy, have also absolutely the 
same power." For all energy is the effect of power. But it cannot be 
that uncreated and created nature have one and the same nature or 
power or energy. But if we should hold that Christ has but one 
energy, we should attribute to the divinity of the Word the passions 
of the intelligentspirit, viz. tear and grief and anguish. 

If they should say, indeed, that the holy Fathers said in their 
disputation concerning the Holy Trinity, "Things that have one and 
the same essence have also one and the same energy, and things 
which have different essences have also different energies," and that 
it is not right to transfer to the dispensation what has reference to 
matters of theology, we shall answer that if it has been said by the 
Fathers solely with reference to theology. and if the Son has not 
even after the incarnation the same energy as the Father s, assuredly 
He cannot have the same essence. But to whom shall we attribute 
this, My Father worketh hitherto and I work: and this, What things 
soever He seeth the Father doing, these also doeth the Son likewise: 
and this, If ye believe not Me, believe My works: and this, The work 
which I do bear witness concerning Me: and this. As the Father 
raised up the dead and quickeneth them, even so the Son quickeneth 
whom He will. For all these shew not only that He is of like essence 
to the Father even after the incarnation, but that He has also the 
same energy. 

And again: if the providence that embraces all creation is not only of 
the Father and the Holy Spirit, but also of the Son even after the 
incarnation, assuredly since that is energy, He must have even after 
the incarnation the same energy as the Father. 

But if we have learnt from the miracles that Christ has the same 
essence as the Father, and since the miracles happen to be the 
energy of God, assuredly He must have even after the incarnation 
the same energy as the Father. 

But, if there is one energy belonging to both His divinity and His 
humanity, it will be compound, and will be either a different energy 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-15.htm (3 of 8)2006-06-01 18:06:51

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.15. 

from that of the Father, or the Father, too, will have a compound 
energy. But if the Father has a compound energy, manifestly He 
must also have a compound nature. 

But if they should say that together with energy is also introduced 
personality, we shall reply that if personality is introduced along with 
energy, then the true converse must hold good that energy is also 
introduced along with personality; and there will be also three 
energies of the Holy Trinity just as there are three persons or 
subsistences, or there will be one person and one subsistence just 
as there is only one energy. Indeed, the holy Fathers have 
maintained with one voice that things that have the same essence 
have also the same energy. 

But further, if personality is introduced along with energy, those who 
divine that neither one nor two energies of Christ are to be spoken 
of, do not maintain that either one or two persons of Christ are to be 
spoken of. 

Take the case of the flaming sword; just as in it the natures of the 
fire and the steel are preserved distinct, so also are their two 
energies and their effects. For the energy of the steel is its cutting 
power, and that of the fire is its burning power, and the cut is the 
effect of the energy of the steel, and the burn is the effect of the 
energy of the fire: and these are kept quite distinct in the burnt cut, 
and in the cut burn, although neither does the burning take place 
apart from the cut after the union of the two, nor the cut apart from 
the burning: and we do not maintain on account of the twofold 
natural energy that there are two flaming swords, nor do we confuse 
the essential difference of the energies on account of the unity of the 
flaming sword. In like manner also, in the case of Christ, His divinity 
possesses an energy that is divine and omnipotent while His 
humanity has an energy such as is our own. And the effect of His 
human energy was His taking the child by the hand and drawing her 
to Himself, while that of His divine energy was the restoring of her to 
life. For the one is quite distinct from the other, although they are 
inseparable from one another in theandric energy. But if, because 
Christ has one subsistence, He must also have one energy, then, 
because He has one subsistence, He must also have one essence. 

And again: if we should hold that Christ has but one energy, this 
must be either divine or human, or neither. But if we hold that it is 
divine we must maintain that He is God alone, stripped of our 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-15.htm (4 of 8)2006-06-01 18:06:51

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.15. 

humanity. And if we hold that it is human, we shall be guilty of the 
impiety of saying that He is mere man. And if we hold that it is 
neither divine nor human, we must also hold that He is neither God 
nor man, of like essence neither to the Father nor to us. For it is as a 
result of the union that the identity in hypostasis arises, but yet the 
difference between the natures is not done away with. But since the 
difference between the natures is preserved, manifestly also the 
energies of the natures will be preserved. For no nature exists that is 
lacking in energy. 

If Christ our Master has one energy, it must be either created or 
uncreated; for between these there is no energy, just as there is no 
nature. If, then, it is created, it will point to created nature alone, but 
if it is uncreated, it will betoken uncreated essence alone. For that 
which is natural must completely correspond with its nature: for 
there cannot exist a nature that is defective. But the energy that 
harmonises with nature does not belong to that which is external: 
and this is manifest because, apart from the energy that 
haromonises with nature, no nature can either exist or be known. For 
through that in which each thing manifests its energy, the absence 
of change confirms its own proper nature. 

If Christ has one energy, it must be one and the same energy that 
performs both divine anti human actions. But there is no existing 
thing which abiding in its natural state can act in opposite ways: for 
fire does not freeze and boil, nor does water dry up and make wet. 
How then could He Who is by nature God, and Who became by 
nature man, have both performed miracles, and endured passions 
with one and the same energy? 

If, then, Christ assumed the human mind, that is to say, the 
intelligent and reasonable soul, undoubtedly He has + thought, and 
will think for ever. But thought is the energy of the mind: and so 
Christ. as man, is endowed with energy, and will be so for ever. 

Indeed, the most wise and great and holy John Chrysostom says in 
his interpretation of the Acts, in the second discourse, "One would 
not err if he should call even His passion action: for in that He 
suffered all things, tie accomplished that great and marvellous work, 
the overthrow of death, and all His other works." 

It all energy is defined as essential movement of some nature, as 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-15.htm (5 of 8)2006-06-01 18:06:51

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.15. 

those who are versed in these matters say, where does one perceive 
any nature that has no movement, and is completely devoid of 
energy, or where does one find energy that is not movement of 
natural power? But, as the blessed Cyril says, no one in his senses 
could admit that there was but one natural energy of God and His 
creation. It is not His human nature that raises up Lazarus from the 
dead, nor is it His divine power that sheds tears: for the shedding of 
tears is peculiar to human nature while the life is peculiar to the 
enhypostatic life. But yet they are common the one to the other, 
because of the identity in subsistence. For Christ is one, and one 
also is His person or subsistence, but yet He has two natures, one 
belonging to His humanity, and another belonging to His divinity. 
And the glory. indeed, which proceeded naturally from His divinity 
became common to both through the identity in subsistence. and 
again on account of His flesh that which was lowly became common 
to both. For He Who is the one or the other, that is God or man, is 
one and the same, and both what is divine and what is human belong 
to Himself. For while His divinity performed the miracles, they were 
not done apart from the flesh, and while His flesh performed its lowly 
offices, they were not done apart from the divinity. For His divinity 
was joined to the suffering flesh, yet remaining without passion, and 
endured the saving passions, and the holy mind was joined to the 
energising divinity of the Word, perceiving and knowing what was 
being accomplished. 

And thus His divinity communicates its own glories to the body 
while it remains itself without part in the sufferings of the flesh. For 
His flesh did not suffer through His divinity in the same way that His 
divinity energised tbrough the flesh. For the flesh acted as the 
instrument of His divinity. Although, therefore, from the first 
conception there was no division at all between the two forms, but 
the actions of either form through all the time became those of one 
person, nevertheless we do not in any way confuse those things that 
took place without separation, but recognise from the quality of its 
works what sort of form anything has. 

Christ, then, energises according to both His natures and either 
nature energises in Him in communion with the other, the Word 
performing through tile authority and power of its divinity all the 
actions proper to the Word, i.e. all acts of supremacy and 
sovereignty, and the body performing all the actions proper to the 
body, in obedience to the will of the Word that is united to it, and of 
whom it has become a distinct part. For He was not moved of 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-15.htm (6 of 8)2006-06-01 18:06:51

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.15. 

Himself to the natural passions, nor again did He in that way recoil 
from the things of pain, and pray for release from them, or suffer 
what befel from without, but He was moved in conformity with His 
nature, the Word willing and allowing Him oeconomically to suffer 
that, and to do the things proper to Him, that the truth might be 
confirmed by the works of nature. 

Moreover, just as He received in His birth of a virgin superessential 
essence, so also He revealed His human energy in a superhuman 
way, walking with earthly feet on unstable water, not by turning the 
water into earth, but by causing it in the superabundant power of His 
divinity not to flow away nor yield beneath the weight of material 
feet. For not in a merely human way did He do human things: for He 
was not only man, but also God, and so even His sufferings brought 
life anti salvation: nor yet did He energise as God, strictly after the 
manner of God, for He was not only God, but also man, and so it was 
by touch and word and such like that He worked miracles. 

But if any one should say, "We do not say that Christ has but one 
nature, in order to do away with His human energy, but we do so 
because human energy, in opposition to divine energy, is called 
passion paGdod." we shall answer that, according to this reasoning, 
those also who hold that He has but one nature do not maintain this 
with a view to doing away with His human nature, but because 
human nature in opposition to divine nature is spoken of as passible 
padhtikh. But God forbid that we should call the human activity 
passion, when we are distinguishing it from divine energy. For, to 
speak generally, of nothing is the existence recognised or defined by 
comparison or collation. If it were so, indeed, existing things would 
turn out to be mutually the one the cause of the other. For if the 
human activity is passion because the divine activity is energy, 
assuredly also the human nature must be wicked because the divine 
nature is good, and, by conversion and opposition, if the divine 
activity is called energy because the human activity is called 
passion, then also the divine nature must be good because the 
human nature is bad. And so all created things must be bad, and he 
must have spoken falsely who said, And God saw every thing that He 
had made, and, behold, it was very good. 

We, therefore, maintain that the holy Fathers gave various names to 
the human activity according to the underlying notion. For the called 
it power, and energy, and difference, and activity, and property, and 
quality, and passion, not in distinction from the divine activity, but 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-15.htm (7 of 8)2006-06-01 18:06:51

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.15. 

power, because it is a conservative and invariable force; and energy, 
because it is a distinguishing mark, and reveals the absolute 
similarity between all things of the same class; and difference, 
because it distinguishes; and activity, because it makes manifest; 
and property, because it is constituent and belongs to that alone, 
and not to any other; and quality, because it gives form; and 
passion, because it is moved, For all things that are of God and after 
God suffer in respect of being moved, forasmuch as they have not in 
themselves motion or power. Therefore, as has been said, it is not in 
order to distinguish the one from the other that it has been named, 
but it is in accordance with the plan implanted in it in a creative 
manner by the Cause that framed the universe. Wherefore, also, 
when they spoke of it along with the divine nature they called it 
energy. For he who said, "For either form energises close 
communion with the other," did something quite different froth him 
who said, And when He had fasted forty days, He was afterwards an 
hungered :(for He allowed His nature to energise when it so willed, in 
the way proper to itself,) or from those who hold there is a different 
energy in Him or that He has a twofold energy, or now one energy 
and now another. For these statements with the change in terms 
signify the two energies. Indeed, often the number is indi-cated both 
by change of terms and by speaking of them as divine and human. 
For the difference is difference in differing things, but how do things 
that do not exist differ? 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-15.htm (8 of 8)2006-06-01 18:06:51

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.16. 

CHAPTER XVI. In reply to those who say "If man has two 
natures and two energies, Christ must be held to have three 
natures and as many energies." 

Each individual man, since he is composed of two natures, soul and 
body, and since these natures are unchangeable in him, could 
appropriately be spoken of as two natures: for he preserves even 
after their union thee natural properties of either. For the body is not 
immortal, but corruptible; neither is the soul mortal, but immortal: 
and the body is not invisible pot the soul visible to bodily eyes: but 
the soul is rational and intellectual, and incorporeal, while the body 
is dense and visible, and irrational. But things that are opposed to 
one another in essence have not one nature, and, therefore, soul and 
body cannot have one essence. 

And again: if man is a rational and mortal animal, and every 
definition is explanatory of the underlying natures, and the rational is 
not the same as the mortal according to the plan of nature, man then 
certainly cannot have one nature, according to the rule of his own 
definition. 

But if man should at any time be said to have one nature, the word 
"nature" is here used instead of "species," as when we say that man 
does not differ from man in any difference of nature. But since all 
men are fashioned in the same way, and are composed of soul and 
body, and each has two distinct natures, they are all brought under 
one definition. And this is not unreasonable, for the holy Athanasius 
spake of all created things as having one nature forasmuch as they 
were all produced, expressing himself thus in his Oration against 
those who blasphemed the Holy Spirit: "That the Holy Spirit is above 
all creation, and different from the nature of things produced and 
peculiar to divinity, we may again perceive. For whatever is seen to 
be common to many things, and not more in one and less in another, 
is called essence. since, then, every man is composed of soul and 
body, accordingly we speak of man as having one nature. But we 
cannot speak of our Lord's subsistence as one nature: for each 
nature preserves, even after the union, its natural properties, nor can 
we find a class of Christs. For no other Christ was born both of 
divinity and of humanity to be at once God and man." 

And again: man's unity in species is not the same thing as the unity 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-16.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:51

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.16. 

of soul and body in essence. For man's unity in species makes clear 
the absolute similarity between all men, while the unity of soul and 
body in essence is an insult to their very existence, and reduces 
them to nothingness: for either the one must change into the 
essence of the other, or from different things something different 
must be produced, and so both would be changed, or if they keep to 
their own proper limits there must be two natures. For, as regards 
the nature of essence the corporeal is not the same as the 
incorporeal. Therefore, although holding that man has one nature, 
not because the essential quality of his soul and that of his body are 
the same, but because the individuals included under the species 
are exactly the same, it is not necessary for us to maintain that 
Christ also has one nature, for in this case there is no species 
embracing many subsistences. 

Moreover, every compound is said to be composed of what 
immediately composes it. For we do not say that a house is 
composed of earth and water, but of bricks and timber. Otherwise, it 
would be necessary to speak of man as composed of at least five 
things, viz., the four elements and soul. And so also, in the case of 
our Lord Jesus Christ we do not look at the parts of the parts, but at 
those divisions of which He is immediately composed, viz., divinity 
and humanity. 

And further, if by saying that man has two natures we are obliged to 
hold that Christ has three, you, too, by saying that man is composed 
of two natures must hold that Christ is composed of three natures: 
and it is just the same with the energies. For energy must 
correspond with nature: and Gregory the Theologian bears witness 
that man is said to have and has two natures, saying, "God and man 
are two natures, since, indeed, soul and body also are two natures." 
And in his discourse "Concerning Baptism" he says, "Since we 
consist of two parts, soul and body. the visible and the invisible 
nature, the purification is likewise twofold, that is, by water and 
Spirit." 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-16.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:51

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.17. 

CHAPTER XVII. Concerning the deification of the nature of our 
Lord's flesh and of Hi's will. 

It is worthy of note that the flesh of the Lord is not said to have been 
deified and made equal to God and God in respect of any change or 
alteration, or transformation, or confusion of nature: as Gregory the 
Theologian says, "Whereof the one deified, and the other was 
deified, and, to speak boldly, made equal to God: and that which 
anointed became man, and that which was anointed became God." 
For these words do not mean any change in nature, but rather the 
oeconomical union(I mean the union in subsistence by virtue of 
which it was united inseparably with God the Word), and the 
permeation of the natures through one another, just as we saw that 
burning permeated the steel. For, just as we confess that God 
became man without change or alteration, so we consider that the 
flesh became God without change. For because the Word became 
flesh, He did not overstep the limits of His own divinity nor abandon 
the divine glories that belong to Him: nor, on the other hand, was the 
flesh, when deified, changed in its own nature or in its natural 
properties. For even after the union, boil the natures abode 
unconfused and their properties unimpaired. But the flesh of the 
Lord received the riches of the divine energies through the purest 
union with the Word, that is to say, the union in subsistence, without 
entailing the loss of any of its natural attributes. For it is not in virtue 
of any energy of its own but through the Word united to it, that it 
manifests divine energy: for the flaming steel burns, not because it 
has been endowed in a physical way with burning energy, but 
because it has obtained this energy by its union with fire. Wherefore 
the same flesh was mortal by reason of its own nature and life-giving 
through its union with the Word in subsistence. And we hold that it is 
just the same with the deification of the will; for its natural activity 
was not changed but united with His divine and omnipotent will, and 
became the will of God, made man. And so it was that, though He 
wished, He could not of Himself escape, because it pleased God the 
Word that the weakness of the human will, which was in truth in Him, 
should be made manifest. But He was able to cause at His will the 
cleansing of the leper, because of the union with the divine will. 
Observe further, that the deification of the nature and the will points 
most expressly and most directly both to two natures and two wills. 
For just as the burning does not change into fire the nature of the 
thing that is burnt, but makes distinct both what is burnt, and what 
burned it, and is indicative not of one but of two natures, so also the 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-17.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:51

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.17. 

deification does not bring about one compound nature but two, and 
their union in subsistence. Gregory the Theologian, indeed, says, 
"Whereof the one deified, the other was deified," and by the words 
"whereof," "the one," "the other," he assuredly indicates two 
natures. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-17.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:51

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.18. 

CHAPTER XVIII. Further concerning volitions and free-wills: 
minds, too, and knowledges and wisdoms. 

When we say that Christ is perfect Gods and perfect man, we 
assuredly attribute to Him all the properties natural to both the 
Father and mother. For He became man in order that that which was 
overcome might overcome. For He Who was omnipotent did not in 
His omnipotent authority and might lack the power to rescue man 
out of the hands of the tyrant. But the tyrant would have had a 
ground of complaint if, after He had overcome man, God should have 
used force against him. Wherefore God in His pity and love for man 
wished to reveal fallen man himself as conqueror, and became man 
to restore like with like. 

But that man is a rational and intelligent animal, no one will deny. 
How, then, could He have become man if He took on Himself flesh 
without soul, or soul without mind? For that is not man. Again, what 
benefit would His becoming man have been to us if He Who suffered 
first was not saved, nor renewed and strengthened by the union with 
divinity? For that which is not assumed is not remedied. He, 
therefore, assumed the whole man, even the fairest part of him, 
which had become diseased, in order that He might bestow salvation 
on the whole. And, indeed, there could never exist a mind that had 
not wisdom and was destitute of knowledge. For if it has not energy 
or motion, it is utterly reduced to nothingness. 

Therefore, God the Word, wishing to restore that which was in His 
own image, became man. But what is that which was in His own 
image, unless mind? So He gave up the better and assumed the 
worse. For mind s is in the border-land between God and flesh, for it 
dwells indeed in fellowship with the flesh, and is, moreover, the 
image of God. Mind, then, mingles with mind, and mind holds a place 
midway between the pureness of God and the denseness of flesh. 
For if the Lord assumed a soul without mind, He assumed the soul of 
an irrational animal. 

But if the Evangelist said that the Word was made flesh, note that in 
the Holy Scripture sometimes a man is spoken of as a soul, as, for 
example, with seventy-five souls came Jacob into Egypt: and 
sometimes a man is spoken of as flesh, as, for example, All flesh 
shall see the salvation of God. And accordingly the Lord did not 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-18.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:52

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.18. 

become flesh without soul or mind, but man. He says, indeed, 
Himself, Why seek ye to kill Me, a Man that hath told you the truth? 
He, therefore, assumed flesh animated with the spirit of reason and 
mind, a spirit that holds sway over the flesh but is itself under the 
dominion of the divinity of the Word. 

So, then, He had by nature, both as God and as man, the power of 
will. But His human will was obedient anti subordinate to His divine 
will, not being guided by its own inclination, but willing those things 
which the divine will willed. For it was with the permission of the 
divine will that He suffered by nature what was proper to Him. For 
when He prayed that He might escape the death, it was with His 
divine will naturally willing and permitting it that He did so pray and 
agonize and fear, and again when His divine will willed that His 
human will should choose tire death, the passion became voluntary 
to Him. For it was not as God only, but also as man, that He 
voluntarily surrendered Himself to the death. And thus He bestowed 
on us also courage in the face of death. So, indeed, He said before 
His saving passion, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from 
Me," manifestly as though He were to drink the cup as man and not 
as God. It was as man, then, that He wished the cup to pass from 
Him: but these are the words of natural timidity. Nevertheless, He 
said, not My will, that is to say, not in so far as I am of a different 
essence from Thee, but Thy will be done, the is to say, My will and 
Thy will, in so far as I am of the same essence as Thou. Now these 
are the words of a brave heart. For the Spirit of the Lord, since He 
truly became man in His good pleasure, on first testing its natural 
weakness was sensible of the natural fellow-suffering involved in its 
separation from the body, but being strengthened by the divine will it 
again grew bold in the face of death. For since He was Himself 
wholly God although also man, and wholly man although also God, 
He Himself as man subjected in Himself and by Himself His human 
nature to God and the Father, and became obedient to the Father, 
thus making Himself the most excellent type and example for us. 

Of His own free-will, moreover, He exercised His divine and human 
will. For free-will is assuredly implanted in every rational nature. For 
to what end would it possess reason, if it could not reason at its own 
free-will? For the Creator hath implanted even in the unreasoning 
brutes natural appetite to compel them to sustain their own nature. 
For devoid of reason, as they are, they cannot guide their natural 
appetite but are guided by it. And so, as soon as the appetite for 
anything has sprung up, straightway arises also the impulse for 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-18.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:52

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.18. 

action. And thus they do not win praise or happiness for pursuing 
virtue, nor punishment for doing evil. But the rational nature, 
although it does possess a natural appetite, can guide and train it by 
reason wherever the laws of nature are observed. For the advantage 
of reason consists in this, tire free-will, by which we mean natural 
activity in a rational subject. Wherefore in pursuing virtue it wins 
praise and happiness, and in pursuing vice it wins punishment. 

So that the soul s of the Lord being moved of its own free-will willed, 
but willed of its free-will those things which His divine will willed it to 
will. For the flesh was not moved at a sign from the Word, as Moses 
and all the holy men were moved at a sign from heaven. But He 
Himself, Who was one and yet both God and man, willed according 
to both His divine and His human will. Wherefore it was not in 
inclination but rather in natural power that the two wills of the Lord 
differed from one another. For His divine will was without beginning 
and all-effecting, as having power that kept pace with it, and free 
from passion; while His human will had a beginning in time, and 
itself endured the natural and innocent passions, and was not 
naturally omnipotent. But yet it was omni-potent because it truly and 
naturally had its origin in the God-Word. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-18.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:52

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.19. 

CHAPTER XIX. Concerning the theandric energy. 

When the blessed Dionysius says that Christ exhibited to us some 
sort of novel theandric energy, he does not do away with the natural 
energies by saying that one energy resulted from the union of the 
divine with the human energy: for in the same way we could speak of 
one new nature resulting from the union of the divine with the human 
nature. For, according to the holy Fathers, things that have one 
energy have also one essence. But Ire wished to indicate the novel 
and ineffable manner in which the natural energies of Christ manifest 
themselves, a manner befitting the ineffable manner in which the 
natures of Christ mutually, permeate one another, and further how 
strange and wonder-rid and, in the nature of things, unknown was 
His life as man, and lastly the manner of the mutual interchange 
arising from the ineffable union. For we hold that the energies are 
not divided and that the natures do not energies separately, but that 
each conjointly in complete community with the other energises with 
its own proper energy. For the human part did not energise merely in 
a human manner, for He was not mere man; nor did the divine part 
energise only after the manner of God, for He was not simply God, 
but He was at once God and man. For just as in the case of natures 
we recognise both their union and their natural difference, so is it 
also with the natural wills and energies. 

Note, therefore, that in the case of our Lord Jesus Christ, we speak 
sometimes of His two natures and sometimes of His one person: anti 
the one or the other is referred to one conception. For the two 
natures are one Christ, and the one Christ is two natures. Wherefore 
it is all the same whether we say "Christ energises according to 
either of His natures," or "either nature energises in Christ in 
communion with the other." The divine nature, then, has communion 
with the flesh in its energising, because it is by the good pleasure of 
the divine will that the flesh is permitted to suffer and do the things 
proper to itself, and because the energy of the flesh is altogether 
saving, and this is an attribute not of human but of divine energy. On 
the other hand the flesh has communion with the divinity of the Word 
in its energising, because the divine energies are performed, so to 
speak, through the organ of the body, and because He Who 
energises at once as God and man is one and the same. 

Further observe that His holy mind also performs its natural 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-19.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:52

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.19. 

energies, thinking and knowing that it is God's mind and that it is 
worshipped by all creation, and remembering the times He spent on 
earth and all He suffered, but it has communion with the divinity of 
the Word in its energising and orders and governs the universe, 
thinking and knowing and ordering not as the mere mind of man, but 
as united in subsistence with God and acting as the mind of God. 

This, then, the theandric energy makes plain that when God became 
man, that is when He became incarnate, both His human energy was 
divine, that is deified, and not without part in His divine energy, and 
His divine energy was not without part in His human energy, but 
either was observed in conjunction with the other. Now this manner 
of speaking is called a periphrasis, viz., when one embraces two 
things in one statement. For just as in the case of the flaming sword 
we speak of the cut burn as one, and the burnt cut as one, but still 
hold that the cut and the burn have different energies and different 
natures, the burn having the nature of fire and the cut the nature of 
steel, in the same way also when we speak of one theandric energy 
of Christ, we understand two distinct energies of His two natures, a 
divine energy belonging to His divinity, and a human energy 
belonging to His humanity. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-19.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:52

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.20. 

CHAPTER XX. Concerning the natural and innocent passions. 

We confess, then, that He assumed all the natural and innocent 
passions of man. For He assumed the whole man and all man's 
attributes save sin. For that is not natural, nor is it implanted in us by 
the Creator, but arises voluntarily in our mode of life as the result of 
a further implantation by the devil, though it cannot prevail over us 
by force. For the natural and innocent passions are those which are 
not in our power, but which have entered into the life of man owing 
to the condemnation by reason of the transgression; such as 
hunger, thirst, weariness, labour, the tears, the corruption, the 
shrinking from death, the fear, the agony with the bloody sweat, the 
succour at the hands of angels because of the weakness of the 
nature, and other such like passions which belong by nature to every 
man. 

All, then, He assumed that He might sanctify all. He was tried and 
overcame in order that He might prepare victory for us and give to 
nature power to overcome its antagonist, in order that nature which 
was overcome of old might overcome its former conqueror by the 
very weapons wherewith it had itself been overcome. 

The wicked one, then, made his assault from without, not by 
thoughts prompted inwardly, just as it was with Adam. For it was not 
by inward thoughts, but by the serpent that Adam was assailed. But 
the Lord repulsed the assault and dispelled it like vapour, in order 
that the passions which assailed him and were overcome might be 
easily subdued by us, and that the new Adam should save the old. 

Of a truth our natural passions were in harmony with nature and 
above nature in Christ. For they were stirred in Him after a natural 
manner when He permitted the flesh to suffer what was proper to it: 
but they were above nature because that which was natural did not 
in the Lord assume command over the will. For no compulsion is 
contemplated in Him but all is voluntary. For it was with His will that 
He hungered and thirsted and feared and died. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-20.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:52

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.20. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-20.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:52

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.21. 

CHAPTER XXI. Concerning ignorance and servitude. 

He assumed, it is to be noted, the ignorant and servile nature. For it 
is man's nature to be the servant of God, his Creator, and he does 
not possess knowledge of the future. If, then, as Gregory the 
Theologian holds, you are to separate the realm of sight from the 
realm of thought, the flesh is to be spoken of as both servile and 
ignorant, but on account of the identity of subsistence and the 
inseparable union the soul of the Lord was enriched with the 
knowledge of the future as also with the other miraculous powers. 
For just as the flesh of men is not in its own nature life-giving, while 
the flesh of our Lord which was united in subsistence with God the 
Word Himself, although it was not exempt from the mortality of its 
nature, yet became life-giving through its union in subsistence with 
the Word, and we may not say that it was not and is not for ever lifegiving: in like manner His human nature does not in essence 
possess the knowledge of the future, but the soul of the Lord 
through its union with God the Word Himself and its identity in 
subsistence was enriched, as I said, with the knowledge of the future 
as well as with the other miraculous powers. Observe further that we 
may not speak of Him as servant. For the words servitude and 
mastership are not marks of nature but indicate relationship, to 
something, such as that of fatherhood and sonship.For these do not 
signify essence but relation. 

It is just as we said, then, in connection with ignorance, that if you 
separate with subtle thoughts, that is, with fine imaginings, the 
created from the uncreated, the flesh is a servant, unless it has been 
united with God the Word. But how can it be a servant when t is once 
united in subsistence? For since Christ is one, He cannot be His own 
servant and Lord. For these are not simple predications but relative. 
Whose servant, then could He be? His Father's? The Son, then, 
would not have all the Father's attributes, if He is the Father's 
servant and yet in no respect His own. Besides, how could the 
apostle say concerning us who were adopted by Him, So that you 
are no longer a servant but a son, if indeed He is Himself a servant? 
The word servant, then, is used merely as a title, though not in the 
strict meaning: but for our sakes He assumed the form of a servant 
and is called a servant among us. For although He is without 
passion, yet for our sake He was the servant of passion and became 
the minister of our salvation. Those, then, who say that He is a 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-21.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:52

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.21. 

servant divide the one Christ into two, just as Nestorius did. But we 
declare Him to be Master and Lord of all creation, the one Christ, at 
once God and man, and all-knowing. For in Him are all the treasures 
of wisdom and knowledge, the hidden treasures. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-21.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:52

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.22. 

CHAPTER XXII. Concerning His growth. 

He is, moreover, said to grow in wisdom and age and grace, 
increasing in age indeed and through the increase in age 
manifesting the wisdom that is in Him; yea, further, making men's 
progress in wisdom and grace, and the fulfilment of the Father's 
goodwill, that is to say, men's knowledge of God and men's 
salvation, His own increase, and everywhere taking as His own that 
which is ours. But those who hold that He progressed in wisdom and 
grace in the sense of receiving some addition to these attributes, do 
not say that the union took place at the first origin of the flesh, nor 
yet do they give precedence to the union in subsistence, but giving 
heed to the foolish Nestorius they imagine some strange relative 
union and mere indwelling, understanding neither what they say nor 
whereof they affirm. For if in truth the flesh was united with God the 
Word from its first origin, or rather if it existed in Him and was 
identical in subsistence with Him, how was it that it was not 
endowed completely with all wisdom and grace? not that it might 
itself participate in the grace, nor share by grace in what belonged to 
the Word, but rather by reason of the union in subsistence, since 
both what is human and what is divine belong to the one Christ, and 
that He Who was Himself at once God and man should pour forth like 
a fountain over the universe His grace and wisdom and plenitude of 
every blessing. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-22.htm2006-06-01 18:06:53

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.23. 

CHAPTER XXIII. Concerning His Fear. 

The word fear has a double meaning. For fear is natural when the 
soul is unwilling to be separated from the body, on account of the 
natural sympathy and close relationship planted in it in the 
beginning by the Creator, which makes it fear and struggle against 
death and pray for an escape from it. It may be defined thus: natural 
fear is the force whereby we cling to being with shrinking. For if all 
things were brought by the Creator out of nothing into being, they all 
have by nature a longing after being and not after non-being. 
Moreover the inclination towards those things that support existence 
is a natural property of them. Hence God the Word when He became 
man had this longing, manifesting, on the one hand, in those things 
that support existence, the inclination of His nature in desiring food 
and drink and sleep, and having in a natural manner made proof of 
these things, while on the other hand displaying in those things that 
bring corruption His natural disinclination in voluntarily shrinking in 
the hour of His passion before the flee of death. For although what 
happened did so according to the laws of nature, yet it was not, as in 
our case, a matter of necessity. For He willingly and spontaneously 
accepted that which was natural. So that fear itself and terror and 
agony belong to the natural and innocent passions and are not 
under the dominion of sin. 

Again, there is a fear which arises from treachery of reasoning and 
want of faith, and ignorance of the hour of death, as when we are at 
night affected by fear at some chance noise. This is unnatural fear, 
and may be thus defined: unnatural fear is an unexpected shrinking. 
This our Lord did not assume. Hence He never felt fear except in the 
hour of His passion, although He often experienced a feeling of 
shrinking in accordance with the dispensation. For He was not 
ignorant of the appointed time. 

But the holy Athanasius in his discourse against Apollinarius says 
that He did actually feel fear. "Wherefore the Lord said: Now is My 
soul troubled. The 'now' indeed means just 'when He willed,' but yet 
points to what actually was. For He did not speak of what was not, as 
though it were present, as if the things that were said only 
apparently happened. For all things happened naturally and 
actually." And again, after some other matters, he says," In nowise 
does His divinity admit passion apart from a suffering body, nor yet 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-23.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:53

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.23. 

does it manifest trouble and pain apart froth a pained and troubled 
soul, nor does it suffer anguish and offer up prayer apart from a 
mind that suffered anguish and offered up prayer. For, although 
these occurrences were not due to any overthrow of nature, yet they 
took place to shew forth His real being." The words "these 
occurrences were not due to any overthrow of His nature," prove 
that it was not involuntarily that He endured these things. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-23.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:53

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.24. 

CHAPTER XXIV. Concerning our Lord's Praying. 

Prayer is an uprising of the mind to God or a petitioning of God for 
what is fitting. How then did it happen that our Lord offered up 
prayer in the case of Lazarus, and at the hour of His passion? For 
His holy mind was in no need either of any uprising towards God, 
since it had been once and for all united in subsistence with the God 
Word, or of any petitioning of God. For Christ is one. But it was 
because He appropriated to Himself our personality and took our 
impress on Himself, and became an ensample for us, and taught us 
to ask of God and strain towards Him, and guided us through His 
own holy mind in the way that leads up to God. For just as He 
endured the passion, achieving for our sakes a triumph over it, so 
also He offered up prayer, guiding us, as I said, in the way that leads 
up to God, and "fulfilling all righteousness" on our behalf, as He said 
to John, and reconciling His Father to us, and honouring Him as the 
beginning and cause, and proving that He is no enemy of God. For 
when He said in connection with Lazarus, Father, I thank Thee that 
Thou hast heard Me. And I know that Thou hearest Me always, but 
because of the people which stand by I said it, that they may believe 
that Thou hast sent Me, is it not most manifest to all that He said this 
in honour of His Father as the cause even of Himself, and to shew 
that He was no enemy of God? 

Again, when he said, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from 
Me: yet, not as I will but as Thou wilt, is it not clear to all that He said 
this as a lesson to us to ask help in our trials only from God, and to 
prefer God's will to oar own, and as a proof that He did actually 
appropriate to Himself the attributes of our nature, and that He did in 
truth possess two wills, natural, indeed, and corresponding with His 
natures but yet in no wise opposed to one another? "Father" implies 
that He is of the same essence, but "if it be possible" does not mean 
that He was in ignorance (for what is impossible to God?), but serves 
to teach us to prefer God's will to our own. For that alone is 
impossible which is against God's will and permission. "But not as I 
will but as Thou wilt," for inasmuch as He is God, He is identical with 
the Father, while inasmuch as He is man, He manifests the natural 
will of mankind. For it is this that naturally seeks escape from death. 

Further, these words, My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me? 
He said as making our personality His own. For neither would God 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-24.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:53

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.24. 

be regarded with us as His Father, unless one were to discriminate 
with subtle imaginings of the mind between that which is seen and 
that which is thought, nor was He ever forsaken by His divinity: nay, 
it was we who were forsaken and disregarded. So that it was as 
appropriating our personality that He offered these prayers. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-24.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:53

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.25. 

CHAPTER XXV. Concerning the Appropriation. 

It is to be observed that there are two appropriations: one that is 
natural and essential, and one that is personal and relative. The 
natural and essential one is that by which our Lord in His love for 
man took on Himself our nature and all our natural attributes, 
becoming in nature and truth man, and making trial of that which is 
natural: but the personal and relative appropriation is when any one 
assumes the person of another relatively, for instance, out of pity or 
love, and in his place utters words concerning him that have no 
connection with himself. And it was in this way that our Lord 
appropriated both our curse and our desertion, and such other 
things as are not natural: not that He Himself was or became such, 
but that He took upon Himself our personality and ranked Himself as 
one of us. Such is the meaning in which this phrase is to be taken: 
Being made a curse for our sakes. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-25.htm2006-06-01 18:06:53

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.26. 

CHAPTER XXVI. Concerning the Passion of our Lord's body, 
and the Impassibility of His divinity. 

The Word of God then itself endured all in the flesh, while His divine 
nature which alone was passionless remained void of passion. For 
since the one Christ, Who is a compound of divinity and humanity, 
and exists in divinity and humanity, truly suffered, that part which is 
capable of passion suffered as it was natural it should, but that part 
which was void of passion did not share in the suffering. For the 
soul, indeed, since it is capable of passion shares in the pain and 
suffering of a bodily cut, though it is not cut itself but only the body: 
but the divine part which is void of passion does not share in the 
suffering of the body. 

Observe, further, that we say that God suffered in the flesh, bat never 
that His divinity suffered in the flesh, or that God suffered through 
the flesh. For if, when the sun is shining upon a tree, the axe should 
cleave the tree, and, nevertheless, the sun remains uncleft and void 
of passion, much more will the passionless divinity of the Word, 
united in subsistence to the flesh, remain void of passion when the 
body undergoes passion. And should any one pour water over 
flaming steel, it is that which naturally suffers by the water, I mean, 
the fire, that is quenched, but the steel remains untouched (for it is 
not the nature of steel to be destroyed by water): much more, then, 
when the flesh suffered did His only passionless divinity escape all 
passion although abiding inseparable from it. For one must not take 
the examples too absolutely and strictly: indeed, in the examples, 
one must consider both what is like and what is unlike, otherwise it 
would not be an example. For, if they were like in all respects they 
would be identities, and not examples, and all the more so in dealing 
with divine matters. For one cannot find an example that is like in all 
respects whether we are dealing with theology or the dispensation. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-26.htm2006-06-01 18:06:54

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.27. 

CHAPTER XXVII. Concerning the fact that the divinity of the 
Word remained inseparable from the soul and the body, even 
at our Lord's death, and that His subsistence continued one. 

Since our Lord Jesus Christ was without sin (for He committed no 
sin, He Who took away the sin of the world, nor was there any deceit 
found in His mouth) He was not subject to death, since death came 
into the world through sin. He dies, therefore, because He took on 
Himself death on our behalf, and He makes Himself an offering to the 
Father for our sakes. For we had sinned against Him, and it was meet 
that He should receive the ransom for us, and that we should thus he 
delivered from the condemnation. God forbid that the blood of the 
Lord should have been offered to the tyrant. Wherefore death 
approaches, and swallowing up the body as a bait is transfixed on 
the hook of divinity, and after tasting of a sinless and life-giving 
body, perishes, and brings up again all whom of old he swallowed 
up. For just as darkness disappears on the introduction of light, so is 
death repulsed before the assault of life, and brings life to all, but 
death to the destroyer. 

Wherefore, although He died as man and His Holy Spirit was severed 
from His immaculate body, yet His divinity remained inseparable 
from both, I mean, from His soul and His body, and so even thus His 
one hypostasis was not divided into two hypostases. For body and 
soul received simultaneously in the beginning their being in the 
subsistence of the Word, and although they were severed from one 
another by death, yet they continued, each of them, having the one 
subsistence of the Word. So that the one subsistence of the Word is 
alike the subsistence of the Word, and of soul and body. For at no 
time had either soul or body a separate subsistence of their own, 
different from that of the Word, and the subsistence of the Word is 
for ever one, and at no time two. So that the subsistence of Christ is 
always one. For, although the soul was separated from the body 
topically, yet hypostatically they were united through the Word. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-27.htm2006-06-01 18:06:54

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.28. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. Concerning Corruption and Destruction. 

The word corruption has two meanings. For it signifies all the human 
sufferings, such as hunger, thirst, weariness, the piercing with nails, 
death, that is, the separation of soul and body, and so forth. In this 
sense we say that our Lord's body was subject to corruption. For He 
voluntarily accepted all these things. But corruption means also the 
complete resolution of the body into its constituent elements, and its 
utter disappearance, which is spoken of by many preferably as 
destruction. The body of our Lord did not experience this form of 
corruption, as the prophet David says, For Thou will not leave my 
soul in hell, neither wilt Thou suffer Thine holy one to see corruption. 

Wherefore to say, with that foolish Julianus and Gaianus, that our 
Lord's body was incorruptible, in the first sense of the word, before 
His resurrection is impious. For if it were incorruptible it was not 
really, but only apparently, of the same essence as ours, and what 
the Gospel tells us happened, viz. the hunger, the thirst, the nails, 
the wound in His side, the death, did not actually occur. But if they 
only apparently happened, then the mystery of the dispensation is 
an imposture and a sham, and He became man only in appearance, 
and not in actual fact, and we are saved only in appearance, and not 
in actual fact. But God forbid, and may those who so say have no 
part in the salvation. But we have obtained and shall obtain the true 
salvation. But in the second meaning of the word "corruption," we 
confess that our Lord's body is incorruptible, that is, indestructible, 
for such is the tradition of the inspired Fathers. Indeed, after the 
resurrection of our Saviour from the dead, we say that our Lord's 
body is incorruptible even in the first sense of the word. For our Lord 
by His own body bestowed the gifts both of resurrection and of 
subsequent incorruption even on our own body, He Himself having 
become to us the firstfruits both of resurrection and incorruption, 
and of passionlessness. For as the divine Apostle says, This 
corruptible must put an incorruption. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-28.htm2006-06-01 18:06:54

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.2, C.29. 

CHAPTER XXIX. Concerning the Descent to Hades. 

The soul when it was deified descended into Hades, in order that, 
just as the Sun of Righteousness rose for those upon the earth, so 
likewise He might bring light to those who sit under the earth in 
darkness and shadow of death: in order that just as He brought the 
message of peace to those upon the earth, and of release to the 
prisoners, and of sight to the blind, and became to those who 
believed the Author of everlasting salvation and to those who did not 
believe a reproach of their unbelief, so He might become the same to 
those in Hades: That every knee should bow to Him, of things in 
heaven, and things in earth and things under the earth. And thus 
after He had freed those who had been bound for ages, straightway 
He rose again from the dead, shewing us the way of resurrection. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa2-29.htm2006-06-01 18:06:54

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.1. 

BOOK IV 

CHAPTER I. Concerning what followed the Resurrection. 

After Christ was risen from the dead He laid aside all His passions, I 
mean His corruption or hunger or thirst or sleep or weariness or 
such like. For, although He did taste food after the resurrection, yet 
He did not do so because it was a law of His nature (for He felt no 
hunger), but in the way of economy, in order that He might convince 
us of the reality of the resurrection, and that it was one and the same 
flesh which suffered and rose again. But He laid aside none of the 
divisions of His nature, neither body nor spirit, but possesses both 
the body and the soul intelligent and reasonable, volitional and 
energetic, and in this wise He sits at the right hand of the Father, 
using His will both as God and as man in behalf of our salvation, 
energising in His divine capacity to provide for and maintain and 
govern all things, and remembering in His human capacity the time 
He spent on earth, while all the time He both sees and knows that He 
is adored by all rational creation. For His Holy Spirit knows that He is 
one in substance with God the Word, and shares as Spirit of God 
and not simply as Spirit the worship accorded to Him. Moreover, His 
ascent from earth to heaven, and again, His descent from heaven to 
earth, are manifestations of the energies of His circumscribed body. 
For He shall so come again to you, saith he, in like manner as ye 
have seen Him go into Heaven. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...ry/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-1.htm2006-06-01 18:06:55

 
 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.2. 

CHAPTER II. Concerning the sitting at the right hand of the 
Father. 

We hold, moreover, that Christ sits in the body at the right hand of 
God the Father, but we do not hold that the right hand of the Father 
is actual place. For how could He that is uncircumscribed have a 
right hand limited by place? Right hands and left hands belong to 
what is circumscribed. But we understand the right hand of the 
Father to be the glory and honour of the Godhead in which the Son 
of God, who existed as God before the ages, and is of like essence to 
the Father, and in the end became flesh, has a seat in the body, His 
flesh sharing in the glory. For He along with His flesh is adored with 
one adoration by all creation. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...ry/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-2.htm2006-06-01 18:06:55

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.3. 

CHAPTER III. In reply to those who say "If Christ has two 
natures, either ye do service to the creature in worshipping 
created nature, or ye say that there is one nature to be 
worshipped, and another not to be worshipped." 

Along with the Father and the Holy Spirit we worship the Son of God, 
Who was incorporeal before He took on humanity, and now in His 
own person is incarnate and has become man though still being also 
God. His flesh, then, in its own nature, if one were to make subtle 
mental distinctions between what is seen and what is thought, is not 
deserving of worship since it is created. But as it is united with God 
the Word, it is worshipped on account of Him and in Him. For just as 
the king deserves homage alike when un-robed and when robed, and 
just as the purple robe, considered simply as a purple robe, is 
trampled upon and tossed about, but after becoming the royal dress 
receives all honour and glory, and whoever dishonours it is 
generally condemned to death: and again, just as wood in itself is 
not of such a nature that it cannot be touched, but becomes so when 
fire is applied to it, and it becomes charcoal, and yet this is not 
because of its own nature, but because of the fire united to it, and 
the nature of the wood is not such as cannot be touched, but rather 
the charcoal or burning wood: so also the flesh, in its own nature, is 
not to be worshipped, but is worshipped in the incarnate God Word, 
not because of itself, but because of its union in subsistence with 
God the Word. And we do not say that we worship mere flesh, but 
God's flesh, that is, God incarnate. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...ry/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-3.htm2006-06-01 18:06:55

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.4. 

CHAPTER IV. Why it was the Son of God, and not the Father 
or the Spirit, that became man: and what having became man 
He achieved. 

The Father is Father and not Son: the Son is Son and not Father: the 
Holy Spirit is Spirit and not Father or Son. For the individuality is 
unchangeable. How, indeed, could individuality continue to exist at 
all if it were ever changing and altering? Wherefore the Son of God 
became Son of Man in order that His individuality might endure. For 
since He was the Son of God, He became Son of Man, being made 
flesh of the holy Virgin and not losing the individuality of Sonship. 

Further, the Son of God became man, in order that He might again 
bestow on man that favour for the sake of which He created him. For 
He created him after His own image, endowed with intellect and freewill, and after His own likeness, that is to say, perfect in all virtue so 
far as it is possible for man's nature to attain perfection. For the 
following properties are, so to speak, marks of the divine nature: viz. 
absence of care and distraction and guile, goodness, wisdom, 
justice, freedom from all vice. So then, after He had placed man in 
communion with Himself (for having made him for incorruption, He 
led him up through communion wills Himself to incorruption), and 
when moreover, through the transgression of the command we had 
confused and obliterated the marks of the divine image, and had 
become evil, we were stripped of our communion with God (for what 
communion hath light with darkness?): and having been shut out 
from life we became subject to the corruption of death: yea, since He 
gave us to share in the better part, and we did not keep it secure, He 
shares in the inferior part, I mean our own nature, in order that 
through Himself and in Himself He might renew that which was made 
after His image and likeness, and might teach us, too, the conduct of 
a virtuous life, making through Himself the way thither easy for us, 
and might by the communication of life deliver us from corruption, 
becoming Himself the firstfruits of our resurrection, and might 
renovate the useless and worn vessel calling us to the knowledge of 
God that He might redeem us from the tyranny of the devil, and 
might strengthen and teach us how to overthrow the tyrant through 
patience and humility. 

The worship of demons then has ceased: creation has been 
sanctified by the divine blood: altars and temples of idols have been 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-4.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:55

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.4. 

overthrown, the knowledge of God has been implanted in men's 
minds, the co-essential Trinity, the uncreate divinity, one true God, 
Creator and Lord of all receives men's service: virtues are cultivated, 
the hope of resurrection has been granted through the resurrection 
of Christ, the demons shudder at those men who of old were under 
their subjection. And the marvel, indeed, is that all this has been 
successfully brought about through His cross and passion and 
death. Throughout all the earth the Gospel of the knowledge of God 
has been preached; no wars or weapons or armies being used to 
rout the enemy, but only a few, naked, poor, illiterate, persecuted 
and tormented men, who with their lives in their hands, preached 
Him Who was crucified in the flesh and died, and who became 
victors over the wise and powerful. For the omnipotent power of the 
Cross accompanied them. Death itself, which once was maws 
chiefest terror, has been overthrown, and now that which was once 
the object of hate and loathing is preferred to life. These are the 
achievements of Christ's presence: these are the tokens of His 
power. For it was not one people that He saved, as when through 
Moses He divided the sea and delivered Israel out of Egypt and the 
bondage of Pharaoh; nay, rather He rescued all mankind from the 
corruption of death and the bitter tyranny of sin: not leading them by 
force to virtue, not overwhelming them with earth or burning them 
with fire, or ordering the sinners to be stoned, but persuading men 
by gentleness and long-suffering to choose virtue and vie with one 
another, and find pleasure in the struggle to attain it. For, formerly, it 
was sinners who were persecuted, and yet they clung all the closer 
to sin, and sin was looked upon by them as their God: but now for 
the sake of piety and virtue men choose persecutions and 
crucifixions and death. 

Hail! O Christ, the Word and Wisdom and Power of God, and God 
omnipotent! What can we helpless ones give Thee in return for all 
these good gifts? For all are Thine, and Thou askest naught from us 
save our salvation, Thou Who Thyself art the Giver of this, and yet 
art grateful to those who receive it, through Thy unspeakable 
goodness. Thanks be to Thee Who gave us life, and granted us the 
grace of a happy life, and restored us to that, when we had gone 
astray, through Thy unspeakable condescension. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-4.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:55

 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.4. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-4.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:55

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.5. 

CHAPTER V. In reply to those who ask if Christ's subsistence 
is create or uncreate. 

The subsistence of God the Word before the Incarnation was simple 
and uncompound, and incorporeal and uncreate: but after it became 
flesh, it became also the subsistence of the flesh, and became 
compounded of divinity which it always possessed, and of flesh 
which it had assumed: and it bears the properties of the two natures, 
being made known in two natures: so that the one same subsistence 
is both uncreate in divinity and create in humanity, visible and 
invisible. For otherwise we are compelled either to divide the one 
Christ and speak of two subsistences, or to deny the distinction 
between the natures and thus introduce change and confusion. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...ry/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-5.htm2006-06-01 18:06:56

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.6. 

CHAPTER VI. Concerning the question, when Christ was 
called. 

The mind was not united with God the Word, as some falsely assert, 
before the Incarnation by the Virgin and from that time called Christ. 
That is the absurd nonsense of Origen who lays down the doctrine of 
the priority of the existence of souls. But we hold that the Son and 
Word of God became Christ after He had dwelt in the womb of His 
holy ever-virgin Mother, and became flesh without change, and that 
the flesh was anointed with divinity. For this is the anointing of 
humanity, as Gregory the Theologian says. And here are the words 
of the most holy Cyril of Alexandria which he wrote to the Emperor 
Theodosius: "For I indeed hold that one ought to give the name 
Jesus Christ neither to the Word that is of God if He is without 
humanity, nor yet to the temple born of woman if it is not united with 
the Word. For the Word that is of God is understood to be Christ 
when united with humanity in ineffable manner in the union of the 
oeconomy." And again, he writes to the Empresses thus: "Some 
hold that the name 'Christ' is rightly given to the Word that is 
begotten of God the Father, to Him alone, and regarded separately 
by Himself. But we have not been taught so to think and speak. For 
when the Word became flesh, then it was, we say, that He was called 
Christ Jesus. For since He was anointed with the oil of gladness, that 
is the Spirit, by Him Who is God and Father, He is for this reason 
called Christ. But that the anointing was an act that concerned Him 
as man could be doubted by no one who is accustomed to think 
rightly." Moreover, the celebrated Athanasius says this in his 
discourse "Concerning the Saving Manifestation:" "The God Who 
was before the sojourn in the flesh was not man, but God in God, 
being invisible and without passion, but when He became man, He 
received in addition the name of Christ because of the flesh, since, 
indeed, passion and death follow in the train of this name." 

And although the holy Scripture says, Therefore God, thy God, hath 
anointed thee with the oil of gladness, it is to be observed that the 
holy Scripture often uses the past tense instead of the future, as for 
example here: Thereafter He was seen upon the earth and dwelt 
among men. For as yet God was not seen nor did He dwell among 
men when this was said. And here again: By the rivers of Babylon, 
there we sat down; yea wept. For as yet these things had not come 
to pass. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-6.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:56

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.6. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-6.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:56

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.7. 

CHAPTER VII. In answer to those who enquire whether the 
holy Mother of God bore two natures, and whether two 
natures hung upon the Crass. 

Agenhton and genhton, written with one 'n' and meaning uncreated 
and created, refer to nature: but agennhton and gennhton, that is to 
say, unbegotten and begotten, as the double 'n' indicates, refer not 
to nature but to subsistence. The divine nature then is agenhtos, that 
is to say, uncreate, but all things that come after the divine nature 
are genhhta, that is, created. In the divine and uncreated nature, 
therefore, the property of being agennhton or unbegotten is 
contemplated in the Father (for He was not begotten), that of being 
gennhton or begotten in the Son (for He has been eternally begotten 
of the Father), and that of procession in the Holy Spirit. Moreover of 
each species of living creatures, the first members were agennhta 
but not agenhta: for they were brought into being by their Maker, but 
were not the offspring of creatures like themselves. For genesis is 
creation, while gennhsis or begetting is in the case of God the origin 
of a co-essential Son arising from the Father alone, and in the case 
of bodies, the origin of a co-essential subsistence arising from the 
contact of male and female. And thus we perceive that begetting 
refers not to nature but to subsistence. For if it did refer to nature, to 
agennhton and to gennhton, i.e. the properties of being begotten and 
unbegotten, could not be contemplated in one and the same nature. 
Accordingly the holy Mother of God bore a subsistence revealed in 
two natures; being begotten on the one hand, by reason of its 
divinity, of the Father timelessly, and, at last, on the other hand, 
being incarnated of her in time and born in the flesh. 

But if our interrogators should hint that He Who is begotten of the 
holy Mother of God is two natures, we reply, "Yea! He is two natures: 
for He is in His own person God and man. And the same is to be said 
concerning the crucifixion and resurrection and ascension. For 
these refer not to nature but to subsistence. Christ then, since He is 
in two natures, suffered and was crucified in the nature that was 
subject to passion. For it was in the flesh and not in His divinity that 
He hung upon the Cross. Otherwise, let them answer us, when we 
ask if two natures died. No, we shall say. And so two natures Were 
not crucified but Christ was begotten, that is to say, the divine Word 
having become man was begotten in the flesh, was crucified in the 
flesh, suffered in the flesh, while His divinity continued to be 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-7.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:56

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.7. 

impossible." 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-7.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:56

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.8. 

CHAPTER VIII. How the Only-begotten Son of God is called 
first-born. 

He who is first begotten is called first-born, whether he is onlybegotten or the first of a number of brothers. If then the Son of God 
was called first-born, but was not called Only-begotten, we could 
imagine that He was the first-born of creatures, as being a creature. 
But since He is called both first-born and Only-begotten, both 
senses must be preserved in His case. We say that He is first-born of 
all creation since both He Himself is of God and creation is of God, 
but as He Himself is born alone and timelessly of the essence of God 
the Father, He may with reason be called Only-begotten Son, firstborn and not first-created. For the creation was not brought into 
being out of the essence of the Father, but by His will out of nothing. 
And He is called First-born among many brethren, for although being 
Only-begotten, He was also born of a mother. Since, indeed, He 
participated just as we ourselves do in blood and flesh and became 
man, while we too through Him became sons of God, being adopted 
through the baptism, He Who is by nature Son of God became firstborn amongst us who were made by adoption and grace sons of 
God, and stand to Him in the relation of brothers. Wherefore He said, 
I ascend unto My Father and your Father. He did not say "our 
Father," but "My Father," clearly in the sense of Father by nature, 
and "your Father," in the sense of Father by grace. And "My God and 
your God." He did not say "our God," but "My God:" and if you 
distinguish with subtle thought that which is seen from that which is 
thought, also "your God," as Maker and Lord. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...ry/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-8.htm2006-06-01 18:06:56

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.9. 

CHAPTER IX. Concerning Faith and Baptism. 

We confess one baptism for the remission of sins and for life eternal. 
For baptism declares the Lord's death. We are indeed "buried with 
the Lord through baptism," as saith the divine Apostle. So then, as 
our Lord died once for all, we also must be baptized once for all, and 
baptized according to the Word of the Lord, In the Name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, being taught the 
confession in Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Those, then, who, after 
having been baptized into Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and having 
been taught that there is one divine nature in three subsistences, are 
rebaptized, these, as the divine Apostle says, crucify the Christ 
afresh. For it is impossible, he saith, for those who were once 
enlightened, &c., to renew them again unto repentance: seeing they 
crucify to themselves the Christ afresh, and put Him to an open 
shame. But those who were not baptized into the Holy Trinity, these 
must be baptized again. For although the divine ApoStle says: Into 
Christ and into His death were we baptized, he does not mean that 
the invocation of baptism must be in these words, but that baptism 
is an image of the death of Christ. For by the three immersions, 
baptism signifies the three days of our Lord's entombment. The 
baptism then into Christ means that believers are baptized into Him. 
We could not believe in Christ if we were not taught confession in 
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. For Christ is the Son of the Living God, 
Whom the Father anointed with the Holy Spirit: in the words of the 
divine David, Therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil 
of gladness above thy fellows. And Isaiah also speaking in the 
person of the Lord says, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me because 
He hath anointed me. Christ, however, taught His own disciples the 
invocation and said, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of 
the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. For since Christ made us for 
incorruption, and we transgressed His saving command. He 
condemned us to the corruption of death in order that that which is 
evil should not be immortal, and when in His compassion He 
stooped to His servants and became like us, He redeemed us from 
corruption through His own passion. He caused the fountain of 
remission to well forth for us out of His holy and immaculate side, 
water for our regeneration, and the washing away of sin and 
corruption; and blood to drink as the hostage of life eternal. And He 
laid on us the command to be born again of water and of the Spirit, 
through prayer and invocation, the Holy Spirit drawing nigh unto the 
water. For since man's nature is twofold, consisting of soul and 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-9.htm (1 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:57

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.9. 

body, He bestowed on us a twofold purification, of water and of the 
Spirit the Spirit renewing that part in us which is after His image and 
likeness, and the water by the grace of the Spirit cleansing the body 
from sin and delivering it from corruption, the water indeed 
expressing the image of death, but the Spirit affording the earnest of 
life. 

For from the beginning the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the 
waters, and anew the Scripture witnesseth that water has the power 
of purification. In the time of Noah God washed away the sin of the 
world by water. By water every impure person is purified, according 
to the law, even the very garments being washed with water. Elias 
shewed forth the grace of the Spirit mingled with the water when he 
burned the holocaust by pouring on water. And almost everything is 
purified by water according to the law: for the things of sight are 
symbols of the things of thought. The regeneration, however, takes 
place in the spirit: for faith has the power of making us sons (of 
God), creatures as we are, by the Spirit, and of leading us into our 
original blessedness. 

The remission of sins, therefore, is granted alike to all through 
baptism: but the grace of the Spirit is proportional to the faith and 
previous purification. Now, indeed, we receive the firstfruits of the 
Holy Spirit through baptism, and the second birth is for us the 
beginning and seal and security and illumination s of another life. 

It behoves as, then, with all our strength to steadfastly keep 
ourselves pure from filthy works, that we may not, like the dog 
returning to his vomit, make ourselves again the slaves of sin. For 
faith apart from works is dead, and so likewise are works apart from 
faith. For the true faith is attested by works. 

Now we are baptized into the Holy Trinity because those things 
which are baptized have need of the Holy Trinity for their 
maintenance and continuance, and the three subsistences cannot be 
otherwise than present, the one with the other. For the Holy Trinity is 
indivisible. 

The first baptism was that of the flood for the eradication of sin. The 
second was through the sea and the cloud: for the cloud is the 
symbol of the Spirit and the sea of the water. The third baptism was 
that of the Law: for every impure person washed himself with water, 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-9.htm (2 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:57

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.9. 

and even washed his garments, and so entered into the camp. The 
fourth was that of John, being preliminary and leading those who 
were baptized to repent-once, that they might believe in Christ: Ego 
enim, inquit, baptizo vos aqua: qui autem post me veniet, ipse vos 
baptizabit Spiritu sancto et igne. Itaque Joannes ad Spiritum 
suscipiendum ante per aquam purgabat. Quintum, Domini baptisma, 
quo ipse baptizatus fuit. Baptizatus est autem, non quod ipse 
purgatione indigeret; sed meam sibi purgationem asciscens, ut 
capita draconum in aquis contereret; ut peccatum obrueret, ac totum 
veterem Adamum in aqua sepeliret; ut baptismum sanctificaret; ut 
legem impleret; ut Trinitatis mysterium aperiret; ut semel tandem 
suscipiendi baptismi formam et exemplum praeberet. Baptizamur 
autem et nos quoque perfecto Domini baptismo, per aquam videlicet 
et Spiritum. Porro Christus idcirco igne baptizare dicitur, quia 
Spiritus gratiam in sanctos apostolos effudit, quemadmodum 
Dominus ipse dixerat: Joannes quidem baptizavit aqua, vos autem 
baptizabimini Spiritu sanclo et igne, non post multos hos dies: vel 
etiam ob castigatorium ignis futuri baptismum. Sextum baptisma, in 
poenitentia et lacrymis versatur: estque sane grave et molestum. 
Septimum, est quod sanguinis profusione ac martyrio perficitur, quo 
et Christus ipse nostri causa defunctus est. Estque illud perquam 
augustum ac beatum, quod nullis posthac sordibus inquinetur. 
Octavum denique et postremum illud est, non jam salutiferum, 
verum ita malitiam auferens, quando suus jam malitiae et peccato 
locus non erit, tat tamen sempiternum excruciet ac puniat. 

Spiritus Sanctus columbae specie et ignis. Porro Spiritus sanctus 
corporali specie, sicut Columba ad Dominum descendit, sicque tum 
baptismi nostri primitias subindicabat, tum corpus cohonestabat: 
quoniam et hoc quoque per deificationern Deus erat. Adde, quod 
columba cessasse diluvium olim nuntiaverit. Ignis vero specie in 
sanctos apostolos descendit, eo quod Deus esset. Deus enim ignis 
consumens est. 

Olei unctio. At vero oleum idcirco ad baptismum adhibetur, quia 
unctionem nostram significat, nosque christos facit, insuper Dei 
misericordiam per Spiritum sanctum nobis pollicetur. Nam et 
columba illis qui incolumes a diluvio evaserant, oleae ramum praeter 
omnem spent olim attulit. 

Joannes, ut baptizatus. Joannes imposita divino Domini capiti manu, 
et cruore proprio baptizatus fuit. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-9.htm (3 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:57

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.9. 

Caeterum baptismum diutius prorogare non oportet dum 
accedentium fidem contestantur actiones. Si quis dolo ad 
baptismum accesserit, tantum abest ut hinc utilitatis quid piam 
capiat, ut condemnationem potius accersat sibi. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...01%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-9.htm (4 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:57

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.10. 

CHAPTER X. De fide. 

Fides virtus. In fidelis est, qui non credit Ecclasiae traditioni aut male 
vivit. Fides porro duplex est. Est enim fides ex audits Scripturas 
namque sacras audiendo, Spiritus Sancti doctrinae credimus. Atque 
haec fides per omnia ills, quae a Christo statuta sunt, perficitur: 
opere videlicet credens, pietatem colens, et ejus qui nos instauravit, 
praeceptis obsequens. Nam qui secundum Ecclesiae catholicae 
traditionem non credit, vel per flagitiosa opera cum diabolo 
communicat, hic infidelis est. 

Fides donum Spiritus. Rursus: Fides est sperandarum substantia 
rerum, argumentum non apparentium, vel est spes minime dubia nec 
ambigua, qua confidimus fore, ut quae nobis divinitus promissa 
sunt, et quae postulamus, adipiscamur. Ac prior quidem, nostrae 
voluntatis est; altera autem inter Spiritus dona censenda est. 

Spiritalis circumcisio. Sciendum est autem, integumentum omne 
quod a nativitate contraximus, peccatum scilicet, per baptismum 
circumcidi, nosque spiritales Israelitas ac Dei populum fieri. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-10.htm2006-06-01 18:06:57

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.11. 

CHAPTER XI. De cruce, ubi rursum de fide. 

Rerum ipsa creatio humanis rationibus comprehendi non potest. 
Fides universa necessaria. Quid fides. Verbum crucis pereuntibus 
quidem stultitia est: iis autem qui salvi fiunt, id est nobis, Dei virtus 
est. Nam spiritualis quidem judicat omnia: animalis autem homo non 
percipit ea qua Dei sunt. Stultitia enim illis est, qui ea suscipiunt, nec 
Dei bonitatem et omnipotentiam considerant; verum res divinas 
humanis naturalibusque rationibus investigant. Etenim quae Dei 
aunt, naturam et Sermonem et cogitationem superant. Nam si quis 
animo volvat quonam pacto, et cur Deus omnia ex nihilo produxerit, 
naturalibusque rationibus id assequi contendat, nequaquam hoc 
comprehendet. Animalis enim et diabolica est hujusmodi scantia. 
Qui vero fide veluti manu ductus, Deum bonum, et omnipotentem et 
verum, et sapientem, et justum cogitat, omnia plana et aequabilia, 
viamque rectam inveniet. But without faith it is impossible to be 
saved. For it is by faith that all things, both human and spiritual, are 
sustained. For without faith neither does the farmer cut his furrow, 
nor does the merchant commit his life to the raging waves of the sea 
on a small piece of wood, nor are marriages contracted nor any other 
step in life taken. By faith we consider that all things were brought 
out of nothing into being by God's power. And we direct all things, 
both divine and human, by faith. Further, faith is assent free from all 
meddlesome inquisitiveness. 

Every action, therefore, and performance of miracles by Christ are 
most great and divine and marvellous: but the most marvellous of all 
is His precious Cross. For no other thing has subdued death, 
expiated the sin of the first parent, despoiled Hades, bestowed the 
resurrection, granted the power to us of contemning the present and 
even death itself, prepared the return to our former blessedness, 
opened the gates of Paradise, given our nature a seat at the right 
hand of God, and made us the children and heirs of God, save the 
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. For by the Cross s all things have 
been made right. So many of us, the apostle says, as were baptized 
into Christ, were baptized into His death, and as many of you as have 
been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Further Christ is the 
power of God and the wisdom of God. Lo! the death of Christ, that is, 
the Cross, clothed us with the enhypostatic wisdom and power of 
God. And the power of God is the Word of the Cross, either because 
God's might, that is, the victory over death, has been revealed to us 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-11.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:57

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.11. 

by it, or because, just as the four extremities of the Cross are held 
fast and bound together by the bolt in the middle, so also by God's 
power the height and the depth, the length and the breadth, that is, 
every creature visible and invisible, is maintained. 

This was given to us as a sign on our forehead, just as the 
circumcision was given to Israel: for by it we believers are separated 
and distinguished from unbelievers. This is the shield and weapon 
against, and trophy over, the devil. This is the seal that the destroyer 
may not touch you, as saith the Scripture. This is the resurrection of 
those lying in death, the support of the standing, the staff of the 
weak, the rod of the flock, the safe conduct of the earnest, the 
perfection of those that press forwards, the salvation of soul and 
body, the aversion of all things evil, the patron of all things good, the 
taking away of sin, the plant of resurrection, the tree of eternal life. 

So, then, this same truly precious and august tree, on which Christ 
hath offered Himself as a sacrifice for our sakes, is to be worshipped 
as sanctified by contact with His holy body and blood; likewise the 
nails, the spear, the clothes, His sacred tabernacles which are the 
manger, the cave, Golgotha, which bringeth salvation, the tomb 
which giveth life, Sion, the chief stronghold of the churches and the 
like, are to be worshipped. In the words of David, the father of God, 
We shall go into His tabernacles, we shall worship at the place where 
His feet stood. And that it is the Cross that is meant is made clear by 
what follows, Arise, O Lord, into Thy Rest . For the resurrection 
comes after the Cross. For if of those things which we love, house 
and couch and garment, are to be longed after, how much the rather 
should we long after that which belonged to God, our Saviour, by 
means of which we are in truth saved. 

Moreover we worship even the image of the precious and life-giving 
Cross, although made of another tree, not honouring the tree (God 
forbid) but the image as a symbol of Christ. For He said to His 
disciples, admonishing them, Then shall appear the sign of the Son 
of Man in Heaven, meaning the Cross. And so also the angel of the 
resurrection said to the woman, Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth which 
was crucified. And the Apostle said, We preach Christ crucified. For 
there are many Christs and many Jesuses, but one crucified. He 
does not say speared but crucified. It behoves us, then, to worship 
the sign of Christ. For wherever the sign may be, there also will He 
be. But it does not behove us to worship the material of which the 
image of the Cross is composed, even though it be gold or precious 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-11.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:57

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.11. 

stones, after it is destroyed, if that should happen. Everything, 
therefore, that is dedicated to God we worship, conferring the 
adoration on Him. 

The tree of life which was planted by God in Paradise pre-figured this 
precious Cross. For since death was by a tree, it was fitting that life 
and resurrection should be bestowed by a tree. Jacob, when He 
worshipped the top of Joseph's staff, was the first to image the 
Cross, and when he blessed his sons with crossed hands he made 
most clearly the sign of the cross. Likewise also did Moses' rod, 
when it smote the sea in the figure of the cross and saved Israel, 
while it overwhelmed Pharaoh in the depths; likewise also the hands 
stretched out crosswise and routing Amalek; and the bitter water 
made sweet by a tree, and the rock rent and pouring forth streams of 
water, and the rod that meant for Aaron the dignity of the high 
priesthood: and the serpent lifted in triumph on a tree as though it 
were dead, the tree bringing salvation to those who in faith saw their 
enemy dead, just as Christ was nailed to the tree in the flesh of sin 
which yet knew no sin. The mighty Moses cried, You will see your 
life hanging on the tree before your eyes, and Isaiah likewise, I have 
spread out my hands all the day unto a faithless and rebellious 
people. But may we who worship this obtain a part in Christ the 
crucified. Amen. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-11.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:57

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.12. 

CHAPTER XII. Concerning Worship towards the East. 

It is not without reason or by chance that we worship towards the 
East. But seeing that we are composed of a visible and an invisible 
nature, that is to say, of a nature partly of spirit and partly of sense, 
we render also a twofold worship to the Creator; just as we sing both 
with our spirit and our bodily lips, and are baptized with both water 
and Spirit, and are united with the Lord in a twofold manner, being 
sharers in the mysteries and in the grace of the Spirit. 

Since, therefore, God is spiritual light, and Christ is called in the 
Scriptures Sun of Righteousness and Dayspring, the East is the 
direction that must be assigned to His worship. For everything good 
must be assigned to Him from Whom every good thing arises. 
Indeed the divine David also says, Sing unto God, ye kingdoms of 
the earth: O sing praises unto the Lord: to Him that rideth upon the 
Heavens of heavens towards the East. Moreover the Scripture also 
says, And God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there He put 
the man whom He had formed: and when he had transgressed His 
command He expelled him and made him to dwell over against the 
delights of Paradises, which clearly is the West. So, then, we 
worship God seeking and striving after our old fatherland. Moreover 
the tent of Moses had its veil and mercy seat towards the East. Also 
the tribe of Judah as the most precious pitched their camp on the 
East. Also in the celebrated temple of Solomon the Gate of the Lord 
was placed eastward. Moreover Christ, when He hung on the Cross, 
had His face turned towards the West, and so we worship, striving 
after Him. And when He was received again into Heaven He was 
borne towards the East, and thus His apostles worship Him, and 
thus He will come again in the way in which they beheld Him going 
towards Heaven; as the Lord Himself said, As the lightning cometh 
out of the East and shineth even unto the West, so also shall the 
coming of the Son of Man be. 

So, then, in expectation of His coming we worship towards the East. 
But this tradition of the apostles is unwritten. For much that has 
been handed down to us by tradition is unwritten. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-12.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:58

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.12. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-12.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:58

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.13. 

CHAPTER XIII. Concerning the holy and immaculate Mysteries 
of the Lord. 

God Who is good and altogether good and more than good, Who is 
goodness throughout, by reason of the exceeding riches of His 
goodness did not suffer Himself, that is His nature, only to be good, 
with no other to participate therein, but because of this He made first 
the spiritual and heavenly powers: next the visible and sensible 
universe: next man with his spiritual and sentient nature. All things, 
therefore, which he made, share in His goodness in respect of their 
existence. For He Himself is existence to all, since all things that are, 
are in Him, not only because it was He that brought them out of 
nothing into being, but because His energy preserves and maintains 
all that He made: and in especial the living creatures. For both in that 
they exist and in that they enjoy life they share in His goodness. But 
in truth those of them that have reason have a still greater share in 
that, both because of what has been already said and also because 
of the very reason which they possess. For they are somehow more 
dearly akin to Him, even though He is incomparably higher than they. 

Man, however, being endowed with reason and free will, received the 
power of continuous union with God through his own choice, if 
indeed he should abide in goodness, that is in obedience to his 
Maker. Since, however, he transgressed the command of his Creator 
and became liable to death and corruption, the Creator and Maker of 
our race, because of His bowels of compassion, took on our 
likeness, becoming man in all things but without sin, and was united 
to our nature. For since He bestowed on us His own image and His 
own spirit and we did not keep them safe, He took Himself a share in 
our poor and weak nature, in order that He might cleanse us and 
make us incorruptible, and establish us once more as partakers of 
His divinity. 

For it was fitting that not only the first-fruits of our nature should 
partake in the higher good but every man who wished it, and that a 
second birth should take place and that the nourishment should be 
new and suitable to the birth and thus the measure of perfection be 
attained. Through His birth, that is, His incarnation, and baptism and 
passion and resurrection, He delivered our nature from the sin of our 
first parent and death and corruption, and became the first-fruits of 
the resurrection, and made Himself the way and image and pattern, 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-13.htm (1 of 6)2006-06-01 18:06:58

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.13. 

in order that we, too, following in His footsteps, may become by 
adoption what He is Himself by nature, sons and heirs of God and 
joint heirs with Him. He gave us therefore, as I said, a second birth in 
order that, just as we who are born of Adam are in his image and are 
the heirs of the curse and corruption, so also being born of Him we 
may be in His likeness and heirs of His incorruption and blessing 
and glory. 

Now seeing that this Adam is spiritual, it was meet that both the birth 
and likewise the food should be spiritual too, but since we are of a 
double and compound nature, it is meet that both the birth should be 
double and likewise the food compound. We were therefore given a 
birth by water and Spirit: I mean, by the holy baptism: and the food is 
the very bread of life, our Lord Jesus Christ, Who came down from 
heaven. For when He was about to take on Himself a voluntary death 
for our sakes, on the night on which He gave Himself up, He laid a 
new covenant on His holy disciples and apostles, and through them 
on all who believe on Him. In the upper chamber, then, of holy and 
illustrious Sion, after He had eaten the ancient Passover with His 
disciples and had fulfilled the ancient covenant, He washed His 
disciples' feet in token of the holy baptism. Then having broken 
bread He gave it to them saying, Take, eat, this is My body broken for 
you for the remission of sins. Likewise also He took the cup of wine 
and water and gave it to them saying, Drink ye all of it: 

for this is My blood, the blood of the New Testament which is shed 
for you for the remission of sins. This do ye in remembrance of Me. 
For as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do shew the 
death of the Son of man and confess His resurrection until He come. 

If then the Word of God is quick and energising, and the Lord did all 
that He willed; if He said, Let there be light and there was light, let 
there be a firmament and there was a firmament; if the heavens were 
established by the Word of the Lord and all the host of them by the 
breath of His mouth; if the heaven and the earth, water and fire and 
air and the whole glory of these, and, in sooth, this most noble 
creature, man, were perfected by the Word of the Lord; if God the 
Word of His own will became man and the pure and undefiled blood 
of the holy and ever-virginal One made His flesh without the aid of 
seed, can He not then make the bread His body and the wine and 
water His blood? He said in the beginning, Let the earth bring forth 
grass, and even until this present day, when the rain comes it brings 
forth its proper fruits, urged on and strengthened by the divine 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-13.htm (2 of 6)2006-06-01 18:06:58

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.13. 

command. God said, This is My body, and This is My blood, and this 
do ye in remembrance of Me. And so it is at His omnipotent 
command until He come: for it was in this sense that He said until He 
come: and the overshadowing power of the Holy Spirit becomes 
through the invocation the rain to this new tillage. For just as God 
made all that He made by the energy of the Holy Spirit, so also now 
the energy of the Spirit performs those things that are supernatural 
and which it is not possible to comprehend unless by faith alone. 
How shall this be, said the holy Virgin, seeing I know not a man? And 
the archangel Gabriel answered her: The Holy Spirit shall come upon 
thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee. And now 
you ask, how the bread became Christ's body and the wine and 
water Christ's blood. And I say unto thee, "The Holy Spirit is present 
and does those things which surpass reason and thought." 

Further, bread and wine s are employed: for God knoweth man's 
infirmity: for in general man turns away discontentedly from what is 
not well-worn by custom: and so with His usual indulgence H e 
performs His supernatural works through familiar objects: and just 
as, in the case of baptism, since it is man's custom to wash himself 
with water and anoint himself with oil, He connected the grace of the 
Spirit with the oil and the water and made it the water of 
regeneration, in like manner since it is man's custom to eat and to 
drink water and wine, He connected His divinity with these and made 
them His body and blood in order that we may rise to what is 
supernatural through what is familiar and natural. 

The body which is born of the holy Virgin is in truth body united with 
divinity, not that the body which was received up into the heavens 
descends, but that the bread itself and the wine are changed into 
God's body and blood. But if you enquire how this happens, it is 
enough for you to learn that it was through the Holy Spirit, just as the 
Lord took on Himself flesh that subsisted in Him and was born of the 
holy Mother of God through the Spirit. And we know nothing further 
save that the Word of God is true and energises and is omnipotent, 
but the manner of this cannot be searched out. But one can put it 
well thus, that just as in nature the bread by the eating and the wine 
and the water by the drinking are changed into the body and blood of 
the eater and drinker, and do not become a different body from the 
former one, so the bread of the table and the wine and water are 
supernaturally changed by the invocation and presence of the Holy 
Spirit into the body and blood of Christ, and are not two but one and 
the same. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-13.htm (3 of 6)2006-06-01 18:06:58

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.13. 

Wherefore to those who partake worthily with faith, it is for the 
remission of sins and for life everlasting and for the safeguarding of 
soul and body; but to those who partake unworthily without faith, it 
is for chastisement and punishment, just as also the death of the 
Lord became to those who believe life and incorruption for the 
enjoyment of eternal blessedness, while to those who do not believe 
and to the murderers of the Lord it is for everlasting chastisement 
and punishment. 

The bread and the wine are not merely figures of the body and blood 
of Christ (God forbid!) but the deified body of the Lord itself: for the 
Lord has said, "This is My body," not, this is a figure of My body: and 
"My blood," not, a figure of My blood. And on a previous occasion 
He had said to the Jews, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man 
and drink His blood, ye have no life in you. For My flesh is meat 
indeed and My blood is drink indeed. And again, He that eateth Me, 
shall live. 

Wherefore with all fear and a pure conscience and certain faith let us 
draw near and it will assuredly be to us as we believe, doubting 
nothing. Let us pay homage to it in all purity both of soul and body: 
for it is twofold. Let us draw near to it with an ardent desire, and with 
our hands held in the form of the cross s let us receive the body of 
the Crucified One: and let us apply our eyes and lips and brows and 
partake of the divine coal, in order that the fire of the longing, that is 
in us, with the additional heat derived from the coal may utterly 
consume our sins and illumine our hearts, and that we may be 
inflamed and deified by the participation in the divine fire. Isaiah saw 
the coal. But coal is not plain wood but wood united with fire: in like 
manner also the bread of the communion is not plain bread but 
bread united with divinity. But a body s which is united with divinity 
is not one nature, but has one nature belonging to the body and 
another belonging to the divinity that is united to it, so that the 
compound is not one nature but two. 

With bread and wine Melchisedek, the priest of the most high God, 
received Abraham on his return from the slaughter of the Gentiles. 
That table pre-imaged this mystical table, just as that priest was a 
type and image of Christ, the true high-priest. For thou art a priest for 
ever after the order of Melchisedek. Of this bread the show-bread 
was an image. This surely is that pure and bloodless sacrifice which 
the Lord through the prophet said is offered to Him from the rising to 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-13.htm (4 of 6)2006-06-01 18:06:58

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.13. 

the setting of the sun. 

The body and blood of Christ are making for the support of our soul 
and body, without being consumed or suffering corruption, not 
making for the draught (God forbid!) but for our being and 
preservation, a protection against all kinds of injury, a purging from 
all uncleanness: should one receive base gold, they purify it by the 
critical burning lest in the future we be condemned with this world. 
They purify from diseases and all kinds of calamities; according to 
the words of the divine Apostles, For if we would judge ourselves, 
we should not be judged. But when we are judged, we are chastened 
of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world. This 
too is what he says, So that he that partaketh of the body and blood 
of Christ unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself. Being 
purified by this, we are united to the body of Christ and to His Spirit 
and become the body of Christ. 

This bread is the first-fruits of the future bread which is epio?sios, i.
e. necessary for existence. For the word epio?sion signifies either 
the future, that is Him Who is for a future age, or else Him of Whom 
we partake for the preservation of our essence. Whether then it is in 
this sense or that, it is fitting to speak so of the Lord's body. For the 
Lord's flesh is life-giving spirit because it was conceived of the lifegiving Spirit. For what is born of the Spirit is spirit. But I do not say 
this to take away the nature of the body, but I wish to make clear its 
life-giving and divine power. 

But if some persons called the bread and the wine antitypes of the 
body and blood of the Lord, as did the divinely inspired Basil, they 
said so not after the consecration but before the consecration, so 
calling the offering itself. 

Participation is spoken of; for through it we partake of the divinity of 
Jesus. Communion, too, is spoken of, and it is an actual communion, 
because through it we have communion with Christ and share in His 
flesh and His divinity: yea, we have communion and are united with 
one another through it. For since we partake of one bread, we all 
become one body of Christ and one blood, and members one of 
another, being of one body with Christ. 

With all our strength, therefore, let us beware lest we receive 
communion from or grant it to heretics; Give not that which is holy 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-13.htm (5 of 6)2006-06-01 18:06:58

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.13. 

unto the dogs, saith the Lord, neither cast ye your pearls before 
swine, lest we become partakers in their dishonour and 
condemnation. For if trojan is in truth with Christ and with one 
another, we are assuredly voluntarily united also with all those who 
partake with us. For this union is effected voluntarily and not against 
our inclination. For we are all one body because we partake of the 
one bread, as the divine Apostle says. 

Further, antitypes of future things are spoken of, not as though they 
were not in reality Christ's body and blood, but that now through 
them we partake of Christ's divinity, while then we shall partake 
mentally through the vision alone. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-13.htm (6 of 6)2006-06-01 18:06:58

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.14. 

CHAPTER XIV. Concerning our Lord's genealogy and 
concerning the holy Mother of God. 

Concerning the holy and much-lauded ever-virgin one, Mary, the 
Mother of God, we have said something in the preceding chapters, 
bringing forward what was most opportune, viz., that strictly and 
truly she is and is called the Mother of God. Now let us fill up the 
blanks. For she being pre-ordained by the eternal prescient counsel 
of God and imaged forth and proclaimed in diverse images and 
discourses of the prophets through the Holy Spirit, sprang at the predetermined time from the root of David, according to the promises 
that were made to him. For the lord hath sworn, He saith in truth to 
David, He will not turn from it: of the fruit of Thy body will I set upon 
Thy throne. And again, Once have I sworn by My holiness, that I will 
not lie unto David. His seed shall endure for ever, and His throne as 
the sun before Me. It shall be established for ever as the moon, and 
as a faithful witness in heaven. And Isaiah says: And there shall 
come out a rod out of the stem of Jesse and a branch shall grow out 
of his roots. 

But that Joseph is descended from the tribe of David is expressly 
demonstrated by Matthew and Luke, the most holy evangelists. But 
Matthew derives Joseph from David through Solomon, while Luke 
does so through Nathan; while over the holy Virgin's origin both 
pass in silence. 

One ought to remember that it was not the custom of the Hebrews 
nor of the divine Scripture to give genealogies of women; and the 
law was to prevent one tribe seeking wives from another. And so 
since Joseph was descended from the tribe of David and was a just 
man (for this the divine Gospel testifies), he would not have 
espoused the holy Virgin contrary to the law; he would not have 
taken her unless she had been of the same tribe. It was sufficient, 
therefore, to demonstrate the descent of Joseph. 

One ought also to observe this, that the law was that when a man 
died without seed, this maws brother should take to wife the wife of 
the dead man and raise up seed to his brother. The offspring, 
therefore, belonged by nature to the second, that is, to him that 
begat it, but by law to the dead. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-14.htm (1 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:59

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.14. 

Born then of the line of Nathan, the son of David, Levi begat Melchi 
and Panther: Panther begat Barpanther, so called. This Barpanther 
begat Joachim: Joachim begat the holy Mother of God. And of the 
line of Solomon, the son of David, Mathan had a wife of whom he 
begat Jacob. Now on the death of Mathan, Melchi, of the tribe of 
Nathan, the son of Levi and brother of Panther, married the wife of 
Mathan, Jacob's mother, of whom he begat Heli. Therefore Jacob 
and Hell became brothers on tile mother's side, Jacob being of the 
tribe of Solomon and Heli of the tribe of Nathan. Then Heli of the tribe 
of Nathan died childless, and Jacob his brother, of the tribe of 
Solomon, took his wife and raised up seed to his brother and begat 
Joseph. Joseph, therefore, is by nature the son of Jacob, of the line 
of Solomon, but by law he is the son of Hell of the line of Nathan. 

Joachim then took to wife that revered and praiseworthy woman, 
Anna. But just as the earlier Anna, who was barren, bore Samuel by 
prayer and by promise, so also this Anna by supplication and 
promise from God bare the Mother of God in order that she might not 
even in this be behind the matrons of fame. Accordingly it was grace 
(for this is the interpretation of Anna) that bore the lady: (for she 
became truly the Lady of all created things in becoming the Mother 
of the Creator). Further, Joachim was born in the house of the 
Probatica, and was brought up to the temple. Then planted in the 
House of God and increased by the Spirit, like a fruitful olive tree, 
she became the home of every virtue, turning her mind away from 
every secular and carnal desire, and thus keeping her soul as well as 
her hotly virginal, as was meet for her who was to receive God into 
her bosom: for as He is holy, He finds rest among the holy. Thus, 
therefore, she strove after holiness, and was declared a holy and 
wonderful temple fit for the most high God. 

Moreover, since the enemy of our salvation was keeping a watchful 
eye on virgins, according to the prophecy of Isaiah, who said, 
Behold a virgin shall conceive and bare a Son and shall call His 
name Emmanuel, which is, being interpreted, 'God with us,' in order 
that he who taketh the wise in their own craftiness may deceive him 
who always glorieth in his wisdom, the maiden is given in marriage 
to Joseph by the priests, a new book to him who is versed in letters: 
but the marriage was both the protection of the virgin and the 
delusion of him who was keeping a watchful eye on virgins. But 
when the fulness of time was come, the messenger of the Lord was 
sent to her, with the good news of our Lord's conception. And thus 
she conceived the Son of God, the hypostatic power of the Father, 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-14.htm (2 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:59

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.14. 

not of the will of the flesh nor of the will of man, that is to say, by 
connection and seed, but by the good pleasure of the Father and cooperation of the Holy Spirit. She ministered to the Creator in that He 
was created, to the Fashioner in that He was fashioned, and to the 
Son of God and God in that He was made flesh and became man 
from her pure and immaculate flesh and blood, satisfying the debt of 
the first mother. For just as the latter was formed from Adam without 
connection, so also did the former bring forth the new Adam, who 
was brought forth in accordance with the laws of parturition and 
above the nature of generation. 

For He who was of the Father, yet without mother, was born of 
woman without a father's co-operation. And so far as He was born of 
woman, His birth was in accordance with the laws of parturition, 
while so far as He had no father, His birth was above the nature of 
generation: and in that it was at the usual time (for He was born on 
the completion of the ninth month when the tenth was just 
beginning), His birth was in accordance with the laws of parturition, 
while in that it was painless it was above the laws of generation. For, 
as pleasure did not precede it, pain did not follow it, according to the 
prophet who says, Before she travailed, she brought forth, and 
again, before her pain came she was delivered of a man-child. The 
Son of God incarnate, therefore, was born of her, not a divinelyinspired man but God incarnate not a prophet anointed with energy 
but by the presence of the anointing One in His completeness, so 
that the Anointer became man and the Anointed God, not by a 
change of nature but by union in subsistence. For the Anointer and 
the Anointed were one and the same, anointing in the capacity of 
God Himself as man. Must there not therefore be a Mother of God 
who bore God incarnate? Assuredly she who played the part of the 
Creator's servant and mother is in all strictness and truth in reality 
God's Mother and Lady and Queen over all created things. But just 
as He who was conceived kept her who conceived still virgin, in like 
manner also He who was born preserved her virginity intact, only 
passing through her and keeping her closed. The conception, 
indeed, was through the sense of hearing, but the birth through the 
usual path by which children come, although some tell tales of His 
birth through the side of the Mother of God. For it was not 
impossible for Him to have come by this gate, without injuring her 
seal in any way. 

The ever-virgin One thus remains even after the birth still virgin, 
having never at any time up till death consorted with a man. For 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-14.htm (3 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:59

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.14. 

although it is written, And knew her not till she had brought forth her 
first-born Son, yet note that he who is first-begotten is first-born 
even if he is only-begotten. For the word "first-born" means that he 
was born first but does not at all suggest the birth of others. And the 
word "till" signifies the limit of the appointed time but does not 
exclude the time thereafter. For the Lord says, And lo, I am with you 
always, even unto the end of the world, not meaning thereby that He 
will be separated from us after the completion of the age. The divine 
apostle, indeed, says, And so shall we ever be with the Lord, 
meaning after the general resurrection. 

For could it be possible that she, who had borne God and from 
experience of the subsequent events had come to know the miracle, 
should receive the embrace of a man. God forbid! It is not the part of 
a chaste mind to think such thoughts, far less to commit such acts 

But this blessed woman, who was deemed worthy of gifts that are 
supernatural, suffered those pains, which she escaped at the birth, 
in the hour of the passion, enduring from motherly sympathy the 
rending of the bowels, and when she beheld Him, Whom she knew to 
be God by the manner of His generation, killed as a malefactor, her 
thoughts pierced her as a sword, and this is the meaning of this 
verse: Yea, a sword shall pierce through thy own saul also. But the 
joy of the resurrection transforms the pain, proclaiming Him, Who 
died in the flesh, to be God. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-14.htm (4 of 4)2006-06-01 18:06:59

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.15. 

CHAPTER XV. Concerning the honour due to the Saints and 
their remains. 

To the saints honour must be paid as friends of Christ, as sons and 
heirs of God: in the words of John the theologian and evangelist, As 
many as received Him, to them gave He power to became sons of 
God. So that they are no longer servants, but sons: and if sons, also 
heirs, heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ: and the Lord in the 
holy Gospels says to His apostles, Ye are My friends. Henceforth I 
call you not servants, for the servant knoweth not what his lord 
doeth. And further, if the Creator and Lord of all things is called also 
King of Kings and Lord of Lords and God of Gods, surely also the 
saints are gods and lords and kings. For of these God is and is 
called God and Lord and King. For I am the God of Abraham, He said 
to Moses, the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob. And God made 
Moses a god to Pharaoh. Now I mean gods and kings and lords not 
in nature, but as rulers and masters of their passions, and as 
preserving a truthful likeness to the divine image according to which 
they were made (for the image of a king is also called king), and as 
being united to God of their own free-will and receiving Him as an 
indweller and becoming by grace through participation with Him 
what He is Himself by nature. Surely, then, the worshippers and 
friends and sons of God are to be held in honour? For the honour 
shewn to the most thoughtful of fellow-servants is a proof of good 
feeling towards the common Master. 

These are made treasuries and pure habitations of God: For I will 
dwell in them, said God, and walk in them, and I will be their God. 
The divine Scripture likewise saith that the souls of the just are in 
God's hand and death cannot lay hold of them. For death is rather 
the sleep of the saints than their death. For they travailed in this life 
and shall to the end, and Precious in the sight of the Lord is the 
death of His saints. What then, is more precious than to be in the 
hand of God? For God is Life and Light, and those who are in God's 
hand are in life and light. 

Further, that God dwelt even in their bodies in spiritual wise, the 
Apostle tells us, saying, Know ye not that your bodies are the 
temples of the Holy Spirit dwelling in you?, and The Lord is that 
Spirit, and If any one destroy the temple of God, him will God 
destroy. Surely, then, we must ascribe honour to the living temples 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-15.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:59

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.15. 

of God, the living tabernacles of God. These while they lived stood 
with confidence before God. 

The Master Christ made the remains of the saints to be fountains of 
salvation to us, pouring forth manifold blessings and abounding in 
oil of sweet fragrance: and let no one disbelieve this. For if water 
burst in the desert from the steep and solid rock at God's will and 
from the jaw-bone of an ass to quench Samson's thirst, is it 
incredible that fragrant oil should burst forth from the martyrs' 
remains? By no means, at least to those who know the power of God 
and the honour which He accords His saints. 

In the law every one who toucheth a dead body was considered 
impure, but these are not dead. For from the time when He that is 
Himself life and the Author of life was reckoned among the dead, we 
do not call those dead who have fallen asleep in the hope of the 
resurrection and in faith on Him. For how could a dead body work 
miracles? How, therefore, are demons driven off by them, diseases 
dispelled, sick persons made well, the blind restored to sight, lepers 
purified, temptations and troubles overcome, and how does every 
good gift from the Father of lights come down through them to those 
who pray with sure faith? How much labour would you not undergo 
to find a patron to introduce you to a mortal king and speak to him 
on your behalf? Are not those, then, worthy of honour who are the 
patrons of the whole race, and make intercession to God for us? 
Yea, verily, we ought to give honour to them by raising temples to 
God in their name, bringing them fruit-offerings, honouring their 
memories and taking spiritual delight in them, in order that the joy of 
those who call on us may be ours, that in our attempts at worship we 
may not on the contrary cause them offence. For those who worship 
God will take pleasure in those things whereby God is worshipped, 
while His shield-bearers will be wrath at those things wherewith God 
is wroth. In psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, in contrition and 
in pity for the needy, let us believers worship the saints, as God also 
is most worshipped in such wise. Let us raise monuments to them 
and visible images, and let us ourselves become, through imitation 
of their virtues, living monuments and images of them. Let us give 
honour to her who bore God as being strictly and truly the Mother of 
God. Let us honour also the prophet John as forerunner and baptist, 
as apostle and martyr, For among them that are born of women there 
hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist, as saith the Lord, and 
he became the first to proclaim the Kingdom. Let us honour the 
apostles as the Lord's brothers, who saw Him face to face and 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-15.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:59

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.15. 

ministered to His passion, for whom God the Father did foreknow He 
also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of His Son, first 
apostles, second prophets, third pastors end teachers. Let us also 
honour the martyrs of the Lord chosen out of every class, as 
soldiers of Christ who have drunk His cup and were then baptized 
with the baptism of His life-bringing death, to be partakers of His 
passion and glory: of whom the leader is Stephen, the first deacon of 
Christ and apostle and first martyr. Also let us honour our holy 
fathers, the God-possessed ascetics, whose struggle was the longer 
and more toilsome one of the conscience: who wandered about in 
sheepskins and goatskins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented; they 
wandered in deserts and in mountains and in dens and caves of the 
earth, of whom the world was not worthy. Let us honour those who 
were prophets before grace, the patriarchs anti just men who 
foretold the Lord's coming. Let us carefully review the life of these 
men, and let us emulate their faith and love and hope and zeal and 
way of life, and endurance of sufferings and patience even to blood, 
in order that we may be sharers with them in their crowns of glory. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-15.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:06:59

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.16. 

CHAPTER XVI. Concerning Images. 

But since some find fault with us for worshipping and honouring the 
image of our Saviour and that of our Lady, and those, too, of the rest 
of the saints and servants of Christ, let them remember that in the 
beginning God created man after His own image. On what grounds, 
then, do we shew reverence to each other unless because we are 
made after God's image? For as Basil, that much-versed expounder 
of divine things, says, the honour given to the image passes over to 
the prototype. Now a prototype is that which is imaged, from which 
the derivative is obtained. Why was it that the Mosaic people 
honoured on all hands the tabernacle which bore an image and type 
of heavenly things, or rather of the whole creation? God indeed said 
to Moses, Look that thou make them after their pattern which was 
shewed thee in the mount. The Cherubim, too, which o'ershadow the 
mercy seat, are they not the work of men's hands? What, further, is 
the celebrated temple at Jerusalem? Is it not hand-made and 
fashioned by the skill of men? 

Moreover the divine Scripture blames those who worship graven 
images, but also those who sacrifice to demons. The Greeks 
sacrificed and the Jews also sacrificed: but the Greeks to demons 
and the Jews to God. And the sacrifice of the Greeks was rejected 
and condemned, but the sacrifice of the just was very acceptable to 
God. For Noah sacrificed, and God smelled a sweet savour, receiving 
the fragrance of the right choice and good-will towards Him. And so 
the graven images of the Greeks, since they were images of deities, 
were rejected and forbidden. 

But besides this who can make an imitation of the invisible, 
incorporeal, uncircumscribed, formless God? Therefore to give form 
to the Deity is the height of folly and impiety. And hence it is that in 
the Old Testament the use of images was not common. But after God 
in His bowels of pity became in truth man for our salvation, not as He 
was seen by Abraham in the semblance of a man, nor as He was 
seen by the prophets, but in being truly man, and after He lived upon 
the earth and dwelt among men, worked miracles, suffered, was 
crucified, rose again and was taken back to Heaven, since all these 
things actually took place and were seen by men, they were written 
for the remembrance and instruction of us who were not alive at that 
time in order that though we saw not, we may still, hearing and 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-16.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:59

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.16. 

believing, obtain the blessing of the Lord. But seeing that not every 
one has a knowledge of letters nor time for reading, the Fathers gave 
their sanction to depicting these events on images as being acts of 
great heroism, in order that they should form a concise memorial of 
them. Often, doubtless, when we have not the Lord's passion in mind 
and see the image of Christ's crucifixion, His saving passion is 
brought back to remembrance, and we fall down and worship not the 
material but that which is imaged: just as we do not worship the 
material of which the Gospels are made, nor the material of the 
Cross, but that which these typify. For wherein does the cross, that 
typifies the Lord, differ from a cross that does not do so? It is just 
the same also in the case of the Mother of the Lord. For the honour 
which we give to her is referred to Him Who was made of her 
incarnate. And similarly also the brave acts of holy men stir us up to 
be brave and to emulate and imitate their valour and to glorify God. 
For as we said, the honour that is given to the best of fellow-servants 
is a proof of good-will towards our common Lady, and the honour 
rendered to the image passes over to the prototype. But this is an 
unwritten tradition, just as is also the worshipping towards the East 
and the worship of the Cross, and very many other similar things. 

A certain tale, too, is told, how that when Augarus was king over the 
city of the Edessenes, he sent a portrait painter to paint a likeness of 
the Lord, and when the painter could not paint because of the 
brightness that shone from His countenance, the Lord Himself put a 
garment over His own divine and life-giving face and impressed on it 
an image of Himself and sent this to Augarus, to satisfy thus his 
desire. 

Moreover that the Apostles handed down much that was unwritten, 
Paul, the Apostle of the Gentiles, tells us in these words: Therefore, 
brethren, stand fast and hold the traditions which ye have been 
taught of us, whether by word or by epistle. And to the Corinthians 
he writes, Now I praise you, brethren, that ye remember me in all 
things, and keep the traditions as I have delivered them to you." 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-16.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:06:59

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.17. 

CHAPTER XVII. Concerning Scripture. 

It is one and the same God Whom both the Old and the New 
Testament proclaim, Who is praised and glorified in the Trinity: I am 
come, saith the Lord, not to destroy life law but to fulfil it. For He 
Himself worked out our salvation for which all Scripture and all 
mystery exists. And again, Search the Scriptures for they are they 
that testify of Me. And the Apostle says, God, Who at sundry times 
and in diverse manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the 
prophets, hath in these last days 

spoken unto us by His Son. Through the Holy Spirit, therefore, both 
the law and the prophets, the evangelists and apostles and pastors 
and teachers, spake. 

All Scripture, then, is given by inspiration of God and is also 
assuredly profitable. Wherefore to search the Scriptures is a work 
most fair and most profitable for souls. For just as the tree planted 
by the channels of waters, so also the soul watered by the divine 
Scripture is enriched and gives fruit in its season, viz. orthodox 
belief, and is adorned with evergreen leafage, I mean, actions 
pleasing to God. For through the Holy Scriptures we are trained to 
action that is pleasing to God, and untroubled contemplation. For in 
these we find both exhortation to every virtue and dissuasion from 
every vice. If, therefore, we are lovers of learning, we shall also be 
learned in many things. For by care and toil and the grace of God the 
Giver, all things are accomplished. For every one that asketh 
receiveth, and he that seeketh findeth, and to hint that knocketh it 
shall be opened. Wherefore let us knock at that very fair garden of 
the Scriptures, so fragrant and sweet and blooming, with its varied 
sounds of spiritual and divinely-inspired birds ringing all round our 
ears, laying hold of our hearts, comforting the mourner, pacifying the 
angry and filling him with joy everlasting: which sets our mind on the 
gold-gleaming, brilliant back of the divine dove, whose bright 
pinions bear up to the only-begotten Son and Heir of the 
Husbandman of that spiritual Vineyard and bring us through Him to 
the Father of Lights. But let us not knock carelessly but rather 
zealously and constantly: lest knocking we grow weary. For thus it 
will be opened to us. If we read once or twice and do not understand 
what we read, let us not grow weary, but let us persist, let us talk 
much, let us enquire. For ask thy Father, he saith, and He will shew 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-17.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:07:00

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.17. 

thee: thy elders and they will tell thee. For there is not in every man 
that knowledge. Let us draw of the fountain of the garden perennial 
and purest waters springing into life eternal. Here let us luxuriate, let 
us revel insatiate: for the Scriptures possess inexhaustible grace. 
But if we are able to pluck anything profitable from outside sources, 
there is nothing to forbid that. Let us become tried money-dealers, 
heaping up the true and pure gold and discarding the spurious. Let 
us keep the fairest sayings but let us throw to the dogs absurd gods 
and strange myths: for we might prevail most mightily against them 
through themselves. 

Observe, further, that there are two and twenty books of the Old 
Testament, one for each letter of the Hebrew tongue. For there are 
twenty-two letters of which five are double, and so they come to be 
twenty-seven. For the letters Caph, Mere, Nun, Pe, Sade are double. 
And thus the number of the books in this way is twenty-two, but is 
found to be twenty-seven because of the double character of five. 
For Ruth is joined on to Judges, and the Hebrews count them one 
book: the first and second books of Kings are counted one: and so 
are the third and fourth books of Kings: and also the first and second 
of Paraleipomena: and the first and second of Esdra. In this way, 
then, the books are collected together in four Pentateuchs and two 
others remain over, to form thus the canonical books. Five of them 
are of the Law, viz. Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, 
Deuteronomy. This which is the code of the Law, constitutes the first 
Pentateuch. Then comes another Pentateuch, the so-called 
Grapheia, or as they are called by some, the Hagiographa, which are 
the following: Jesus the Son of Nave, Judges along with Ruth, first 
and second Kings, which are one book, third and fourth Kings, 
which are one book, and the two books of the Paraleipomena which 
are one book. This is the second Pentateuch. The third Pentateuch is 
the books in verse, viz. Job, Psalms, Proverbs of Solomon, 
Ecclesiastes of Solomon and the Song of Songs of Solomon. The 
fourth Pentateuch is the Prophetical books, viz the twelve prophets 
constituting one book, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel. Then come 
the two books of Esdra made into one, and Esther. There are also the 
Panaretus, that is the Wisdom of Solomon, and the Wisdom of 
Jesus, which was published in Hebrew by the father of Sirach, and 
afterwards translated into Greek by his grandson, Jesus, the Son of 
Sirach. These are virtuous and noble, but are not counted nor were 
they placed in the ark. 

The New Testament contains four gospels, that according to 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-17.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:07:00

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.17. 

Matthew, that according to Mark, that according to Luke, that 
according to John: the Acts of the Holy Apostles by Luke the 
Evangelist: seven catholic epistles, viz. one of James, two of Peter, 
three of John, one of Jude: fourteen letters of the Apostle Paul: the 
Revelation of John the Evangelist: the Canons of the holy apostles, 
by Clement. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-17.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:07:00

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.18. 

CHAPTER XVIII. Regarding the things said concerning Christ. 

The things said concerning Christ fall into four generic modes. For 
some fit Him even before the incarnation, others in the union, others 
after the union, and others after the resurrection. Also of those that 
refer to the period before the incarnation there are six modes: for 
some of them declare the union of nature and the identity in essence 
with the Father, as this, I and My Father are one: also this, He that 
hath seen Me hath seen the Father: and this, Who being in the form 
of God, and so forth. Others declare the perfection of subsistence, 
as these, Son of God, and the Express Image of His person, and 
Messenger of great counsel, Wonderful Counsellor, and the like. 

Again, others declare the indwelling of the subsistences in one 
another, as, I am in the Father and the Father in Me; and the 
inseparable foundation, as, for instance, the Word, Wisdom, Power, 
Effulgence. For the word is inseparably established in the mind (and 
it is the essential mind that I mean), and so also is wisdom, and 
power in him that is powerful, and effulgence in the light, all 
springing forth from these. 

And others make known the fact of His origin from the Father as 
cause, for instance My Father is greater than I. For from Him He 
derives both His being and all that He has: His being was by 
generative and not by creative means, as, I came forth from the 
Father and am come, and I live by the Father. But all that He hath is 
not His by free gift or by teaching, but in a causal sense, as, The Son 
can do nothing of Himself but what He seeth the Father do. For if the 
Father is not, neither is the Son. For the Son is of the Father and in 
the Father and with the Father, and not after the Father. In like 
manner also what He doeth is of Him and with Him. For there is one 
and the same, not similar but the same, will and energy and power in 
the Father, Son and Holy Spirit. 

Moreover, other things are said as though the Father's good-will was 
fulfilled through His energy, and not as through an instrument or a 
servant, but as through His essential and hypostatic Word and 
Wisdom and Power, because but one action is observed in Father 
and Son, as for example, All things were made by Him, and He sent 
His Word and healed them, and That they may believe that Than hast 
sent Me. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-18.htm (1 of 6)2006-06-01 18:07:00

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.18. 

Some, again, have a prophetic sense, and of these some are in the 
future tense: for instance, He shall come openly, and this from 
Zechariah, Behold, thy King cometh unto thee, and this from Micah, 
Behold, the Lord cometh out of His place and will came down and 
tread upon the high places of the earth. But others, though future, 
are put in the past tense, as, for instance, This is our God: Therefore 
He was seen upon the earth and dwell among men, and The Lord 
created me in the beginning of His ways for His works, and 
Wherefore God, thy God, anointed thee with the oil of gladness 
above thy fellows, and such like. 

The things said, then, that refer to the period before the union will be 
applicable to Him even after the union: but those that refer to the 
period after the union will not be applicable at all before the union, 
unless indeed in a prophetic sense, as we said. Those that refer to 
the time of the union have three modes. For when our discourse 
dears with the higher aspect, we speak of the deification of the flesh, 
and His assumption of the Word and exceeding exaltation, and so 
forth, making manifest the riches that are added to the flesh tram the 
union and natural conjunction with the most high God the Word. And 
when our discourse deals with the lower aspect, we speak of the 
incarnation of God the Word, His becoming man, His emptying of 
Himself, His poverty, His humility. For these and such like are 
imposed upon the Word and God through His admixture with 
humanity. When again we keep both sides in view at the same time, 
we speak of union, community, anointing, natural conjunction, 
conformation and the like. The former two modes, then, have their 
reason in this third mode. For through the union it is made clear 
what either has obtained from the intimate junction with and 
permeation through the other. For through the union in subsistence 
the flesh is said to be deified and to become God and to be equally 
God with the Word; and God the Word is said to be made flesh, and 
to become man, and is called creature and last: not in the sense that 
the two natures are converted into one compound nature (for it is not 
possible for the opposite natural qualities to exist at the same time in 
one nature), but in the sense that the two natures are united in 
subsistence and permeate one another without confusion or 
transmutation The permeation moreover did not come of the flesh 
but of the divinity: for it is impossible that the flesh should permeate 
through the divinity: but the divine nature once permeating through 
the flesh gave also to the flesh the same ineffable power of 
permeation; and this indeed is what we call union. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-18.htm (2 of 6)2006-06-01 18:07:00

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.18. 

Note, too, that in the case of the first and second modes of those that 
belong to the period of the union, reciprocation is observed. For 
when we speak about the flesh, we use the terms deification and 
assumption of the Word and exceeding exaltation and anointing. For 
these are derived from divinity, but are observed in connection with 
the flesh. And when we speak about the Word, we use the terms 
emptying, incarnation, becoming man, humility and the like: and 
these, as we said, are imposed on the Word and God through the 
flesh. For He endured these things in person of His own free-will. 

Of the things that refer to the period after the union there are three 
modes. The first declares His divine nature, as, I am in the Father 
and the Father in Me, and I and the Father are one: and all those 
things which are affirmed of Him before His assumption of humanity, 
these will be affirmed of Him even after His assumption of humanity, 
with this exception, that He did not assume the flesh and its natural 
properties. 

The second declares His human nature, as, Now ye seek to kill Me, a 
man that hath told you the truth, and Even so must the Son of Man 
be lifted up, and the like. 

Further, of the statements made and written about Christ the Saviour 
after the manner of men, whether they deal with sayings or actions, 
there are six modes. For some of them were done or said naturally in 
accordance with the incarnation; for instance, His birth from a virgin, 
His growth and progress with age, His hunger, thirst, weariness, 
fear, sleep, piercing with nails, death and all such like natural and 
innocent passions. For in all these there is a mixture of the divine 
and human, although they are held to belong in reality to the body, 
the divine suffering none of these, but procuring through them our 
salvation. 

Others are of the nature of ascription, as Christ's question, Where 
have ye laid Lazarus? His running to the fig-tree, His shrinking, that 
is, His drawing back, His praying, and His making as though He 
would have gone He in need of these or similar things, but only 
because His form was that of a man as necessity and expediency 
demanded. For example, the praying was to shew that He is not 
opposed to God, for He gives honour to the Father as the cause of 
Himself: and the question was not put in ignorance but to shew that 
He is in truth man as well as God; and the drawing back is to teach 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-18.htm (3 of 6)2006-06-01 18:07:00

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.18. 

us not to be impetuous nor to give ourselves up. 

Others again are said in the manner of association and relation, as, 
My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me? and He hath made 
Him to be sin for us, Who knew no sin, and being made a curse for 
us; also, Then shall the Son also Himself be subject unto Him that 
put all things under Him. For neither as God nor as man was He ever 
forsaken by the Father, nor did He become sin or a curse, nor did He 
require to be made subject to the Father. For as God He is equal to 
the Father and not opposed to Him nor subjected to Him; and as 
God, He was never at any time disobedient to His Begetter to make it 
necessary for Him to make Him subject. Appropriating, then, our 
person and ranking Himself with us, He used these words. For we 
are bound in the fetters of sin and the curse as faithless and 
disobedient, and therefore forsaken. 

Others are said by reason of distinction in thought. For if you divide 
in thought things that are inseparable in actual truth, to cut the flesh 
from the Word, the terms 'servant' and 'ignorant' are used of Him, for 
indeed He was of a subject and ignorant nature, and except that it 
was united with God the Word, His flesh was servile and ignorant. 
But because of the union in subsistence with God the Word it was 
neither servile nor ignorant. In this way, too, He called the Father His 
God. 

Others again are for the purpose of revealing Him to us and 
strengthening our faith, as, And now, O Father, glorify Thou Me with 
the glory which I had with Thee, before the world was. For He 
Himself was glorified and is glorified, but His glory was not 
manifested nor confirmed to us. Also that which the apostle said, 
Declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of 
holiness, by the resurrection from the dead. For by the miracles and 
the resurrection and the coming of the Holy Spirit it was manifested 
and confirmed to the world that He is the Son of God. And this too, 
The Child grew in wisdom and grace. 

Others again have reference to His appropriation of the personal life 
of the Jews, in numbering Himself among the Jews, as He saith to 
the Samaritan woman, Ye worship ye know not what: we know what 
we worship, far salvation is of the Jews. 

The third mode is one which declares the one subsistence and 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-18.htm (4 of 6)2006-06-01 18:07:00

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.18. 

brings out the dual nature: for instance, And I live by the Father: so 
he that eateth Me, even he shall live by Me. And this: I go to My 
Father and ye see Me no more. And this: They would not have 
crucified the Lord of Glory. And this: And no man hath ascended up 
to heaven but He that came down from heaven, even the Son of Man 
which is in heaven, and such like. 

Again of the affirmations that refer to the period after the 
resurrection some are suitable to God, as, Baptizing them in the 
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, for here 
'Son' is clearly used as God; also this, And lo, I am with you alway, 
even unto the end of the world, and other similar ones. For He is with 
us as God. Others are suitable to man, as, They held Him by the feet, 
and There they will see Me, and so forth. 

Further, of those referring to the period after the Resurrection that 
are suitable to man there are different modes. For some did actually 
take place, yet not according to nature, but according to 
dispensation, in order to confirm the fact that the very body, which 
suffered, rose again; such are the weals, the eating and the drinking 
after the resurrection. Others took place actually and naturally, as 
changing from place to place without trouble and passing in through 
closed gates. Others have the character of simulation, as, He made 
as though He would have gone further. Others are appropriate to the 
double nature, as, I ascend unto My Father and your Father, and My 
God and our God, and The King of Glory shall carte in, and He sat 
down on the right hand of the majesty on High. Finally others are to 
be understood as though He were ranking Himself with us, in the 
manner of separation in pure thought, as, My God and your God. 

Those then that are sublime must be assigned to the divine nature, 
which is superior to passion and body: and those that are humble 
must be ascribed to the human nature; and those that are common 
must be attributed to the compound, that is, the one Christ, Who is 
God and man. And it should be understood that both belong to one 
and the same Jesus Christ, our Lord. For if we know what is proper 
to each, and perceive that both are performed by one and the same, 
we shall have the true faith and shall not go astray. And from all 
these the difference between the united natures is recognised, and 
the fact that, as the most godly Cyril says, they are not identical in 
the natural quality of their divinity and humanity. But yet there is but 
one Son and Christ and Lord: and as He is one, He has also but one 
person, the unity in subsistence being in nowise broken up into 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-18.htm (5 of 6)2006-06-01 18:07:00

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.18. 

parts by the recognition of the difference of the natures. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-18.htm (6 of 6)2006-06-01 18:07:00

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.19. 

CHAPTER XIX. That God is not the cause of evils. 

It is to be observed that it is the custom in the Holy Scripture to 
speak of God's permission as His energy, as when the apostle says 
in the Epistle to the Romans, Hath not the potter power over the clay, 
of the same lump to make one vessel unto honour and another unto 
dishonour? And for this reason, that He Himself makes this or that. 
For He is Himself alone the Maker of all things; yet it is not He 
Himself that fashions noble or ignoble things, but the personal 
choice of each one. And this is manifest from what the same Apostle 
says in the Second Epistle to Timothy, In a great house there are not 
only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth: and 
some to honour and some to dishonour. If a man therefore purge 
himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honour sanctified, and 
meet for the master's use, and prepared unto every good work. And 
it is evident that the purification must be voluntary: for if a man, he 
saith, purge himself. And the consequent antistrophe responds, "If a 
man purge not himself he will be a vessel to dishonour, unmeet for 
the master's use and fit only to be broken in pieces." Wherefore this 
passage that we have quoted and this, God hath concluded them all 
in unbelief, and this, God hath given them the spirit of slumber, eyes 
that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear, all 
these must be understood not as though God Himself were 
energising, but as though God were permitting, both because of freewill and because goodness knows no compulsion. 

His permission, therefore, is usually spoken of in the Holy Scripture 
as His energy and work. Nay, even when He says that God creates 
evil things, and that there is no evil in a city that the Lord hath not 
done, he does not mean by these words that the Lord is the cause of 
evil, but the word 'evil' is used in two ways, with two meanings. For 
sometimes it means what is evil by nature, and this is the opposite of 
virtue and the will of God: and sometimes it means that which is evil 
and oppressive to our sensation, that is to say, afflictions and 
calamities. Now these are seemingly evil because they are painful, 
but in reality are good. For to those who understand they became 
ambassadors of conversion and salvation. The Scripture says that of 
these God is the Author. 

It is, moreover, to be observed that of these, too, we are the cause: 
for involuntary evils are the offspring of voluntary ones. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-19.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:07:01

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.19. 

This also should be recognised, that it is usual in the Scriptures for 
some things that ought to be considered as effects to be stated in a 
causal sense, as, Against Thee, Thee only, have I sinned and done 
this evil in Thy sight, that Than mightest be justified when Thou 
speakest, and prevail when Thou judgest. For the sinner did not sin 
in order that God might prevail, nor again did God require our sin in 
order that He might by it be revealed as victor. For above 
comparison He wins the victor's prize against all, even against those 
who are sinless, being Maker, incomprehensible, uncreated, and 
possessing natural and not adventitious glory. But it is because 
when we sin God is not unjust in His anger against us; and when He 
pardons the penitent He is shewn victor over our wickedness. But it 
is not for this that we sin, but because the thing so turns out. It is 
just as if one were sitting at work and a friend stood near by, and one 
said, My friend came in order that I might do no work that day. The 
friend, however, was not present in order that the man should do no 
work, but such was the result. For being occupied with receiving his 
friend he did not work. These things, too, are spoken of as effects 
because affairs so turned out. Moreover, God does not wish that He 
alone should be just, but that all should, so far as possible, be made 
like unto Him. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-19.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:07:01

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.20. 

CHAPTER XX. That there are not two Kingdoms. 

That there are not two kingdoms, one good and one bad, we shall 
see from this. For good and evil are opposed to one another and 
mutually destructive, and cannot exist in one another or with one 
another. Each of them, therefore, in its own division will belong to 
the whole, and first they will he circumscribed, not by the whole 
alone but also each of them by part of the whole. 

Next I ask, who it is that assigns to each its place. For they will not 
affirm that they have come to a friendly agreement with, or been 
reconciled to, one another. For evil is not evil when it is at peace 
with, and reconciled to, goodness, nor is goodness good when it is 
on amicable terms with evil. But if He Who has marked off to each of 
these its own sphere of action is something different from them, He 
must the rather be God. 

One of two things indeed is necessary, either that they come in 
contact with and destroy one another, or that there exists some 
intermediate place where neither goodness nor evil exists, 
separating both from one another, like a partition. And so there will 
be no longer two but three kingdoms. 

Again, one of these alternatives is necessary, either that they are at 
peace, which is quite incompatible with evil (for that which is at 
peace is not evil), or they are at strife, which is incompatible with 
goodness (for that which is at strife is not perfectly good), or the evil 
is at strife and the good does not retaliate, but is destroyed by the 
evil, or they are ever in trouble and distress, which is not a mark of 
goodness. There is, therefore, but one kingdom, delivered from all 
evil. 

But if this is so, they say, whence comes evil? For it is quite 
impossible that evil should originate from goodness. We answer 
then, that evil is nothing else than absence of goodness and a 
lapsing from what is natural into what is unnatural: for nothing evil is 
natural. For all things, whatsoever God made, are very good, so far 
as they were made: if, therefore, they remain just as they were 
created, they are very good, but when they voluntarily depart from 
what is natural and turn to what is unnatural, they slip into evil. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-20.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:07:01

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.20. 

By nature, therefore, all things are servants of the Creator and obey 
Him. Whenever, then, any of His creatures voluntarily rebels and 
becomes disobedient to his Maker, he introduces evil into himself. 
For evil is not any essence nor a property of essence, but an 
accident, that is, a voluntary deviation from what is natural into what 
is unnatural, which is sin. 

Whence, then, comes sin? It is an invention of the free-will of the 
devil. Is the devil, then, evil? In so far as he was brought into 
existence he is not evil but good. For he was created by his Maker a 
bright and very brilliant angel, endowed with free-will as being 
rational. But he voluntarily departed from the virtue that is natural 
and came into the darkness of evil, being far removed from God, 
Who alone is good and can give life and light. For from Him every 
good thing derives its goodness, and so far as it is separated from 
Him in will (for it is not in place), it falls into evil. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-20.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:07:01

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.21. 

CHAPTER XXI. The purpose for which God in His 
foreknowledge created persons who would sin and not repent. 

God in His goodness brought what exists into being out of nothing, 
and has foreknowledge of what will exist in the future. If, therefore, 
they were not to exist in the future, they would neither be evil in the 
future nor would they be foreknown. For knowledge is of what exists 
and foreknowledge is of what will surely exist in the future. For 
simple being comes first and then good or evil being. But if the very 
existence of those, who through the goodness of God are in the 
future to exist, were to be prevented by the fact that they were to 
become evil of their own choice, evil would have prevailed over the 
goodness of God. Wherefore God makes all His works good, but 
each becomes of its own choice good or evil. Although, then, the 
Lord said, Goad were it for that man that he had never been barn, He 
said it in condemnation not of His own creation but of the evil which 
His own creation had acquired by his own choice and through his 
own heedlessness. For the heedlessness that marks man's judgment 
made His Creator's beneficence of no profit to him. It is just as if any 
one, when he had obtained riches and dominion from a king, were to 
lord it over his benefactor, who, when he has worsted him, will 
punish him as he deserves, if he should see him keeping hold of the 
sovereignty to the end. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20Provv...y/001%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-21.htm2006-06-01 18:07:01

 
 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.22. 

CHAPTER XXII. Concerning the law of God and the law of sin. 

The Deity is good and more than good, and so is His will. For that 
which God wishes is good. Moreover the precept, which teaches 
this, is law, that we, holding by it, may walk in light: and the 
transgression of this precept is sin, and this continues to exist on 
account of the assault of the devil and our unconstrained and 
voluntary reception of it. And this, too, is called law. 

And so the law of God, settling in our mind, draws it towards itself 
and pricks our conscience. And our conscience, too, is called a law 
of our mind. Further, the assault of the wicked one, that is the law of 
sin, settling in the members of our flesh, makes its assault upon us 
through it. For by once voluntarily transgressing the law of God and 
receiving the assault of the wicked one, we gave entrance to it, being 
sold by ourselves to sin. Wherefore our body is readily impelled to it. 
And so the savour and perception of sin that is stored up in our 
body, that is to say, lust and pleasure of the body, is law in the 
members of our flesh. 

Therefore the law of my mind, that is, the conscience, sympathises 
with the law of God, that is, the precept, and makes that its will. But 
the law of sin, that is to say, the assault made through the law that is 
in our members, or through the lust and inclination and movement of 
the body and of the irrational part of the soul, is in opposition to the 
law of my mind, that is to conscience, and takes me captive (even 
though I make the law of God my will and set my love on it, and make 
not sin my will), by reason of commixture: and through the softness 
of pleasure and the lust of the body and of the irrational part of the 
soul, as I said, it leads me astray and induces me to become the 
servant of sin. But what the law could not do, in that it was weak 
through the flesh, God, sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful 
flesh (for He assumed flesh but not sin) condemned sin in the flesh, 
that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us who walk 
not after the flesh but in the Spirit. For the Spirit helpeth our 
infirmities and affordeth power to the law of our mind, against the 
law that is in our members. For the verse, we know not what we 
should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit itself maketh intercession 
with groanings that cannot be uttered, itself teacheth us what to pray 
for. Hence it is impossible to carry out the precepts of the Lord 
except by patience and prayer. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-22.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:07:01

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.22. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-22.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:07:01

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.23. 

CHAPTER XXIII. Against the Jews on the question Sabbath. 

The seventh day is called the Sabbath and signifies rest. For in it 
God rested from all His works, as the divine Scripture says: and so 
the number of the days goes up to seven and then circles back again 
and begins at the first. This is the precious number with the Jews. 
God having ordained that it should be held in honour, and that in no 
chance fashion but with the imposition of most heavy penalties for 
the transgression. And it was not in a simple fashion that He 
ordained this, but for certain reasons understood mystically by the 
spiritual and clear-sighted. 

So far, indeed, as I in my ignorance know, to begin with inferior and 
more dense things, God, knowing the denseness of the Israelites 
and their carnal love and propensity towards matter in everything, 
made this law: first, in order that the servant and the cattle should 
rest as it is written, for the righteous man regardeth the life of his 
beast: next, in order that when they take their ease from the 
distraction of material things, they may gather together unto God, 
spending the whole of the seventh day in psalms and hymns and 
spiritual songs and the study of the divine Scriptures and resting in 
God. For when the law did not exist and there was no divinelyinspired Scripture, the Sabbath was not consecrated to God. But 
when the divinely-inspired Scripture was given by Moses, the 
Sabbath was consecrated to God in order that on it they, who do not 
dedicate their whole life to God, and who do not make their desire 
subservient to the as though to a Father, but are like foolish 
servants, may on that day talk much concerning the exercise of it, 
and may abstract a small, truly a most insignificant, portion of their 
life for the service of God, and this from fear of the chastisements 
and punishments which threaten transgressors. For the law is not 
made for a righteous man but for the unrighteous. Moses, of a truth, 
was the first to abide fasting with God for forty days and again for 
another forty, and thus doubtless to afflict himself with hunger on 
the Sabbaths although the law forbade self-affliction on the Sabbath. 
But if they should object that this took place before the law, what will 
they say about Elias the Thesbite who accomplished a journey of 
forty days on one meal? For he, by thus afflicting himself on the 
Sabbaths not only with hunger but with the forty days' journeying, 
broke the Sabbath: and yet God, Who gave the law, was not wroth 
with him but shewed Himself to him on Choreb as a reward for his 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-23.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:07:02

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.23. 

virtue. And what will they say about Daniel? Did he not spend three 
weeks without food? And again, did not all Israel circumcise the 
child on the Sabbath, if it happened to be the eighth day after birth? 
And do they not hold the great fast which the law enjoins if it falls on 
the Sabbath? And further, do not the priests and the Levites profane 
the Sabbath in the works of the tabernacle and yet are held 
blameless? Yea, if an ox should fall into a pit on the Sabbath, he who 
draws it forth is blameless, while he who neglects to do so is 
condemned. And did not all the Israelites compass the walls of 
Jericho bearing the Ark of God for seven days, in which assuredly 
the Sabbath was included. As I said, therefore, for the purpose of 
securing leisure to worship God in order that they might, both 
servant and beast of burden, devote a very small share to Him and 
be at rest, the observance of the Sabbath was devised for the carnal 
that were still childish and in the bonds of the elements of the world, 
and unable to conceive of anything beyond the body and the letter. 
But when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth His Onlybegotten Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem 
them that were under the law that we might receive the adoption of 
sons. For to as many of us as received Him, He gave power to 
become sons of God, even to them that believe on Him. So that we 
are no longer servants but sons: no longer under the law but under 
grace: no longer do we serve God in part from fear, but we are bound 
to dedicate to Him the whole span of our life, and cause that servant, 
I mean wrath and desire, to cease from sin and bid it devote itself to 
the service of God, always directing our whole desire towards God 
and arming our wrath against the enemies of God: and likewise we 
hinder that beast of burden, that is the body, from the servitude of 
sin, and urge it forwards to assist to the uttermost the divine 
precepts. 

These are the things which the spiritual law of Christ enjoins on us 
and those who observe that become superior to the law of Moses. 
For when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part 
shall be done away: and when the covering of the law, that is, the 
veil, is rent asunder through the crucifixion of the Saviour, and the 
Spirit shines forth with tongues of fire, the letter shall be done away 
with, bodily things shall come to an end, the law of servitude shall be 
fulfilled, and the law of liberty be bestowed on us. Yea we shall 
celebrate the perfect rest of bureau nature, I mean the day after the 
resurrection, on which the Lord Jesus, the Author of Life and our 
Saviour, shall lead us into the heritage promised to those who serve 
God in the spirit, a heritage into which He entered Himself as our 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-23.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:07:02

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.23. 

forerunner after He rose from the dead, and whereon, the gates of 
Heaven being opened to Him, He took His seat in bodily form at the 
right hand of the Father, where those who keep the spiritual law shall 
also come. 

What belongs to us, therefore, who walk by the spirit and not by the 
letter, is the complete abandonment of carnal things, the spiritual 
service and communion with God. For circumcision is the 
abandonment of carnal pleasure and of whatever is superfluous and 
unnecessary. For the foreskin is nothing else than the skin which it 
superfluous to the organ of lust. And, indeed, every pleasure which 
does not arise from God nor is in God is superfluous to pleasure: 
and of that the foreskin is the type. The Sabbath, moreover, is the 
cessation from sin; so that both things happen to be one, and so 
both together, when observed by those who are spiritual, do not 
bring about any breach of the law at all. 

Further, observe that the number seven denotes all the present time, 
as the most wise Solomon says, to give a portion to seven and also 
to eight. And David, the divine singer when he composed the eighth 
psalm, sang of the future restoration after the resurrection from the 
dead. Since the Law, therefore, enjoined that the seventh day should 
be spent in rest from carnal things and devoted to spiritual things, it 
was a mystic indication to the true Israelite who had a mind to see 
God, that he should through all time offer himself to God and rise 
higher than carnal things. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-23.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:07:02

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.24. 

CHAPTER XXIV. Concerning Virginity. 

Carnal men abuse virginity, and the pleasure-loving bring forward 
the following verse in proof, Cursed be every one that raiseth not up 
seed in Israel. But we, made confident by God the Word that was 
made flesh of the Virgin, answer that virginity was implanted in 
man's nature from above and in the beginning. For man was formed 
of virgin soil. From Adam alone was Eve created. In Paradise 
virginity held sway. Indeed, Divine Scripture tells that both Adam and 
Eve were naked and were not ashamed. But after their transgression 
they knew that they were naked, and in their shame they sewed 
aprons for themselves. And when, after the transgression, Adam 
heard, dust thou art and unto dust shalt thou return, when death 
entered into the world by reason of the transgression, then Adam 
knew Eve his wife, and she conceived and bare seed. So that to 
prevent the wearing out and destruction of the race by death, 
marriage was devised that the race of men may be preserved 
through the procreation of children. 

But they will perhaps ask, what then is the meaning of "male and 
female," and "Be fruitful and multiply?" In answer we shall say that 
"Be fruitful and multiply" does not altogether refer to the multiplying 
by the marriage connection. For God had power to multiply the race 
also in different ways, if they kept the precept unbroken to the end. 
But God, Who knoweth all things before they have existence, 
knowing in His foreknowledge that they would fall into transgression 
in the future and be condemned to death, anticipated this and made 
"male and female," and bade them "be fruitful and multiply." Let us, 
then, proceed on our way and see the glories of virginity: and this 
also includes chastity. 

Noah when he was commanded to enter the ark and was entrusted 
with the preservation of the seed of the world received this 
command, Go in, saith the Lord, thou and thy sons, and thy wife, and 
thy sons' wives. He separated them from their wives in order that 
with purity they might escape the flood and that shipwreck of the 
whole world. After the cessation of the flood, however, He said, Go 
forth of the ark, thou and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons' wives. 
Lo, again, marriage is granted for the sake of the multiplication of the 
race. Next, Elias, the fire-breathing charioteer and sojourner in 
heaven did not embrace celibacy, and yet was not his virtue attested 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-24.htm (1 of 3)2006-06-01 18:07:02

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.24. 

by his super-human ascension? Who closed the heavens? Who 
raised the dead? Who divided Jordan? Was it not the virginal Elias? 
And did not Elisha, his disciple, after he had given proof of equal 
virtue, ask and obtain as an inheritance a double portion of the grace 
of the Spirit? What of the three youths? Did they not by practising 
virginity become mightier than fire, their bodies through virginity 
being made proof against the fire? And was it not Daniel's body that 
was so hardened by virginity that the wild beasts' teeth could not 
fasten in it. Did not God, when He wished the Israelites to see Him, 
bid them purify the body? Did not the priests purify themselves and 
so approach the temple's shrine and offer victims? And did not the 
law call chastity the great vow? 

The precept of the law, therefore, is to be taken in a more spiritual 
sense. For there is spiritual seed which is conceived through the 
love and fear of God in the spiritual womb, travailing and bringing 
forth the spirit of salvation. And in this sense must be understood 
this verse: Blessed is he who hath seed in Zion and posterity in 
Jerusalem. For does it mean that, although he be a whoremonger 
and a drunkard and an idolater, he is still blessed if only he hath 
seed in Sion and posterity in Jerusalem? No one in his senses will 
say this. 

Virginity is the rule of life among the angels, the property of all 
incorporeal nature. This we say without speaking ill of marriage: God 
forbid! (for we know that the Lord blessed marriage by His presence, 
and we know him who said, Marriage is and the bed undefiled), but 
knowing that virginity is better than marriage, however good. For 
among the virtues, equally as among the vices, there are higher and 
lower grades. We know that all mortals after the first parents of the 
race are the offspring of marriage. For the first parents were the work 
of virginity and not of marriage. But celibacy is, as we said, an 
imitation of the angels. Wherefore virginity is as much more 
honourable than marriage, as the angel is higher than man. But why 
do I say angel? Christ Himself is the glory of virginity, who was not 
only-begotten of the Father without beginning or emission or 
connection, but also became man in our image, being made flesh for 
our sakes of the Virgin without connection, and manifesting in 
Himself the true and perfect virginity. Wherefore, although He did not 
enjoin that on us by law (for as He said, all men cannot receive this 
saying), yet in actual fact He taught us that and gave us strength for 
it. For it is surely clear to every one that virginity now is flourishing 
among men. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-24.htm (2 of 3)2006-06-01 18:07:02

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.24. 

Good indeed is the procreation of children enjoined by the law, and 
good is marriage on account of fornications, for it does away with 
these, and by lawful intercourse does not permit the madness of 
desire to he caromed into unlawful acts. Good is marriage for those 
who have no continence: but that virginity is better which increases 
the fruitfulness of the soul and offers to God the seasonable fruit of 
prayer. Marriage is honourable and the bed undefiled, but 
whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-24.htm (3 of 3)2006-06-01 18:07:02

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.25. 

CHAPTER XXV. Concerning the Circumcision. 

The Circumcision was given to Abraham before the law, after the 
blessings, after the promise, as a sign separating him and his 
offspring and his household from the Gentiles with whom he lived. 
And this is evident, for when the Israelites passed forty years alone 
by themselves in the desert, having no intercourse with any other 
race, all that were horn in the desert were uncircumcised: but when 
Joshua led them across Jordan, they were circumcised, and a 
second law of circumcision was instituted. For in Abraham's time the 
law of circumcision was given, and for the forty years in the desert it 
fell into abeyance. And again for the second time God gave the law 
of Circumcision to Joshua, after the crossing of Jordan, according 
as it is written in the book of Joshua, the son of Nun: At that time the 
Lord said unto Joshua, Make thee knives of stone from the sharp 
rock, and assemble and circumcise the sons of Israel a second time; 
and a little later: For the children of Israel walked forty and two years 
in the wilderness of Battaris, till all the people that were men of war, 
which came out of Egypt, were uncircumcised, because they obeyed 
not the voice of the Lord: unto whom the Lord sware that He would 
not shew them the goad land, which the Lord swore unto their 
fathers that He would give them, a land that floweth with milk and 
honey. And their children, whom He raised up in their stead, them 
Joshua circumcised: for they were uncircumcised, because they had 
not circumcised them by the way. So that the circumcision was a 
sign, dividing Israel from the Gentiles with whom they dwelt. 

It was, moreover, a figure of baptism. For just as the circumcision 
does not cut off a useful member of the body but only a useless 
superfluity, so by the holy baptism we are circumcised from sin, and 
sin clearly is, so to speak, the superfluous part of desire and not 
useful desire. For it is quite impossible that any one should have no 
desire at all nor ever experience the taste of pleasure. But the 
useless part of pleasure, that is to say, useless desire and pleasure, 
it is this that is sin from which holy baptism circumcises us, giving 
us as a token the precious cross on the brow, not to divide us from 
the Gentiles (for all the nations received baptism and were sealed 
with the sign of the Cross), but to distinguish in each nation the 
faithful from the Faithless. Wherefore, when the truth is revealed, 
circumcision is a senseless figure and shade. So circumcision is 
now superfluous and contrary to holy baptism. For he who is 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-25.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:07:02

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.25. 

circumcised is a debtor to do the whale law. Further, the Lord was 
circumcised that He might fulfil the law: and He fulfilled the whole 
law and observed the Sabbath that He might fulfil and establish the 
law. Moreover after He was baptized and the Holy Spirit had 
appeared to men, descending on Him in the form of a dove, from that 
time the spiritual service and conduct of life and the Kingdom of 
Heaven was preached. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-25.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:07:02

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.26. 

CHAPTER XXVI. Concerning the Antichrist. 

It should be known that the Antichrist is bound to come. Every one, 
therefore, who confesses not that the Son of God came in the flesh 
and is perfect God and became perfect man, after being God, is 
Antichrist. But in a peculiar and special sense he who comes at the 
consummation of the age is called Antichrist. First, then, it is 
requisite that the Gospel should be preached among all nations, as 
the Lord said, and then he will come to refute the impious Jews. For 
the Lord said to them: I am come in My Father's name and ye receive 
Me not: if another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive. 
And the apostle says, Because they received not the love of the truth 
that they might be saved, for this cause Gad shall send them a 
strong delusion that they should believe a lie: that they all might be 
damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in 
unrighteousness. The Jews accordingly did not receive the Lord 
Jesus Christ who was the Son of God and God, but receive the 
impostor who calls himself God. For that he will assume the name of 
God, the angel teaches Daniel, saying these words, Neither shall he 
regard the God of his fathers. And the apostle says: Let no man 
deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come except there 
come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son, of 
perdition: who opposeth and exalleth himself above all that is called 
Gad or that is worshipped, so that he sitteth in the temple of God, 
shewing himself that he is God; in the temple of God he said; not our 
temple, but the old Jewish temple. For he will come not to us but to 
the Jews: not for Christ or the things of Christ: wherefore he is 
called Antichrist. 

First, therefore, it is necessary that the Gospel should be preached 
among all nations: And then shall that wicked one be revealed, even 
him whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power and 
signs and lying wonders, with all deceivableness of unrighteousness 
in them that perish, whom the Lord shall consume with the word of 
His mouth and shall destroy with the brightness of His coming. The 
devil himself, therefore does not become man in the way that the 
Lord was made man. God forbid! but he becomes man as the 
offspring of fornication and receiveth all the energy of Satan. For 
God, foreknowing the strangeness of the choice that he would make, 
allows the devil to take up his abode in him. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-26.htm (1 of 2)2006-06-01 18:07:03

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.26. 

He is, therefore, as we said, the offspring of fornication and is 
nurtured in secret, and on a sudden he rises up and rebels and 
assumes rule. And in the beginning of his rule, or rather tyranny, he 
assumes the role of sanctity. But when he becomes master he 
persecutes the Church of God and displays all his wickedness. But 
he will come with signs and lying wonders, fictitious and not real, 
and he will deceive and lead away from the living God those whose 
mind rests on an unsound and unstable foundation, so that even the 
elect shall, if it be possible, be made to stumble. 

But Enoch and Elias the Thesbite shall be sent and shall turn the 
hearts of the fathers to the children, that is, the synagogue to our 
Lord Jesus Christ and the preaching of the apostles: and they will be 
destroyed by him. And the Lord shall come out of heaven, just as the 
holy apostles beheld Him going into heaven perfect God and perfect 
man, with glory and power, and will destroy the man of lawlessness, 
the son of destruction, with the breath of His mouth. Let no one, 
therefore, look for the Lord to come from earth, but out of Heaven, as 
He himself has made sure. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-26.htm (2 of 2)2006-06-01 18:07:03

 
 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.27. 

CHAPTER XXVII. Concerning the Resurrection. 

We believe also in the resurrection of the dead. For there will be in 
truth, there will be, a resurrection of the dead, and by resurrection 
we mean resurrection of bodies. For resurrection is the second state 
of that which has fallen. For the souls are immortal, and hence how 
can they rise again? For if they define death as the separation of 
soul and body, resurrection surely is the re-union of soul and body, 
and the second state of the living creature that has suffered 
dissolution and downfall. It is, then, this very body, which is 
corruptible and liable to dissolution, that will rise again incorruptible. 
For He, who made it in the beginning of the sand of the earth, does 
not lack the power to raise it up again after it has been dissolved 
again and returned to the earth from which it was taken, in 
accordance with the reversal of the Creator's judgment. 

For if there is no resurrection, let us eat and drink: let us pursue a 
life of pleasure and enjoyment. If there is no resurrection, wherein do 
we differ from the irrational brutes? If there is no resurrection, let us 
hold the wild beasts of the field happy who have a life free from 
sorrow. If there is no resurrection, neither is there any God nor 
Providence, but all things are driven and borne along of themselves. 
For observe how we see most righteous men suffering hunger and 
injustice and receiving no help in the present life, while sinners and 
unrighteous men abound in riches and every delight. And who in his 
senses would take this for the work of a righteous judgment or a 
wise providence? There must be, therefore, there must be, a 
resurrection. For God is just and is the rewarder of those who submit 
patiently to Him. Wherefore if it is the soul alone that engages in the 
contests of virtue, it is also the soul alone that will receive the crown. 
And if it were the soul alone that revels in pleasures, it would also be 
the soul alone that would be justly punished. But since the soul does 
not pursue either virtue or vice separate from the body, both 
together will obtain that which is their just due. 

Nay, the divine Scripture bears witness that there will be a 
resurrection of the body. God in truth says to Moses after the flood, 
Even as the green herb have I given you all things. But flesh with the 
life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat. And surely 
your blood of your lives will I require; at the hand of every beast will I 
require it, and at the hand of every man's brother will I require the life 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-27.htm (1 of 5)2006-06-01 18:07:03

 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.27. 

of man. Whoso sheddeth man's blood, for his blood his own shall be 
shed, for in the image of God made I man. How will He require the 
blood of man at the hand of every beast, unless because the bodies 
of dead men will rise again? For not for man will the beasts die. 

And again to Moses, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and 
the God of Jacob: God is not the God of the dead (that is, those who 
are dead and will be no more), but of the living, whose souls indeed 
live in His hand, but whose bodies will again come to life through the 
resurrection. And David, sire of the Divine, says to God, Thou takest 
away their breath, they die and return to their dust. See how he 
speaks about bodies. Then he subjoins this, Thou sendest forth Thy 
Spirit, they are created: and Thou renewest the face of the earth. 

Further Isaiah says: The dead shall rise again, and they that are in 
the graves shall awake. And it is clear that the souls do not lie in the 
graves, but the bodies. 

And again, the blessed Ezekiel says: And it was as I prophesied, and 
behold a shaking and the bones came together, bone to his bone, 
each to its own joint: and when I beheld, lo, the sinews came up 
upon them and the flesh grew and rose up on them and the skin 
covered them above. And later he teaches how the spirits came back 
when they were bidden. 

And divine Daniel also says: And at that time shall Michael stand up, 
the great prince which standeth for the children of thy people: and 
there shall be a time of trouble, such trouble as never was since 
there was a nation on the earth even to that same time. And at that 
time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found 
written in the book. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the 
earth shall awake: some to everlasting life and some to shame and 
everlasting contempt. And they that be wise shall shine as the 
brightness of the firmament, and out of the multitude of the just shall 
shine like stars into the ages and beyond. The words, many of them 
that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, clearly shew that there 
will be a resurrection of bodies. For no one surely would say that the 
souls sleep in the dust of the earth. 

Moreover, even the Lord in the holy Gospels clearly allows that there 
is a resurrection of the bodies. For they that are in the graves, He 
says, shall hear His voice and shall come forth: they that have done 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-27.htm (2 of 5)2006-06-01 18:07:03

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.27. 

good unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto 
the resurrection of damnation. Now no one in his senses would ever 
say that the souls are in the graves. 

But it was not only by word, but also by deed, that the Lord revealed 
the resurrection of the bodies. First He raised up Lazarus, even after 
he had been dead four days, and was stinking. For He did not raise 
the soul without the body, but the body along with the soul: and not 
another body but the very one that was corrupt. For how could the 
resurrection of the dead man have been known or believed if it had 
not been established by his characteristic properties? But it was in 
fact to make the divinity of His own nature manifest and to confirm 
the belief in His own and our resurrection, that He raised up Lazarus 
who was destined once more to die. And the Lord became Himself 
the first-fruits of the perfect resurrection that is no longer subject to 
death Wherefore also the divine Apostle Paul said: If the dead rise 
not, then is not Christ raised. And if Christ be not raised, our faith is 
vain: we are jet in our sins. And, Now, is Christ risen from the dead 
and become the first-fruits of them that slept, and the first-born pyre 
the dead; and again, For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, 
even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him. 
Even so, he said, as Christ rose again. Moreover, that the 
resurrection of the Lord was the union of uncorrupted body and soul 
(for it was these that had been divided) is manifest: for He said, 
Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up. And the holy 
Gospel is a trustworthy witness that He spoke of His own body. 
Handle Me and see, the Lord said to His own disciples when they 
were thinking that they saw a spirit, that it is I Myself, and that I am 
not changed: for a spirit hath not flesh or bones, as ye see Me have. 
And when He had said this He shewed them His hands 

and His side, and stretched them forward for Thomas to touch. Is not 
this sufficient to establish belief in the resurrection of bodies? 

Again the divine apostle says, For this corruptible must put on 
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. And again: It 
is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption: it is sawn in 
weakness, it is raised in power: it is sown in dishonour, it is raised in 
glory: it is sown a natural body (that is to say, crass and mortal), it is 
raised a spiritual body, such as was our Lord's body after the 
resurrection which passed through closed doors, was unwearying, 
had no need of food, or sleep, or drink. For they will be, saith the 
Lord, as the angels of God: there will no longer be marriage nor 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-27.htm (3 of 5)2006-06-01 18:07:03

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.27. 

procreation of children. The divine apostle, in truth, says, For our 
conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Saviour, 
the Lord Jesus, Who shall change our vile body that it may be 
fashioned like unto His glorious body: not meaning change into 
another form (God forbid!), but rather the change from corruption 
into incorruption. 

But some one will say, How are the dead raised up? Oh, what 
disbelief! Oh, what folly! Will He, Who at His solitary will changed 
earth into body, Who commanded the little drop of seed to grow in 
the mother's womb and become in the end this varied and manifold 
organ of the body, not the rather raise up again at His solitary will 
that which was and is dissolved? And with what body do they come? 
Thou fool, if thy hardness will not permit you to believe the words of 
God, at least believe His works. For that which thou sowest is not 
quickened except it die. And that which thou sowest, thou sowest 
not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat or 
of some other grain. But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased Him, 
and to every seed his own body. Behold, therefore, how the seed is 
buried in the furrows as in tombs. Who is it that giveth them roots 
and stalk and leaves and ears and the most delicate beards? Is it not 
the Maker of the universe? Is it not at the bidding of Him Who hath 
contrived all things? Believe, therefore, in this wise, even that the 
resurrection of the dead will come to pass at the divine will and sign. 
For He has power that is able to keep pace with His will. 

We shall therefore rise again, our souls being once more united with 
our bodies, now made incorruptible and having put off corruption, 
and we shall stand beside the awful judgment-seat of Christ: and the 
devil and his demons and the man that is his, that is the Antichrist 
and the impious and the sinful, will be given over to everlasting fire: 
not material fire like our fire, but such fire as God would know. But 
those who have done good will shine forth as the sun with the 
angels into life eternal, with our Lord Jesus Christ, ever seeing Him 
and being in His sight and deriving unceasing joy from Him, praising 
Him with the Father and the Holy Spirit throughout the limitless ages 
of ages. Amen. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-27.htm (4 of 5)2006-06-01 18:07:03

 
 

St. John of Damascus DE FIDE ORTHODOXA: AN EXACT EXPOSITION O: L.3, C.27. 

file:///D|/Documenta%20Chatolica%20Omnia/99%20-%20P...1%20-Da%20Fare/SJohnDamascusDeFideOrthodoxa3-27.htm (5 of 5)2006-06-01 18:07:03

 

