This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized 
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the 
information in books and make it universally accessible.

https://books.google.com

LIBRARY OF THE

UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA

GIFT OF

S. V„ MoCa3land

A SELECT LIBRARY

OP

NICENE AND POST-NICENE FATHERS

OF

THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH.

^econb ^Series.

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH WITH PROLEGOMENA AND EXPLANATORY NOTES.

VOLUMES I. -VII.
UNDER THE EDITORIAL SUPERVISION OF

PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D., LL.D.,
Professor of Church History in the Union Theological
Seminary, New York.

and

HENRY WACE, D.D.,
Principal of King's College,
London,

IN CONNECTION WITH A NUMBER OF PATRISTIC SCHOLARS OP EUROPE
AND AMERICA.

VOLUME VII.

S. CYRIL OF JERUSALEM.

S. GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

NEW YORK:
THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE COMPANY.
OXFORD AND LONDON:
PARKER & COMPANY.

1894.

eft

COPYRIGHT, ll()4/
By THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE COMPANY.

Copy ^

CONTENTS OF VOLUME VII.

S. CYRIL, Archbishop of Jerusalem : Catechetical Lectures

By Edward Hamilton Gifford, P.O., Formerly Archdeacon of London, and Canon

of S. Paul's.

S. GREGORY NAZIANZEN, Archbishop of Constantinople :

Select Orations
Letters

By Charles Gordon Browne, M.A., Rector of Lympstone, Devon ; and James Edward

Swallow, M.A., Chaplain of the House of Mercy, Horbury.

i

Note. -S. Cyril is issued under the Editorial supervision of Dr. Wace, and S. Gregory Nazianzen under

that of the translators.

i

THE

CATECHETICAL LECTURES

OF

S. CYRIL,

ARCHBISHOP OF JERUSALEM,

WITH A REVISED TRANSLATION, INTRODUCTION, NOTES, AND INDICES,

BY

EDWIN HAMILTON GIFFORD, D.D.,

FORMERLY ARCHDEACON OF LONDON, AND CANON OF S. PAUL'S.

VOL VII,

PREFACE.

The present translation of the Catechetical Lectures of S. Cyril of Jerusalem is based
on a careful revision of the English translation published in the " Library of the Fathers
of the Holy Catholic Church," with a most interesting Preface by John Henry Newman,
dated from Oxford, The Feast of St. Matthew, 1838.

In his Preface Mr. Newman stated with respect to the translation " that for almost the
whole of it the Editors were indebted to Mr. Church, Fellow of Oriel College."
Mr. Church
was at that time a very young man, having taken his First Class in Michaelmas Term, 1836 ;
and this his first published work gave abundant promise of that peculiar felicity of expression,
which made him in maturer life one of the most perfect masters of the English tongue.
Having received full liberty to make such use of his translation as I might deem most
desirable for the purpose of the present Edition, I have been obliged to exercise my own
judgment both in preserving much of Dean Church's work unaltered, and in revising it
wherever the meaning of the original appeared to be less perfectly expressed.

In this constant study and use of Dean Church's earliest work I have had always before
my mind a grateful and inspiring remembrance of one whose friendship it was my great
privilege to enjoy during the few last saddened years of his saintly and noble life.

In the notes of this Edition one of my chief objects has been to illustrate S. Cyril's
teaching by comparing it with the works of earlier Fathers to whom he may have been
indebted, and with the writings of his contemporaries.

In the chapters of the Introduction which touch on S. Cyril's doctrines of Baptism,
Chrism, and the Holy Eucharist, I have not attempted either to criticise or to defend his
teaching, but simply to give as faithful a representation as I could of his actual meaning.
The Eastern Church had long before S. Cyril's day, and still has its own peculiar Sacramental
doctrines, which, notwithstanding the efforts of rival theologians, can never be reduced to
exact conformity with the tenets of our own or other Western Churches.

The Indices have been revised, and large additions made to the lists of Greek words,

and of texts of Scripture.

E. H. G.

Oxford,
26 May, 189$.

CONTENTS OF THE INTRODUCTION.

Chapter L Life of S. Cyrii
Chapter II. Catechetical Instruction.

§ I. Catechesis
§ 2. Catechisl
§ 3. Catechumens
§ 4. Candidates for Baptism
§ 5- The name &wti%6ijl*voi

Chapter III.

Special Preparation for Baptism.

§ I. Penitence
§ 2. Confession
§ 3. Exorcism

Chapter IV.

Ceremonies of Baptism and Chrism.

§ I. Renunciation
§ 2. Profession of Faith
§ 3. First Unction
§ 4. Baptism
§ 5. Trims Immersion
§ 6. Chrism

Chapter V. Eucharistic Rites.
§ I. First Communion
§ 2. The Liturgy

Chapter VI.

Effects of Baptism and Chrism.

§ 1. Baptism
§ 2. Chrism

Chapter VII. Eucharistic Doctrine
Chapter VIII.
Place of S. Cyril's Lectures
Chapter IX. Time and Arrangement of S. Cyril's Lectures.

§ I. The Year
§ 2. The Days
§ 3. Arrangement

Chapter X. The Creed of Jerusalem : Doctrine of the Holy Trinity.

§ 1. The Creeds ofJerusalem and Nictca
§ 2. Doctrine ofthe Holy Trinity
S. Cyril's Writings.

Chapter XI.

§ 1. List of Works
§2. Authenticity of the Lectures
§3. Early Testimony
g 4. Editions
§ 5. Manuscripts
J 6. Versions

MOB
i

xi
xii
xiii
xv
xvii

xviii
ib.
xix

xxi
ib.
xxii
xxiii
xxiv
ib.

xxvi
ib.

xxx
xxxiii
xxxv
xli

xliii
xiiv
xlvi

xlvi
xlvii

liii
ib.
Iiv
ib.
Ivi
Ivii

INTRODUCTION.

CHAPTER L

Life of S. Cyril.

The works of S. Cyril of Jerusalem owe much of their peculiar interest and value to
the character of the times in which he wrote.
Born a few years before the outbreak of
Arianism in a.d. 318, he lived to see its suppression by the Edict of Theodosius, 380,
and to take part in its condemnation by the Council of Constantinople in the following year.
The story of Cyril's life is not told in detail by any contemporary author ; in his
own writings there is little mention of himself; and the Church historians refer only to
the events of his manhood and old age. We have thus no direct knowledge of his early
years, and can only infer from the later circumstances of his life what may probably have
been the nature of his previous training.
The names of his parents are quite unknown ;
but in the Greek Menaea, or monthly catalogues of Saints, and in the Roman Martyrology
for the 1 8th day of March, Cyril is said to have been "born of pious parents, professing
the orthodox Faith, and to have been bred up in the same, in the reign of Constantine."

This account of his parentage and education derives some probability from the fact
that Cyril nowhere speaks as one who had been converted from paganism or from any
heretical sect.
His language at the close of the viith Lecture seems rather to be inspired
by gratitude to his own parents for a Christian education : " The first virtuous observance in
a Christian is to honour his parents, to requite their trouble, and to provide with all his
for however much we may repay them, yet we can never be
power for their comfort :
to them what they as parents have been to us.
Let them enjoy the comfort we can give, and
strengthen us with blessings."

One member only of Cyril's family is mentioned by name, his sister's son Gelasius,

who was appointed by Cyril to be Bishop of Caesarea on the death of Acacius, a.d. 366 circ.

Cyril himself was probably born, or at least brought up, in or near Jerusalem, for it
was usual to choose a Bishop from among the Clergy over whom he was to preside,
a preference being given to such as were best known to the people generally1.

That Cyril, whether a native of Jerusalem or not, had passed a portion of his childhood
there, is rendered probable by his allusions to the condition of the Holy Places before they
were cleared and adorned by Constantine and Helena. He seems to speak as an eye-witness
of their former state, when he says that a few years before the place of the Nativity at
Bethlehem had been wooded2, that the place where Christ was crucified and buried was
a garden, of which traces were still remaining 3, that the wood of the Cross had been
distributed to all nations*, and that before the decoration of the Holy Sepulchre by
Constantine, there was a cleft or cave before the door of the Sepulchre, hewn out of the

* Bingham, The Antiquities ofthe Christian Church, Book II. c 10, | a.

a Cat. xii. 20. The wood had been cleared

away about sixteen years before this Lecture was delivered.

.

3 Cat. xiii, 32 ; xiv. 5.

* Cat. iv. 10 ; x. 19 : xiii. 4.

Gregor. Nyss. Baptism of Christ, p. 520, in this Series : " The wood of the Cross is of saving

efficacy for all men, though it is, as I am informed, a piece of a poor tree, less valuable than most trees are."

VOL. VII.

b

ii

INTRODUCTION.

rock itself, but now no longer to be seen, because the outer cave had been cut away for
the sake of the recent adornments s.

This work was undertaken by Constantine after the year 326 a.d. 6; and if Cyril
spoke from remembrance of what he had himself seen, he could hardly have been less
than ten or twelve years old, and so must have been born not later, perhaps a few years
earlier, than 315 a.d.

The tradition that Cyril had been a monk and an ascetic was probably founded upon
the passages in which he seems to speak as one who had himself belonged to the order
of Solitaries, and shared the glory of chastity'. We need not, however, suppose that the
■'Solitaries" (povatovTn) of whom he speaks were either hermits living in remote and desert
places, or monks secluded in a monastery : they commonly lived in cities, only in separate
ordinary Christians. To such a life
houses, and frequented the same Churches with
of perpetual chastity, strict asceticism, and works of charity, Cyril may probably, in accord
ance with the custom of the age, have been devoted from early youth.

A more important question is that which relates to the time and circumstances of his
ordination as Deacon, and as Priest, matters closely connected with some of the chief troubles
of his later life.

That he was ordained Deacon by Macarius, Bishop of Jerusalem, who died in 334
or 335, may be safely inferred from the unfriendly notice of S. Jerome, Chron. ann. 349
(350 a.d.) : " Cyril having been ordained Priest by Maximus, and after his death permitted
by Acacius, Bishop of Cassarea, and the other Arian Bishops, to be made Bishop on
condition of repudiating his ordination by Maximus, served in the Church as a Deacon : and
after he had been paid for this impiety by the reward of the Episcopate (Sacerdotii), he by
various plots harassed Heraclius, whom Maximus when dying had substituted in his own
place, and degraded him from Bishop to Priest."

From this account, incredible as it is in the main, and strongly marked by personal
prejudice, we may conclude that Cyril had been ordained Deacon not by Maximus, but by
his predecessor Macarius ;
for otherwise he would have been compelled to renounce his
Deacon's Orders, as well as his Priesthood.

Macarius died in or before the year 335 ; for at the Council of Tyre, assembled in that
year to condemn Athanasius, Maximus sat as successor to Macarius in the See of Jerusalem 8.
This date is confirmed by the fact that after the accession of Maximus, a great assembly of
Bishops was held at Jerusalem in the year 335, for the dedication of the Church of the Holy
Resurrection °.

It thus appears that Cyril's ordination as Deacon cannot be put later than 334 or the

beginning of 335.

Towards the close of the latter year the Bishops who had deposed Athanasius at the
Council of Tyre proceeded to Jerusalem "to celebrate the Tricennalia of Constantine's
reign by consecrating his grand Church on Mount Calvary'." On that occasion "Jerusalem
became the gathering point for distinguished prelates from every province, and the whole
city was thronged by a vast assemblage of the servants of God
In short, the whole of
Syria and Mesopotamia, Phoenicia and Arabia, Palestine, Egypt, and Libya, with the dwellers
in the Thebaid, all contributed to swell the mighty concourse of God's ministers, followed as
they were by vast numbers from every province.
They were attended by an imperial escort,
and officers of trust had also been sent from the palace itself, with instructions to heighten
Eusebius proceeds to describe
the splendour of the festival at the Emperor's expense2."

5 Cat. xiv. 9.

6 Eusebius, Vita Const, iii. 29 ff.

8 Hefele, History ofCouncils, ii. 17 ; Sozom. H.E. ii. 25.
* Robertson, Prolegomena to A tkanasius, p. xxxix.

7 Cat. xii. i, 33, 34. Compare iv. 34, note 8

9 Euseb. Vila Const, iv. 43.
* Euseb. V.C. iv. 43.

LIFE OF S. CYRIL.

the splendid banquets, the lavish distribution of money and clothes to the naked and
destitute, the offerings of imperial magnificence, the " intellectual feast " of the many Bishops'
discourses, and last, not least, his own " various public orations pronounced in honour of
this solemnity." Among the Clergy taking part in this gorgeous ceremony, the newly
ordained Deacon of the Church of Jerusalem would naturally have his place.
It was
a scene which could not fail to leave a deep impression on his mind, and to influence
his attitude towards the contending parties in the great controversy by which the Church
was at this time distracted. He knew that Atlianasius had just been deposed, he had seen
Arius triumphantly restored to communion in that august assembly of Bishops " from every
province," with his own Bishop Maximus, and Eusebius of Caesarea, the Metropolitan, at
their head.
It is much to the praise of his wisdom and steadfastness that he was not
misled by the notable triumph of the Arians to join their faction or adopt their tenets.

In September, 346, Athanasius returning from his second exile at Treves passed through
Jerusalem. The aged Bishop Maximus, who had been induced to acquiesce in the con
demnation of Athanasius at Tyre, and in the solemn recognition of Arius at Jerusalem, had
afterwards refused to join the Eusebians at Antioch in 341, for the purpose of confirming the
sentence passed at Tyre, and now gave a cordial welcome to Athanasius, who thus describes
his reception 3 : " As I passed through Syria, I met with the Bishops of Palestine, who, when
they had called a Council at Jerusalem, received me cordially, and themselves also sent me
on my way in peace, and addressed the following letter to the Church and the Bishops4."
The letter congratulating the Egyptian Bishops and the Clergy and people of Alexandria on
the restoration of their Bishop is signed first by Maximus, who seems to have acted without
reference to the Metropolitan Acacius, successor of Eusebius as Bishop of Caesarea, and
a leader of the Arians, a bitter enemy of Athanasius. Though Cyril in his writings never
mentions Athanasius or Arius by name, we can hardly doubt that, as Touttee suggests5,
he must at this time have had an opportunity of learning the true character of the questions
in dispute between the parties of the great heresiarch and his greater adversary.

We have already learned from Jerome that Cyril was admitted to the Priesthood by
There is no evidence of the exact date of his ordination : but we may safely
Maximus.
assume that he was a Priest of some years' standing, when the important duty of preparing
the candidates for Baptism was intrusted to him in or about the year 348 6.
There appears
to be no authority for the statement {Diet. Chr. Antiq. "Catechumens," p. 319*3), that
" the Catecheses of Cyril of Jerusalem were delivered by him partly as a Deacon, partly as
a Presbyter'."

At the very time of delivering the lectures, Cyril was also in the habit of preaching
to the general congregation on the Lord's day 8, when the candidates for Baptism were
especially required to be present'.
In the Church of Jerusalem it was still the custom
for sermons to be preached by several Presbyters in succession, the Bishop preaching last.
From Cyril's Homily on the Paralytic (§ 20) we learn that he preached immediately before the
Bishop, and so must have held a distinguished position among the Priests.
This is also
implied in the fact, that within three or four years after delivering his Catechetical Lectures
to the candidates for Baptism, he was chosen to succeed Maximus in the See of Jerusalem.

The date of his consecration is approximately determined by his own letter to Constantius
concerning the appearance of a luminous cross in the sky at Jerusalem. The letter was
written on the 7th of May, 351, and is described by Cyril as the first-fruit of his Episcopate.
He must therefore have been consecrated in 350, or early in 351.

1 Apolog. contra Avian. | 57.
5 Introductory note to Cyril's Letter to Constantius, fx.

7 See more below on the office of " Catechist," ch. ii. f a.

b a

* Cf. Athan. Hist. Arian. % 25.

•On the exact date of the Lectures, see below, ch. ix.

8 Cat. x. 14.

9 Cat. i. 6.

iv

INTRODUCTION.

Socrates and Sozomen agree in the assertion that Acacius, Patrophilus the Arian Bishop
of Scythopolis, and their adherents ejected Maximus and put Cyril in his place 9*.
But ac
cording to the statement of Jerome already quoted Ql' Maximus, when dying, had not only
nominated Heraclius to be his successor, which, with the consent of the Clergy and people,
was not unusual, but had actually established him as Bishop in his stead (in suum locum
substituerat).
Touttee argues
not without reason, that the consecration of Heraclius, which Jerome attributes to Maximus,
would have been opposed to the right of the people and Clergy to nominate their own
Rishop, and to the authority of the Metropolitan and other Bishops of the province, by
whom the choice was to be confirmed and the consecration performed, and that it had
moreover been expressly forbidden seven years before by the 23rd Canon of the Council of
Antioch.

The two accounts are irreconcileable, and both improbable.

Still more improbable is the charge that Cyril had renounced the priesthood conferred
on him by Maximus, and after serving in the Church as a Deacon, had been rewarded by
the Episcopate, and then himself degraded Heraclius from Bishop to Priest.
As a solution
of these difficulties, it is suggested by Reischl 0? that Cyril had been designated in the lifetime
of Maximus as his successor, and after his decease had been duly and canonically consecrated,
but had incurred the calumnious charges of the party opposed to Acacius and the Eusebians.
because he was supposed to have bound himself to them by accepting consecration at their
This view is in some measure confirmed by the fact that " in the great controversy
hands.
In the Meletian
of the day Cyril belonged to the Asiatic party, Jerome to that of Rome.
schism also they took opposite sides, Cyril supporting Meletius, Jerome being a warm
adherent of Paulinus ,," by whom he had been recently ordained Priest.
It is also worthy
of notice that Jerome's continuation of the Chronicle of Eusebius was written at Con
stantinople in 380-381, the very time when the many injurious charges fabricated by
Cyril's bitter enemies were most industriously circulated in popular rumour on the eve of
a judicial inquiry by the second general Council which met there in 381, under the presidency
of Meletius, Cyril, and Gregory of Nazianzum a. Had Jerome written of Cyril a year or two
later, he must have known that these calumnies had been emphatically rejected by the Synod
of Constantinople (382) consisting of nearly the same Bishops who had been present at the
Council of the preceding year. In their Synodical letter 3 to Pope Damasus they wrote : "And
of the Church in Jerusalem, which is the Mother of all the Churches, we notify that the most
reverend and godly Cyril is Bishop : who was long ago canonically appointed by the Bishops
of the Province, and had many conflicts in various places against the Arians."

The beginning of Cyril's Episcopate was marked by the appearance of a bright Cross in
the sky, about nine o'clock in the morning of Whitsunday, the 7th of May, 351 a.d.
Brighter than the sun, it hung over the hill of Golgotha, and extended to Mount Olivet, being
The whole population of Jerusalem, citizens and foreigners, Chris
visible for many hours.
tians and Pagans, young and old, flocked to the Church, singing the praises of Christ, and
hailing the phenomenon as a sign from heaven confirming the truth of the Christian religion.
Cyril regarded the occasion as favourable for announcing to the Emperor Constantius the
commencement of his Episcopate ; and in his extant letter described the sign as a proof of
God's favour towards the Empire and its Christian ruler. The piety of his father Constahtine
had been rewarded by the discovery of the true Cross and the Holy places : and now the
greater devotion of the Son had won a more signal manifestation of Divine approval.

9* Socr. H.E. ii. 38 ; So*, iv. 20. The Bishops of Palestine, except two or three, had received Athanasius most cordially a fey

years before (Athan. Hist. Arian. g 25).

9b p. ii.
« Vict. Chr. Biogr. * 1 Cyrillus," p. 761 : and for the Meletian Schism, see " Meletius," " Paulinus," " Vitalius."
" Hefele, ii. 344.

3 Theodoret, Hut. Eccl. v. 9.

V Vol. I. p. xli. note.

LIFE OF S. CYRIL.

v

The letter ends with a prayer that God may grant to the Emperor long to reign as the
protector of the Church and of the Empire, "ever glorifying the Holy and Consubstantial
The word 4/ioovow, it is alleged, had not at this time been
Trinity, our true God."
accepted by Cyril, and its use has therefore been thought to cast doubt upon the genuineness
of this final prayer, which is nevertheless maintained by the Benedictine Editor*. The letter
as a whole is certainly genuine, and the phenomenon is too strongly attested by the historians
of the period to be called in question.
While, therefore, we must reject Cyril's explanation,
we have no reason to suspect him of intentional misrepresentation. A parhelion, or other
remarkable phenomenon, of which the natural cause was at that time unknown, might well
appear " to minds excited by the struggle between the Christian Faith and a fast-declining
heathenism to be a miraculous manifestation of the symbol of Redemption, intended to
establish the Faith and to confute its gainsayers s."

The first few years of Cyril's episcopate fell within that so-called "Golden Decade,"
346-355, which is otherwise described as "an uneasy interval of suspense rather than o;
peace6." Though soon to be engaged in a dispute with Acacius concerning the privileges of
their respective Sees, Cyril seems to have been in the interval zealous and successful in
promoting the peace and prosperity of his own Diocese.

We learn from a letter of Basil the Great that he had visited Jerusalem about the year
357, when he had been recently baptized, and was preparing to adopt a life of strict asceticism.
He speaks of the many saints whom he had there embraced, and of the many who had fallen
on their knees before him, and touched his hands as holy',- signs, as Touttde suggests, of a
'flourishing state of religion and piety.
Cyril's care for the poor, and his personal poverty,
were manifested by an incident, of which the substantial truth is proved by the malicious use
to which it was afterwards perverted.
"Jerusalem and the neighbouring region being visited
with a famine, the poor in great multitudes, being destitute of necessary food, turned their
As he had no money to succour them in their need, he sold
eyes upon Cyril as their Bishop.
the treasures and sacred veils of the Church.
It is said, therefore, that some one recognised
an offering of his own as worn by an actress on the stage, and made it his business to inquire
whence she had it, and found that it had been sold to her by a merchant, and to the merchant
by the Bishop 8."

This was one of the charges brought against Cyril in the course of the disputes between
himself and Acacius, which had commenced soon after he had been installed in'the Bishopric
As Bishop of Caesarea, Acacius exercised Metropolitan jurisdiction o\sr the
of Jerusalem.
Bishops of Palestine.
But Cyril, as presiding over an Apostolic See, "the Mother c^irthe
Churches," claimed exemption from the jurisdiction of Caesarea, and higher rank than its
It is not alleged, nor is it in any way probable, that Cyril claimed also the juris
Bishop.
The rights and privileges of his See had been clearly defined
diction over other Bishops.
many years before by the 7th Canon of the Council of Nicaea: "As custom and ancient
tradition shew that the Bishop of Aelia ought to be honoured, let him have precedence in
honour, without prejudice to the proper dignity of the Metropolitical See."
Eusebius0, in
reference to a Synod concerning the time of Easter, says : " There is still extant a writing of
those who were then assembled in Palestine (about 200 a.d.), over whom Theophilus, Bishop
of Caesarea, and Narcissus, Bishop of Jerusalem, presided."
If one Synod only is here meant,
it would appear that the Bishop of Caesarea took precedence of the Bishop of Jerusalem,
which would be the natural order in a Synod held at Caesarea.
Bishop .Hefele, however, takes
a different view 1 : " According to the Syuodicon, two Synods were held in Palestine on the

4 Epist. ad Constantium-Monilum, | x.

5 Diet. Chr. Biogr. p. 761.

6 Gwatkin, p. 74.

7 Epist. iv. p. tt.

8 Sozom. H.E. iv. »5.

9 Hist. Eccl. v. 23.

1 History 0/the Christian Councils, Book I. Sec. ii. c.

vi

INTRODUCTION.

subject of the Easter controversy : the one at Jerusalem presided over by Narcissus, and
composed of fourteen Bishops ; and the other at Caesarea, comprising twelve Bishops, and
In confirmation of this view we may observe that when
presided over by Theophilus."
next Eusebius mentions Narcissus and Theophilus, he reverses the previous order, and names
the Bishop of Jerusalem first.

However this may have been, Acacius, who as an Arian was likely to have little respect
for the Council of Nicaea, seems to have claimed both precedence and jurisdiction over
Cyril. From" Socrates we learn that Cyril was frequently summoned to submit to the
judgment of Acacius, but for two whole years refused to appear. He was therefore
deposed by Acacius and the other Arian Bishops of Palestine on the charge of having
sold the property of the Church, as before mentioned.
Socrates, who confesses that he
does not know for what Cyril was accused, yet suggests that he was afraid to meet the accu
But Theodoret, a more impartial witness, says* that Acacius took advantage
sations s.
of some slight occasion (<i<pop/iur) and deposed him.
Sozomen5 also describes the accu
sation as a pretext (Arl npoipda-tt tiuoSc), and the deposition as hastily decreed, to forestall
any countercharge of heresy by Cyril (<p6avti Ka6t\av). The deposition was quickly followed
by Cyril's expulsion from Jerusalem, and a certain Eutychius was appointed to succeed him6.
Passing by Antioch, which at this time, 357-358, was left without a Bishop by the recent
decease of the aged Arian Leontius Castratus?, Cyril took refuge in Tarsus with its Bishop
the " admirable Silvanus," " one of the Semi-Arians, who, as Athanasius testifies, agreed
almost entirely with the Nicene doctrine, only taking offence at the expression opoovcnoc,
because in their opinion it contained latent Sabellianism8." Cyril now sent to the Bishops whohad deposed him a formal notice that he appealed to a higher Court (/idfoc tjr«aX«V<rro
SiKaarfipiov), and his appeal was approved by the Emperor Constantius9.
Acacius, on learn
But Silvanus
ing the place of Cyril's retreat, wrote to Silvanus announcing his deposition.
out of respect both to Cyril, and to the people, who were delighted with his teaching, still
permitted him to exercise his ministry in the Church.
Socrates finds fault with Cyril for his
appeal : " In this," he says, " he was the first and only one who acted contrary to the custom
of the Ecclesiastical Canon, by having recourse to appeals as in a civil court" The reproach
implied in this statement is altogether undeserved. The question, as Touttfie argues, is not
whether others had done the like before or after, but whether Cyril's appeal was in accord
ance with natural justice, and the custom of the Church. On the latter point he refers to the
various appeals of the Donatists, of Marcellus of Ancyra, and Asclepas of Gaza, and to the
casC*sE,the notorious heretic Photinus, who after being condemned in many Councils appealed
to the Emperor, and was allowed to dispute in his presence with Basil the Great as his
opponent.
Athanasius himself, in circumstances very similar to Cyril's, declined to appear
before Eusebius and a Synod of Arian Bishops at Caesarea, by whom he was condemned
a.d. 334, and appealed in person to Constantine, requesting either that a lawful Council of
Bishops might be assembled, or that the Emperor would himself receive his defence I."

In justification of Cyril's appeal it

is enough to say that it was impossible for him to
submit to the judgment of Acacius and his Arian colleagues.
They could not be impartial
in a matter where the jurisdiction of Acacius their president, and his unsoundness in the
Faith, were as much in question as any of the charges brought against Cyril. He took the
only course open to him in requesting the Emperor to remit his case to the higher juris-

1 lb.

» Hist. Eccl. ii. 40.
5 HE. iv. 25.
6 There is much uncertainty and confusion in the names of the
Bishops who succeeded Cyril on the three occasions of his being
deposed.
His successor in 357 is said by Jerome to have been
a certain Eutychius, probably the same who was afterwards ex

4 lb. ii. 26.

communicated at Seleucia {Did. Ckr. Biogr. Eutychius 13). Th«
subject is discussed at length by Touttee {Diss. I. viu).

7 See the account of his remarkable career in the Diet. Ckr.

8 Athan. Dt Synodis, c. xii. ; Hefelc, ii. 36a.

Biogr.

9 Socrates, H.E. ii. 40.
1 Athan. contr. Arianos Apol. c. 36: Hefcle, ii. p. 87, note.

LIFE OF S. CYRIL.

vii

diction of a greater Council, and in giving formal notice of this appeal to the Bishops who
had expelled him.

While the appeal was pending, Cyril became acquainted with " the learned Bishop, Basil
of Ancyra" (Hefele), with Eustathius of Sebaste in Armenia, and George of Laodicea, the
chief leaders of the party " usually (since Epiphanius), but with some injustice, designated
Semi-Arian 2." One of the charges brought against Cyril in the Council of Constantinople
(360, a.d.) was, as we shall see, that he held communion with these Bishops.

Cyril had not long to wait for the hearing of his appeal.

In the year 359 the Eastern
Bishops met at Seleucia in Isauria, and the Western at Ariminum.
Constantius had at
first wished to convene a general Council of all the Bishops of the Empire, but this
intention he was induced to abandon by representations of the long journeys and expense,
and he therefore directed the two Synods then assembled at Ariminum and at Seleucia " the
Rugged " to investigate first the disputes concerning the Faith, and then to turn their
attention to the complaints of Cyril, and other Bishops against unjust decrees of deposition
and banishment 3.
This order of proceeding was discussed, and after much controversy
adopted on the first day of meeting, the 27th of September*. On the second day Acacius
and his friends refused to remain unless the Bishops already deposed, or under accusation,
were excluded.
Theodoret relates that "several friends of peace tried to persuade Cyril
of Jerusalem to withdraw, but that, as he would not comply, Acacius left the assembly V
Three days afterwards, according to Sozomen, a third meeting was held at which the demand
of Acacius was complied with ; " for the Bishops of the opposite party were determined that
he should have no pretext for dissolving the Council, which was evidently his object in order
to prevent the impending examination of the heresy of Aetius and of the accusations which
had been brought against him and his partisans 6." A creed put forward by Acacius having
been rejected, he refused to attend any further meetings, though repeatedly summoned to
be present at an investigation of his own charges against Cyril.

In the end Acacius and many of his friends were deposed or excommunicated. Some of
these, however, in defiance of the sentence of the Council, returned to their dioceses, as did
also the majority who had deposed them.

But he was not to be left long in peace.

It is not expressly stated whether any formal decision on the case of Cyril was adopted by
the Council : but as his name does not appear in the lists of those who were deposed or ex
communicated, it is certain that he was not condemned.
It is most probable that the charges
against him were disregarded after his accuser Acacius had refused to appear, and that he re
Acacius and
turned, like the others, to his diocese.
some of his party had hastened to Constantinople, where they gained over to their cause the
chief men attached to the palace, and through their influence secured the favour of Con
stantius, and roused his anger against the majority of the Council. But what especially stirred
the Emperor's wrath were the charges which Acacius concocted against Cyril : " For," he said
that "the holy robe which the Emperor Constantine of blessed memory, in his desire to
honour the Church of Jerusalem, had presented to Macarius, the Bishop of that city, to be
worn when he administered the rite of Holy Baptism, all fashioned as it was with golden
threads, had been sold by Cyril, and bought by one of the dancers at the theatre, who had put
it on, and while dancing had fallen, and injured himself, and died.
With such an
ally as this Cyril," he said, " they undertake to judge and pass sentence upon the rest of the
world K"

Ten deputies who at the close of the Council of Seleucia had been appointed to report its

1 Robertson, Proltgonuna ad Atkanas. ii. $ 8 (a) c.

6 Sozotn. iv. aa.

8 Soz. iv. 17.

4 Socrat. ii. 39.

I K.E. ii. 26.

Theodoret, H.E. ii. 23.

viif

INTRODUCTION.

proceedings to the Emperor, " met, on their arrival at the Court, the deputies of the Council
of Ariminum, and likewise the partisans of Acacius8.
After much controversy and many
intrigues, a mutilated and ambiguous Creed adopted at Ariminum in which the oponva-ios of
Nicaea was replaced by " like to the Father that begat Him according to the Scriptures,"
and the mention of either " essence " (oiola) or " subsistence " (ynaaraait) condemned », was
brought forward and approved by the Emperor.
" After having, on the last day of the
year 359, discussed the matter with the Bishops till far into the night T, he at length extorted
their signatures .... It is in this connexion that Jerome says : Ingemuit totits orbis, et Arianum se esse miratus est"."
Early in the following year, 360 a.d., through the influence of
Acacius a new Synod was held at Constantinople, in which, among other Semi-Arian Bishops,
Cyril also was deposed on the charge of having held communion with Eustathius of Sebaste,
Cyril, as we have seen, had become acquainted
Basil of Ancyra, and George of Laodicea.
with these Bishops during his residence at Tarsus in 358, at which time they were all zealous
opponents of Acacius and his party, but differed widely in other respects.

George of Laodicea was a profligate in morals, and an Arian at heart, whose opposition
to Acacius and Eudoxius was prompted by self-interest rather than by sincere conviction.
He had been deposed from the priesthood by Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, both on the
ground of false doctrine, and of the open and habitual irregularities of his life.
Athanasius
styles him "the most wicked of all the Arians," reprobated even by his own party for his grossly
dissolute conducts.

Basil of Ancyra was a man of high moral character, great learning, and powerful intellect,
a consistent opponent both of the Sabellianism of Marcellus, and of every form of Arian
and Anomcean heresy, a chief among those of whom Athanasius wrote «, " We discuss the
matter with them as brothers with brothers, who mean what we mean, and dispute only about
. Now such is Basil who wrote from Ancyra concerning the Faith "
the word (o/iocvcrios). .
(358 a.d., the same year in which Cyril met him at Tarsus).

.

Eustathius is described as a man unstable in doctrine, vacillating from party to party,
subscribing readily to Creeds of various tendency, yet commanding the respect even of his
enemies by a life of extraordinary holiness, in which active benevolence was combined with
" He was a man," says Mr. Gwatkin 5, " too active to be ignored, too
extreme austerity.
unstable to be trusted, too famous for ascetic piety to be lightly made an open enemy."

S. Basil the Great, when travelling from place to place, to observe the highest forms of
ascetic life, had met with Eustathius at Tarsus, and formed a lasting friendship with a man
whom he describes as " exhibiting something above human excellence," and of whom, after
the painful dissensions which embittered Basil's later life, that great saint could say, that
from childhood to extreme old age he (Eustathius) had watched over himself with the greatest
care, the result of his self-discipline being seen in his life and character6.

Of any intimate friendship between Cyril and these Semi-Arian leaders, we have no
evidence in the vague charges of Acacius : their common fault was that they condemned him
in the Synod of Seleucia.
The true reason of Cyril's deposition, barely concealed by the
friv olous charges laid against him, was the hatred of Acacius, incurred by the refusal to ac
knowledge the Metropolitan jurisdiction of the See of Cresarea.
The deposition was confirmed
by Constantius, and followed by a sentence of banishment. The place of Cyril's exile is not
mentioned, nor is it known whether he joined in the protest of the other deposed Bishops,
described by S. Basil, Epist. 75.
His banishment was not of longer continuance than two
Constantius died on the 3rd of November, 361, and the accession of Julian was soon
years.

8 Soxom. ir. a>

* Hefclc, Councils, ii. 171.

9 Athan. dc Syn. i 30, where this Creed is given in fulL

3 Diet. Ckr. Biogr.

4 De Synodis, | 41.

1 S. Hilar, ii. Num. 70S.

5 TAt Arian Controversy, p. 135.

6 Basil, E/ist. 244. Compare Newman, Preface to Catechetical Lectures, p. iv.

LIFE OF S. CYRIL.

ix

followed by the recall of all the exiled Bishops, orthodox and heretical, and the restoration
of their confiscated estates 7.
Julian's object, according to Socrates, was " to brand the
memory of Constantius by making him appear to have been cruel towards his subjects." An
equally amiable motive imputed to him is mentioned by Sozomen : " It is said that he issued
this order in their behalf not out of mercy, but that through contention among themselves
the Church might be involved in fraternal strife8."
Cyril, returning with the other Bishops,
seems to have passed through Antioch on his way home, and to have been well received by
the excellent Bishop Meletius.

It happened that the son of a heathen priest attached to the Emperor's Court, having
been instructed in his youth by a Deaconess whom he visited with his mother, had secretly
become a Christian. On discovering this, his father had cruelly scourged and burnt him with
hot spits on his hands, and feet, and back. He contrived to escape, and took refuge with
his friend the Deaconess.
" ' She dressed me in women's garments, and took me in her
covered carriage to the divine Meletius. He handed me over to the Bishop of Jerusalem,
at that time Cyril, and we started by night for Palestine.'
After the death of Julian, this
young man led his father also into the way of truth.

This act he told me with the rest

The next incident recorded in the life of S. Cyril is his alleged prediction of the failure of
Julian's attempt to rebuild the Temple of Jerusalem.
" The vain and ambitious mind of
Julian," says Gibbon, " might aspire to restore the ancient glory of the Temple of Jerusalem.
As the Christians were firmly persuaded that a sentence of everlasting destruction had been
pronounced against the whole fabric of the Mosaic law, the Imperial sophist would have
converted the success of his undertaking into a specious argument against the faith ot
prophecy and the truth of revelation."
Again he writes: "The Christians entertained
a natural and pious expectation, that in this memorable contest, the honour of religion
would be vindicated by some signal miracte V That such an expectation may have been
shared by Cyril is not impossible : but there is no satisfactory evidence that he ventured to
foretell any miraculous interposition.
According to the account of Rufinus", "lime and
cement had been brought, and all was ready for destroying the old foundations and laying
But Cyril remained undismayed, and after careful consideration either
new on the next day.
of what he had read in Daniel's prophecy concerning the 'times,' or of our Lord's predictions
in the Gospels, persisted that it was impossible that one stone should ever there be laid upon
another by the Jews."
This account of Cyril's expectation, though probable enough in itself,
seems to be little more than a conjecture founded on his statement {Cat. xv. 15), that
" Antichrist will come at the time when there shall not be left one stone upon another
in the Temple of the Jews."
That doom was not completed in Cyril's time, nor did
he expect it to be fulfilled until the coming of the Jewish Antichrist, who was to restore
the Temple shortly before the end of the world.
It was impossible for Cyril to see in Julian
such an Antichrist as he has described; and therefore, without any gift or pretence ot
prophecy, he might very well express a firm conviction that the attempted restoration at that
time must fail.
Though Gibbon is even more cynical and contemptuous than usual in his
examination of the alleged miracles, he does not attempt to deny the main facts of the storyS;.
with their miraculous character we are not here concerned, but only with Cyril's conduct
on so remarkable an occasion.

In the same year, a.d. 363, Julian was killed in his Persian campaign on the 26th of
June, and was succeeded by Jovian, whose universal tolerance, and personal profession
of the Nicene faith, though discredited by the looseness of his morals, gave an interval

7 Socr. H.E. iii. x.
1 Gibbon, c. xxiii.

affected clemency to the desire of fomenting the intestine divisions of the Church."
a Hist, i. 37.
a Pagan, ' and on the explanation from natural causes suggested by Michaelis.

c. 3. Compare Gibbon, Ch. xxiii. : " The impartial Ammianus has ascribed this
3 See Gibbon's remarks on the testimony of Ammianus, *• a contemporary and

9 Theodoret, H.E. iii. 10.

8 Sozom. H.E.

INTRODUCTION.

of comparative rest to the Church.
In his reign Athanasius was recalled, and Acacius
and his friends subscribed the Nicene Creed, with an explanation of the sense in which
they accepted the word tS/uioiViiw «. As Cyril's name is not mentioned in any of the records
of Jovian's short reign of seven months, we may infer that he dwelt in peace at Jerusalem.

Jovian died on the 17th of February, 364, and was succeeded by Valentinian, who in the
following March gave over the Eastern provinces of the Empire to his brother Valens.
During the first two years of the new reign we hear nothing of Cyril : but at the beginning of
the year 366, on the death of his old enemy Acacius, Cyril assumed the right to nominate his
successor in the See of Caesarea, and appointed a certain Philumenus
Whether this
assumption of authority was in accordance with the 7th Canon of Nicaea may be doubted :
Cyril's choice of his nephew was, however, in after times abundantly justified by the conduct
and character of Gelasius, who is described by Theodoret as a man " distinguished by the
purity of his doctrine, and the sanctity of his life," and is quoted by the same historian as
"the admirable," and "the blessed Gelasius6."

Epiphanius relates 1 that " after these three had been set up, and could do nothing on
account of mutual contentions," Euzoius was appointed by the Arians, and held the See until
In the
the accession of Theodosius in a.d. 379, when he was deposed, and Gelasius restored.
meantime Cyril had been a third time deposed and driven from Jerusalem, probably in the
year 367.
For at that time Valens, who had fallen under the influence of Eudoxius, the Arian
Bishop of Constantinople, by whom he was baptized, "wrote to the Governors of the provinces,
commanding that all Bishops who had been banished by Constantius, and had again assumed
their sacerdotal offices under the Emperor Julian, should be ejected from their Churches8."
Of this third and longest banishment we have no particulars, but we may safely apply to it the
words of the Synod at Constantinople, 382, that Cyril " had passed through very many contests
with the Arians in various places."

The terrible defeat and miserable death of Valens in the great battle against the Goths at
Adrianople (a.d. 378) brought a respite to the defenders of the Nicene doctrine.
ForGratian
" disapproved of the late persecution that had been carried on for the purpose of checking the
diversities in religious Creeds, and recalled all those who had been banished on account of
Gratian associated Theodosius with himself in the Empire on the 19th of
their religion 9."
"all the Churches of the East, with
January, 379; and "at this period," says Sozomen
the exception of that of Jerusalem, were in the hands of the Arians."
Cyril, therefore, had
been one of the first to return to his own See.
During his long absence the Church of
Jerusalem had been the prey both of Arianism and of the new heresy of Apollinarius, which
had spread among the monks who were settled on Mount Olivet.
Egyptian Bishops, banished
for their orthodoxy, having taken refuge in Palestine, there found themselves excluded from
communibn.
Jerusalem was given over to heresy and schism, to the violent strife of rival
factions, and to extreme licentiousness of morals.

Gregory of Nyssa, who had been commissioned by a Council held at Antioch in 378 to
visit the Churches in Arabia and Palestine, "because matters with them were in confusion, and
■needed an arbiter," gives a mournful account both of the distracted state of the Church, and
" If the Divine grace were more abundant about Jerusalem
of the prevailing corruption.
than elsewhere, sin would not be so much the fashion among those who live there ; but as it
is, there is no form of uncleanness that is not perpetrated among them ; rascality, adultery,
In a letter3 written after his return
theft, idolatry, poisoning, quarrelling, murder, are rife."

4 Socr. iii. 25 ; Sozom. vi. 4,
7 Ham. ixxiii. % 37.

5 Epiphanius. Horr. 73, I 37.

8 Hist. Eccl. V. 8 ; Dialog, i. iii.

8 Sozom. vi. ft.

Cf. Tillemont, Minwiret, Tom. viii. p. 357 : " As Cyril was, no doubt, then per

secuted only on accouut of his firmness in the true Faith, the title of Confessor cannot be refused to him."
■ Greg. Nyss. Epist. xvii. in this Series.

9 Soz. vii. 1.

■ lb. a.

LIFE OF S. CYRIL.

xi

to Caesarea in Cappadocia he asks, " What means this opposing array of new Altars ? Do we
announce another Jesus? Do we produce other Scriptures?
Have any of ourselves dared
to say " Mother of Man " of the Holy Virgin, the Mother of God ?

In the year a.d. 381 Theodosius summoned the Bishops of his division of the Empire to
meet in Council at Constantinople, in order to settle the disputes by which the Eastern
Church had been so long distracted, and to secure the triumph of the Nicene Faith over the
various forms of heresy which had arisen in the half-century which had elapsed since the first
General Council. Among the Bishops present were Cyril of Jerusalem, and his nephew
Gelasius, who on the death of Valens had regained possession of the See of Csesarea from the
Arian intruder Euzoius.
Cyril is described by Sozomen3 as one of three recognised
leaders of the orthodox party, and, according to Bishop Hefele*, as sharing the presidency
This latter point, however, is not clearly
with the Bishops of Alexandria and Antioch.
expressed in the statement of Sozomen.
Socrates writes that Cyril at this time recognised the
doctrine of o^oouo-ioi', having retracted his former opinion : and Sozomen says that he had at
this period renounced the tenets of the Macedonians which he previously held
Touttee
rightly rejects these reproaches as unfounded : they are certainly opposed to all his teaching
in the Catechetical Lectures, where the doctrine of Christ's unity of essence with the Father
is fully and frequently asserted, though the term 6/ioovaiot is not used, and the co-equal Deity
of the Holy Ghost is everywhere maintained.

We find no further mention of Cyril in the proceedings of the Council itself.
As
consisting of Eastern Bishops only, its authority was not at first acknowledged, nor its
acts approved in the Western Church. The two Synods held later in the same year
at Aquileia and at Milan, sent formal protests to Theodosius, and urged him to summon
a General Council at Alexandria or at Rome.
But instead of complying with this request,
the Emperor summoned the Bishops of his Empire to a fresh Synod at Constantinople ; and
there in the summer of 382 very nearly the same Bishops were assembled who had been
present at the Council of the preceding year. Their Synodical letter addressed to the Bishops
assembled at Rome is preserved by Theodoret 6, and in it we read as follows : " Of the
Church in Jerusalem, the Mother of all the Churches, we make known that Cyril the most
reverend and most beloved of God is Bishop ; and that he was canonically ordained long
ago by the Bishops of the province, and that he has very often fought a good fight in various
places against the Arians."
Thus justice was done at last to one whose prudence, modera
tion, and love of peace, had exposed him in those days of bitter controversy to undeserved
His justification by the Council is the last recorded
suspicion and relentless persecution.
incident in Cyril's life. We are told by Jerome that he held undisturbed possession of his
See for eight years under Theodosius.
The eighth year of Theodosius was a.d. 386, and
in the Roman Martyrology, the 18th of March in that year is marked as "The birthday
('Natalis,' i.e. of his heavenly life) of Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, who after suffering many
wrongs from the Arians for the sake of the Faith, and having been several times driven
from his See, became at length renowned for the glory of sanctity, and rested in peace:
an Ecumenical Council in a letter to Damasus gave a noble testimony to his untarnished,
faith."

CHAPTER II.
Catechetical Instruction.

§ 1. Catechesis. The term "Catechesis" in its widest sense includes instruction by word
but is especially applied to Christian teaching,

of mouth on any subject sacred or profane

3 H.E. vii. 7.

« Councils, ii. 344.

5 Socrat. t. 8; Sozom. to. 7.

e H.E. v. 9.

• AcM xviii. 25 J xxi. II, 14; Rom. ii. i8< Gal. vi. 6.

Cf. Clem. Alex. Fragm. I a8 : n* ion n<mvm ivn «anjpri<r»"f.

xii

INTRODUCTION.

whether of an elementary kind appropriate to new converts, or, as in the famous Catechetical
School of Alexandria, extending to the higher interpretation of Holy Scripture, and the
exposition of Christian philosophy.

The earliest known example of a Catechetical work is the " Teaching of the Twelve
Apostles" which Athanasius names among the " books not included in the Canon, but
appointed by the Fathers to be read by those who are just recently coming to us, and
wish to be instructed in the word of godliness (*.a.Ty)xt\a8ai t'uv rijr flotpclas Xo'yow)*."
This
use of the Didache for the instruction of recent converts from Paganism agrees with
its original purpose as stated in the longer title, " Teaching of the Lord through the Twelve
Apostles for the Gentiles." The first six chapters are evidently adapted for those who need
elementary instruction, more particularly for Catechumens of Gentile descent, as distinct
The remaining chapters of the Didache" relate
from Jewish candidates for Baptism
chiefly to the administration of Baptism, to Prayer, Fasting, and the services of the Lord's
Day, and to the celebration of the Agape and Eucharist ■».
This same division of subjects
is observed in the two classes of S. Cyril's Catechetical Lectures : the first class, including
the Procatechesis, consists of XIX Lectures addressed to candidates for Baptism, and these
are followed by five " Mystagogic " Lectures, so called as being explanations of the Sacra
mental Mysteries to the newly-baptized.

The Didache' was taken as the basis of other manuals of instruction, as is evident from
the fact that the greater part of the first six chapters is imbedded in " The Apostolical
Church Order," supposed to date from Egypt in the third century. The Greek text, with an
English translation, of the part corresponding with the Didache, is given in "The oldest
Church Manual " as Document V.

A further development of the Didachd, "adapted to the state of the Eastern Church in
the first half of the fourth century," is contained in the Seventh Book of the Apostolical
Constitutions of Pseudo-Clement of Rome, chs. i.-xxxii.
" Here the Didache is embodied
almost word for word, but with significant omissions, alterations, and additions, which betray
. The Didacht? was thus superseded by a more complete and timely Church
a later age. .
.
Dr. Schaff has appended this document also to his edition of the
Manual, and disappeared."
Didache, noting the borrowed passages on the margin, and distinguishing them by spaced
type in the Greek text, and by italics in the English translation.

In this work the directions concerning the instruction of Catechumens and their Baptism
are addressed to the Catechist and the Minister of Baptism.
They contain only a short out
line (c. xxxix.) of the subjects in which the Catechumens are to be instructed, most if not all
of which are explained at large in Cyril's Lectures : and in the directions concerning Baptism,
Chrism, and the Eucharist, the similarity is so close, that in many passages of the Constitu
tions the author seems to be referring especially to the use of the Church of Jerusalem.

From this close affinity with earlier works we may be assured that in the Catecheses of
Cyril we have trustworthy evidence of the great care which the Church had from the
beginning bestowed on the instruction and training of converts, before admitting them to the
privilege of Baptism ; but beyond this, Cyril's own work has a peculiar value as the earliest
extant example of a full, systematic, and continuous course of such instruction.

§ 2. Catechist. The duty of catechizing was not limited to a class of persons permanently
set apart for that purpose, but all orders of the Clergy were accustomed to take part in the
work.
Even laymen were encouraged to teach children or new converts the first elements of
religion, as we learn from Cyril's exhortation : " If thou hast a child according to the flesh,
admonish him of this now ; and if thou hast begotten one through catechizing, put him also on

■ Ftstal Efist. 39. Compare Clem. Alex. Strom. V. c. x. f 67. raAa u.iy n «carqx1fl<',« eiowl »pwrii i^vxqf Tpo^q vorftiorrax.

J Schaff. Oldest Church Manual, p. 15.

* lb. p. 26.

CATECHETICAL INSTRUCTION.

xiii

his guards."
That this remark was addressed not to the Catechumens, but to such of the
Faithful as happened to be present among his audience, appears from what he says elsewhere,
'' So thou likewise, though not daring before thy Baptism to wrestle with the adversaries, yet
after thou hast received the grace, and art henceforth confident in the armour of righteousness,
must then do battle, and preach the Gospel, if thou wilt 6."

The more systematic instruction of those who had been already admitted to the order of
Catechumens was entrusted to persons appointed to this special duty.
Thus Origen " was in
his eighteenth year when he took charge of the Catechetical School at Alexandria," which
" was entrusted to him alone by Demetrius, who presided over the Church » : " and S. Au
gustine's Treatise, De Catec/iizandis Rudibus, was addressed to Deogratias, who being a Deacon
at Carthage, and highly esteemed for his skill and success as a Catechist, felt so strongly the
importance of the work and his own insufficiency, that he wrote to Augustine for advice as to
the best method of instructing those who were brought to him to be taught the first elements
of the Christian Faith.

The final training of the foirifrfpfrot, or candidates for Baptism, was undertaken in part by
the Bishop himself, but chiefly by a Priest specially appointed by him.
Of the part taken by
the Bishop mention is made by S. Ambrose in a letter to his sister Marcellina (£p. xx.) : " On
the following day, which was the Lord's day, after the Lessons and Sermon, the Catechumens
had been dismissed, and I was delivering the Creed to some candidates (Competentes) in the
Baptistery of the Basilica."

Of this " delivery of the Creed," which was usually done by a Presbyter, we have examples
in S. Augustine's Sermons In traditione Symboli, ccxii.-ccxiv., each of which contains a brief
recapitulation and explanation of the several articles of belief.
In Serm. ccxiv., after a short
introduction, we find the following note inserted by the preacher himself. [" After this preface the
' I believe in God the Fa ther
whole Creed is to be recited, without interposing any discussion.
Almighty! and the rest that follows.
Which Creed, thou knowest, is not wont to be written :
after it has been said, the following discussion (disputatio) is to be a:lded."]

From the opening words of Sermon ccxiv., and of ccxvi., " ad Competentes" it is evident
that these were delivered by S. Augustine as the first-fruits of his ministry very soon after he
had been reluctantly ordained Priest (a.d. 391). Two other examples of addresses to Can
didates for Baptism are the Catecheses I., II., upas rove /iAXowar <j>aTi{<o8at, delivered at Antioch
by S. Chrysostom while a Presbyter.

Another duty often undertaken by the Bishop was to hear each Candidate separately

recite the Creed, and then to expound to them all the Lord's Prayer8.

§ 3. Catechumens.

The term Catechumen denoted a person who was receiving in
struction in the Christian religion with a view to being in due time baptized.
Such persons
were either converts from Paganism and Judaism, or children of Christian parents whose
For though the practice of Infant-Baptism was certainly common
Baptism had been deferred.
in the Early Church
" In many cases Christian
parents may have shared and acted on the opinion expressed by Tertullian in the second
century, and by Gregory Nazianzen in the fourth, and thought it well to defer the Baptism of
children, cases of grave sickness excepted, till they were able to make answer in their own
name to the interrogations of the baptismal rite V

it was not compulsory nor invariable.

7 Euseb. H.E. vi. 3.

5 Cat. xv. 18.
* Cat. iii. 13.
8 S. August- Serm. Iviii. et cexv.
1 Cf. Iren. II. c xxii. I 4 : " Omnes enim venit per semet
ipsum salvare ; omnes, inquam, qui per cum rcnasntittur in Dcum,
infantes, et parvulos, et pueros. et juvenes,et seniorcs.
Cf. Concil.
Carthag. iii. Epitt. Synod. (Cypriani Ep. lix. vel Ixiv. Routh.
R. S. iii. p. 98.)

» Did. Chr. Anlif. " Baptism," I lot, TertuII. De Baptism*,
c. xviii.
" And so, according to the circumstances, and disposi
tion, and even age of each individual, the delay of Baptism is
preferable ; principally, however, in the case of little children.'
Cf. Grcgor. Naz. Orat. 40 De Baptitmo, quoted by Bingham,
xi. c. 4, I 13.

xiv

INTRODUCTION.

It is stated by Bingham

but without any reference to ancient authors, that " the children
of believing parents, as they were baptized in infancy, were admitted Catechumens as soon as
they were capable of learning." Though the title " Catechumen " was not usually applied to
those who had been already baptized, it is probable that such children were admitted to the
Lectures addressed to Catechumens both in the earlier and later stage of their preparation :
for it seems to be implied in the passage quoted above from Cat. xv. 18, that admission was
not limited to the candidates for Baptism.

To believe and to be baptized are the two essential conditions of membership in Christ's
Church*: but for the admission of new converts to the class of Catechumens nothing more
could be required than evidence of a sincere desire to understand, to believe, and ultimately
to be baptized.

We know that unbelievers, Jews, and Heathens were allowed in the Apostolic age to be
present at times in the Christian assemblies 5 ; and in Cyril's days they stood in the lower
part of the Church (w'pflijf) to hear the Psalms, Lessons, and Sermon*.

Any persons who by thus hearing the word, or by other means, were brought to believe in
the truth of Christianity, and to wish for further instruction, were strictly examined as to their
character, belief, and sincerity of purpose. The care with which such examinations were con
ducted is thus described by Origen : " The Christians, however, having previously, so far as
possible, tested the souls of those who wish to become their hearers, and having previously
admonished them in private, when they seem, before entering the community, to have made
sufficient progress in the desire to lead a virtuous life, they then introduce them, having
privately formed one class of those who are just beginners, and are being introduced, and
have not yet received the mark of complete purification ; and another of those who have
manifested to the best of their ability the purpose of desiring no other things than are approved
Such as were thus found worthy of admission were brought to the Bishop or
by Christians7."
Presbyter, and received by the sign of the Cross 8, with prayer and imposition of hands, to the
status of Catechumens.

We have a description by Eusebius ' of some of these ceremonies in the case of Constantine : When the Emperor felt his life to be drawing to a close, " he poured forth his
supplications and confessions to God, kneeling on the pavement in the Church itself, in
which he also now for the first time received the imposition of hands with prayer." Soon
after this the Bishops whom he had summoned to Nicomedia to give him Baptism, "performed
the sacred ceremonies in the usual manner, and having given him the necessary instructions
made him a partaker of the mystic ordinances:"

Another ceremony used in the admission of Catechumens, at least in some Churches, is
mentioned by S. Augustine 1 : " Sanctification is not of one kind only :
for I suppose that
Catechumens also are sanctified in a certain way of their own by the sign of Christ's Cross,
and the Prayer of the Imposition of Hands ; and that which they receive, though it be not
the Body of Christ, is yet an holy thing, and more holy than the common food which sustains
us, because it is a sacrament." From this passage it has been inferred that consecrated bread

3 Antij. X. L | 4.
* Mark xvi. 16 ; Acts xviii. 8.
6 Apostolic Constitutions. VI 1 1, i. | 5 :

5 i Cor. xiv. 33.
14 And after the reading
of the Law and the Prophets, and our Epistles, and Acts, and
Gospels, let him that is ordained .
. speak to the people the
word of exhortation, and when he has ended his discourse of
doctrine, all standing up, let the Deacon ascend upon some high
scat, and proclaim, Let none of the hearers, let none of the unbelievers stay: and silence being made, let him say. Ye Cateikumrns, pray, and let all the Faithful pray for them."

.

7 Contra Ctlsum, iiu C SI.

Cf. Const. Apost. viii. ja : " Let

them be examined as to the causes wherefore they come to the
word of the Lord, and let those who bring them inquire exactly
about their character, and give them their testimony.
Let their
manners and tbeir life be inquired into, and whether they be slaves
or free,' &c.

8 S. Aug. De Syinbolo, Strm. ad Cateehumenos, fx: M Ye
have not yet been born again by holy Baptism, but by the sign of
the Cross ye have been already conceived in the womb of your
mother the Church."

9 Vita Const. :.v. c. 60.
* D* Peaatorum tncritis, ii. 4a-

CATECHETICAL INSTRUCTION.

xv

(roXoytat, partis benedictus), taken out of the oblations provided for the Eucharist, was given to
the Catechumens,-an opinion which seemed to have some support in the comparison between
" that which the Catechumens receive," and " the food which sustains us."
But Bingham
maintains 2 that S. Augustine here refers only to the symbolical use of salt, of which he says in
his Confessions, I. xi., that while yet a boy he " used to be marked with the sign of His Cross,
and seasoned with His salt." The meaning of this so-called " Sacrament of the Catechumens "
was that by the symbol of salt " they might learn to purge and cleanse their souls from
sin."

In the African Church in the time of S. Augustine it was customary to anoint the new
convert with exorcised oil at the time of his admission, but in the Eastern Church there seems
to have been no such anointing until immediately before Baptism.

Persons who had been thus admitted to the class of Catechumens were usually regarded as
Christians, but only in a lower degree, being still clearly distinguished from the Faithful.
" Ask a man, Art thou a Christian ] If he is a Pagan or a Jew, he answers, I am not.
But if
he say, I am, you ask him further, Catechumen or Faithful ?
If he answer, Catechumen, he
has been anointed, but not yet baptized V Augustine, like Tertullian, complains that among
heretics there was no sure distinction between the Catechumen and the Faithful ♦ : and
according to the second General Council, Canon 7, converts from certain heresies to the
orthodox Faith were to be received only as heathen : " On the first day we make them
Christians, on the second Catechumens, on the third we exorcise them by three times breath
ing on them on the face and on the ears ; and so we instruct them (KaTtjxovp.ei,), and make
them frequent the Church for a long time, and listen to the Holy Scriptures, and then we
baptize them."

Whether Cyril calls his hearers Christians before they had been baptized is not very clear :
in Cat. x. § 16, he seems to include them among those who are called by the "new name;"
but in § 20 of the same Lecture he assumes that there may be present some one whp " was
before a believer (»rto-ru't)," and to him he says "Thou wert called a Christian; be tender of
the name;" and in Lect xxi. 1, speaking to those who had now been baptized, he says,
" Having therefore become partakers of Christ, ye are properly called Christs. Now ye have
been made Christs by receiving the antitype of the Holy Ghost," that is, Chrism.

§ 4. Candidates for Baptism.

Bingham, who himself makes four classes or degrees of
Catechumens, acknowledges that "the Greek expositors of the ancient Canons," and other
writers, " usually make but two sorts
These were (1) the imperfect (artMcrrfpoi), called also
hearers (•iKpomptvot, audientes), because in Church they were only allowed to remain till the
Holy Scriptures had been read, the Sermon preached, the special prayers of the Cate
chumens said, and the blessing given to each by the Bishop in the words of the " prayer of
the imposition of hands 6."
After this the Deacon says, " Go out, ye Catechumens, in peace."
(2) After the Energumens also have been dismissed, the moreperfect (rfKuortpo-, rp^ ly^tvoi) remain
on their knees in prayer (yovvn\lvuvTfs, tixoptvai).
Then the Deacon is to cry aloud, " Ye that
are to be illuminated, pray.
Let us the faithful all pray for them. And being sealed to God
through His Christ, let them bow down their heads, and receive the blessing from the
Bishop." The " Prayer of the Imposition of hands " is then pronounced over them by the
Bishop.

The period of probation and instruction varied at different times and places : according to
Canon 42 of the Synod of Elvira, 305, it was to be two years : " He who has a good name,

• Antig. X. ii. | 16.
* Srrm. xlvi. dt Pastoribus, c. 13 : Tertull. dt Pfascripiiont Htrrtt, c 41 : " Imprimis quis Catechumenus, quis Fidelia, in
5 Ant. X. ii. 1-J. The Council of Nicsea, Canon xiv., seems to speak only of two clashes.

/A S. August. In Jok. Evang. Tract, xliv. 8 1.

certum est."

« Comt. Apcit. viii. 8 6.

df

xvi

INTRODUCTION.

and wishes to become a Christian, must be a Catechumen two years: then he may be
After this probation had been satisfactorily passed, the Catechumens were
baptized
invited to give in their names as Candidates for Baptism.
This invitation, described by
Cyril as a call to military service fKXrjo-ts aTpaitias) 8, appears to have been often repeated on
the approach of Lent.
Thus S. Ambrose, in his Commentary on S. Luke, v. 5 ; We have
toiled all night and have taken nothing, complains, " I too, Lord, know that for me it is night,
when I have not Thy command. No one yet has given his name : with my voice I have cast
the net throughout Epiphany, and as yet I have taken nothing."

This preliminary " call to service " must' be distinguished from the actual enlistment in
the Christian army at Baptism, in anticipation of which Cyril prays for his hearers that God
"may enlist them in His service, and put on them the armour of righteousness0." The same
metaphorical language in reference to the Christian warfare recurs in many passages

The next step for those who responded to the call was the registration of names
(•'vofiaT«ypa(j>Ui) '.
It appears from passages of Dionysius Pseudo-Areopagites, quoted by
Bingham J, that the Bishop, after laying his hand on each Catechumen's head, commanded
his Presbyters and Deacons to register his name, together with that of his sponsor (iiKiSo^ot)
This ceremony took place at Jerusalem at the beginning
in the Diptychs of the living.
of Lent, as we learn from Procat. § 1 : " Thou hast entered, been approved ; thy name
inscribed. ... A long notice is allowed thee ;
thou hast forty days for repentance."
Those who had been admitted as candidates for Baptism were in most Churches still
But
reckoned among the Catechumens, being distinguished as trvratrovms, " compete ties."
from Cyril's language in several passages it appears that in the Church of Jerusalem
they ceased to be regarded as Catechumens, and were reckoned among the Faithful.
" Thou
wert called a Catechumen, while the word echoed round thee from without.
Think not that
thou receivest a small thing : though a miserable man, thou receivest one of God's titles.
Hear S. Paul saying, God is faithful.
But beware, lest thou have the title of 'faithful,' but
the will of the faithless «."
" Thou receivest a new name which thou hadst not before.
Heretofore thou wast a Catechumen, but now thou wilt be called a Believer (nior.Ss) 5."

Again, " How great a dignity the Lord bestows on you in transferring you from the order
of Catechumens to that of the Faithful, the Apostle Paul shews, when he affirms, God is
faithful6."

Two passages in S. Cyril have been thought to imply that the newly-admitted Candidates
for Baptism carried lighted torches in procession, perhaps on the first Sunday after the
registration. He speaks of their having received " torches of the bridal procession 1 ; "
and on this expression the Benedictine Editor observes that " Wax tapers " were perhaps
given to the Jlluminandi to carry, a custom which may also be indicated in the words,
"Ye who have lately lighted the torches of faith, guard them carefully in your hands
unquenched 8."

Others are of opinion that the custom of. carrying torches or tapers was observed only
in the procession of the newly-baptized from the Baptistery to the Church °, and that here
Cyril means by the " bridal lamps," those motions of the Holy Ghost, and spiritual instruc
This
tions, which had lighted their way to Christ, and to the entrance to His Kingdom 10.
latter interpretation is rather vague and far-fetched, and it is evident that the words, " Ye who
have lately lighted the torches of faith," gain much in clearness and force, if suggested by the
visible symbolism of a ceremony in which the Jlluminandi hud just borne their part. The

f Hefele, Councils, i. p. 155.
* Procat. I 1.
9 lb. f 17.
4 Procat 16.
9 Bingham, Ant. X. it | 15.

5 Cat. L 4.

Const. Apost. viii. 31 : " Let him that is to be instructed be a catechumen three years."

' See Cat. i. 3 ; iii. 3, 13 ; iv. 36 ; xvii. 36 ; xxi. 4.

• Procat. f 1.

6 lb. V. I.

7 Anpirairf rcp^ayuytat, Procat. | I.

*° Diet. CAr. Antiq. Vol. ii. p. 995, note.

3 Antiq. X. ii. | 6.
' Cat. L I I.

CATECHETICAL INSTRUCTION.

xvii

lighted torches would be a significant symbol both of the marriage of the soul with Christ,
and of its enlightenment by faith.

§ 5.

♦on-ifr/ioTM.

In the first words of his Introductory Lecture Cyril addresses his
hearers as ol aWifopfroi, "Ye who are being enlightened," and from the Titles of the
Catechetical Lectures i.-xviii., we see that this name was constantly used to distinguish
the candidates preparing for immediate Baptism.

The Verb oWifw is frequently used by the LXX., beth in a physical and in a spiritual
being generally

In the New Testament it is found but rarely in the physical sense

sense.
applied to the light of spiritual truth, and to Christ as its source

In two passages of the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Aorist (qSarnrOevrat) marks "the decisive
moment when the light was apprehended in its glory 3," from which the thought easily passes
on to the public profession of the truth thus received, that is, to Baptism.

That the word began very early to be used in this new sense, is evident from Justin
Martyr's explanation of it in his First Apology, c. 61 ; where, after speaking of instruction in
Christian doctrine, of the profession of faith, and the promise of repentance and holy living,
as the necessary preparations for Baptism, he thus proceeds : " And this washing is called
Illumination (oWto>idf), because they who learn these things are illuminated in their under
standing*." The same transition of the meaning from instruction to Baptism is clearly
implied by Clement of Alexandria : " Among the barbarian philosophers also to instruct and
to enlighten is called to regenerate*;" and again: "For this reason the teaching, which
made manifest the hidden things, has been called illumination ((purtovidc) 6."

That this is the sense in which Cyril uses the word is placed beyond doubt by a passage
of the Lecture delivered immediately before the administration of Baptism : " that your soul
being previously illuminated (irpo<poTi(i>p«'i r/t) by the word of doctrine, ye may in each particular
discover the greatness of the gifts bestowed on you by God

We thus see that the Present Participle (0<anfo>frai) describes a process of gradual illumi
nation during the course of instruction, to be completed in Baptism, a sense which is well
expressed in the Latin Gerundive " Illuminandi." And as we have seen that the candidates
are addressed as ol #»rifd/i«r<>i even before the course of instruction has commenced, the quasiFuture sense "follows necessarily from the context8."

The spiritual " Illumination," of which Baptism was to be the completion and the seal,
thus became by a natural development one of the recognised names of Baptism itself. On
the contrary, the inverse process assumed by the Benedictine Editor is entirely unnatural.
Starting from the later ecclesiastical use of $wr<'f<t and ^amer/idr as connoting Baptism, he
supposes that this was the first application of those terms, and that they were transferred
to the previous illumination acquired by instruction in Christian truth, only because this was"
a necessary preparation for Baptism. He therefore maintains that <j>un(6iicvoi throughout the
Catechetical Lectures is another term for /San-cftf/urai : and as a decisive proof of this he refers
to Cat. xvi. 26 : pfKXti Si ko\ «Vi o-e t!>v #ajn-tfu/if<'0!> QOdvuv ij x"p"t not observing that the grace
is to come upon "the person being baptized" at a time still future.
This meaning of
the passage is made absolutely certain by the words which immediately follow,-" But
in what manner I say not, for I will not anticipate the proper season." We may conclude,
therefore, that in Cyril's Lectures the term ol <£timfd/iri<ot refers to the preparatory course
of enlightenment rather than to Baptism. At the same time we must remember that in Cyril's
day, and long before, Qwrifa, ojumr/idr, and (pmTio-pa were constantly used to denote Baptism

■ Luke xi. 36 ; Apoc. xviil. i.
3 Westcott, " Hebrews" vi. 4 ; x. 3a.

• Joh. L 9; 1 Cor. it. 5 ; 7 Cor. iv. 4, 6 ; Eph. L r8 ; itt. 0 : a Tim. i. 10 ; Apoc xxi. 33 ; xxii. 5.
5 Strom. V.c. 2, § 15 :
t Cat. xviii. f 3a.

4 wf ^uircfope'pwK ti\v Siaiomk tuv ravra n av9arorrwr.
Cf. V. c. viii. | 49.

6 Strom. V. c. x. f 65.

ro «ari)xi)4r<u Tf koX $urureu ivaytvvijtTai Mycrtu.

8 CT. Winer, Grammar ofN.T. Greek, Sect xj. ar, note 3.
VOL. VII.

xviii

INTRODUCTION.

itself, as being the time of special illumination by the grace of the Holy Spirit then given.
. This work is
Thus Clement of Alexandria writes : " In Baptism we are illuminated. .
variously called grace, and illumination (tpwriaiia), and perfection, and washing :
. illumi
nation, by which that holy light of salvation is beheld, that is, by which we see God clearly'."
Gregory Nazianzen speaks in the same way : " We call it
gift, grace, baptism, chrism,
illumination, garment of incorruption, washing of regeneration, seal, all that is precious10."

.

.

.

CHAPTER III.
Special Preparation for Baptism.

§ i. Penitence. The candidate for Baptism, having been duly admitted and registered, was
required not only to be diligent in attending the course of Catechetical instruction \ but also
" Those who are
to enter at once upon a course of strict devotion and penitential discipline.
coming to Baptism," says Tertullian, " must be constantly engaged in prayers, fastings, kneelings, and watchings, together with confession of all past faults *."

On these subjects Cyril's teaching is earnest, wise, and sympathetic : he seeks to lead to
repentance by gentle persuasion, and pleads for self-discipline as needful for the good of the
soul 3. One whole Lecture is devoted to the necessity of thorough repentance for all past
sins, and forgiveness of all offences
another to the sure efficacy of repentance for the
remission of sins s.
§ 2. Confession.

Great stress is laid by Cyril on the necessity not only of
sincere inward repentance, but also of open confession. The words «£o/xoXoycio-da(, e£o/toXoyno-ts
have a twofold meaning and a wide application.

'Efo/ioAiiyijo-ir.

(i.) In the Septuagint they occur very frequently, especially in the Psalms, in the sense of
"giving thanks or praise" (Heb. ntHI)6, a meaning which is also found in the New Testa
Perhaps the earliest instance in an Ecclesiastical writer is in Hernias, Mandal. X.
ment 7.
iii. a : «{of»o\oyov/iei/or tu ecu.

I have not found any instance of this meaning in Cyril.

S. Cnrysostom, commenting on the words, " 1 will give thanks unto Thee, O I.ordB," says,
"There are two kinds of exomologesis; for it is either a condemnation of our own sins, or
a giving of thanks to God." The link between these two ideas is seen in Joshua's exhortation
to Achan, My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord, the God of Israel, and t/iake confession 0
unto Him.

Or, give praise.

R. V. Margin.

(2.) In the sense of "confessing" sins, the Verb is not uncommon in the N. T. *, and in
the early Fathers".
Tertullian adopts the Greek word, and calls exomologesis "the handmaid
of repentance V' adding that it will extinguish the fire of Gehenna in the heart, being a second
remedy for sin, after Baptism.

Again, speaking of the outward act of repentance, he says : " This act, which is more usually
expressed and commonly spoken of under a Greek name, is f'£ofioXdyijo-ir, whereby we confess our
sins to the Lord, not indeed as if He were ignorant of them, but inasmuch as by confession
satisfaction is appointed, and of confession repentance is born, and God appeared by repent
Accordingly exomologesis is a discipline for man's prostration and humiliation, enjoining
ance.
a demeanour calculated to move mercy.
With regard also to the very dress and food, it
commands (the penitent) to lie in sackcloth and ashes ... to know no food and drink but such

9 Pedag. I. TL I 33. (Syllb. 41).
« Procal. I 9 : " Let thy feet haste to the CatechUings," 1 10 :
11 Abide thou in the Catechising^ : though our discourse be long,
let not thy mind be weaned out."
Cf. Justin M. Afol. I. c. 6t ; Ccrut.

• Dt Bnptitmo, c ao.

»° Oml. xl. | 4.

Cf. Cat. i. 5.

Afost. vii. aa.

3 Compare his teaching on Prayer. Procat. 1 16 : Cat. ix. 7 :

and on Fasting Cat. iv. 37, 37 ; xviii. 17.

4 Cat. i.

5 Cat. ii.

6 Ps. xlii. 5 ; xliiL 4, 5 (cfopoAoyiJrouai) ; and Ps. c. 4 (6

<£o/xoA»y>j<rt 0-

7 Matt. xi. 35 ; PhiL ii. is.

8 Ps. ix. I : 'EfopoAoyijropax <roi, Kvpic.
9 Joshua vii. 19, Sept. i£opok6yij<rtv.
1 Matt. iii. 6 ; Mark i. 5 ; James iii. 16.
* Irenasus, I. xiii. | 5 ; III. iv. I 3 ; Clem. Alex. Prvtrefit. ii

I 41 : c£ojxoAoyovft<u oi Gai'iiocfv ri)y YAffTptpapytav t\v avrtar.

3 Dt I'aniUntU, C. xii.

SPECIAL PREPARATION FOR BAPTISM.

xix

as is plain,-to feed prayers on fastings, to groan, to weep and roar (tnugire) unto the Lord
God; to roll before the feet. of the presbyters, and kneel to God's dear ones, to enjoin on all
All this exomologesis does, that it may
the brethren embassies of intercession on his behalf
enhance repentance *, &c."

In this highly rhetorical description of the ecclesiastical discipline so dear to Tertullian
there are many features of extreme severity to which Cyril makes no allusion ; yet he
frequently and very earnestly insists on the necessity and the efficacy of confession.
" The
present is the season of confession : confess what thou hast done in word or in deed, by night
or by day ; confess in an acceptable time, and in the day cf salvation receive the heavenly
treasure s."
" Tell the Physician thine ailment : say thou also, like David, Isaid, Iwill confess
me my sin unto the Lord • and the same shall be done in thy case, which he says forthwith,
Seest
and Thou forgavest the wickedness of my heart 6." " Seest thou the humility of the king ?
thou his confession ? .
. The deed was quickly done, and straightway the Prophet appeared
as accuser, and the offender confessed his fault; and because he candidly confessed, he
received a most speedy cure

.

.

" Ezekias prevailed to the cancelling of God's decree, and cannot Jesus grant remission of
Turn and bewail thyself, shut thy door, and pray to be forgiven, pray that He may
For confession has power to quench even fire, power

sins?
remove from thee the burning flames.
to tame even Hons8."

The confession to which Cyril attaches so high a value, whether made in the privacy of
solitude, or openly before the Ministers of the Church and the Congregation, is a confession
to God, and not to man.
" Having therefore, brethren, many examples of those who have
sinned and repented and been saved, do ye also heartily make confession unto the Lord
Elsewhere he expressly disclaims the necessity of private confession to man : " Not that thou
shouldest shew thy conscience to me, for thou art not to be judged of maris judgment ; but
that thou shew the sincerity of thy faith to God, who trieth the reins and hearts, and knoweth
the thoughts of men '." He also limits the season of confession and repentance to this pre
sent life : " Therefore the just shall then offer praise ; but they who have died in sins have no
further season for confession a."

§ 3. Exorcism. One of the earliest ceremonies, after the registration of names, was
Exorcism, which seems to have been often repeated during the Candidate's course of prepar
ation.
" Receive with earnestness the exorcisms : whether thou be breathed upon or exorcised,
the act is to thee salvation 3."

The power of casting out devils, promised by our Lord*, and exercised by Apostles', and
by Philip the Deacon and Evangelist6, was long regarded in the early Church as a direct gift
still bestowed by the Holy Ghost, apart from any human ordinance.
Justin Martyr 7, Ter
all speak of exorcism as being practised by laymen, even by soldiers, and
tullian 8, Origcn
women, by means of prayer and invocation of the name of Jesus.
Accordingly "an Exorcist
is not ordained, for it is a gift of the spontaneous benevolence and grace of God through
Christ by visitation of the Holy Ghost.
For he who has received the gift of healing is
declared by revelation from God, the grace which is in him being manifest to all '." When
the extraordinary gift was found to have been withdrawn, exorcists are mentioned among the
inferior officers of the Church, after readers and subdeacons a.
From an early period certain
set formulae, such as the Divine names, " The God of Abraham, and God of Isaac, and God

4 Dt Pamittntia, c, ix.
7 lb. I 11.

8 Cat. ii. 15.

5 Cat. L I 5.

« lb I 6.
For similar statements, see

7 Apologia I. H 6, 8; Tryph. lxxxv.
6 De Idolol. c xi. ; dt Corona Mil. xi. ; dt Anima, lvii.

Cat- i. 3 ; ii. 19, ao, &C
9 Cat. ii. I zo.
3 Procat. % g.
I Acta v. 16 ; xvi. 18 ; xix. la.

1 lb. v. I a.
4 Mark xvi. 17; Luke ix. 1 ; x. 17.

a lb. xviii. 14.

de Spectac. xxvi. ; dt Pro-script. Hani. xli.

9 Contra Cilsum. vii. c. 57.
a Euseb. H.E. vi 43; Sya. Antioch. in Encacniis, Can. 10:

» Const. Apesl. viii. 36.

• Acts viii. 7.

Syn. Laod. Can. aa.

INTRODUCTION.

of Jacob," "The God of Israel," "The God who drowned the king of Egypt and the
Egyptians in the Red Sea," were frequently invoked against demons and certain wicked
persons 3.

Accordingly, when an exorcist was ordained the Bishop was directed to give him the book
in which the exorcisms were written, with the words, " Receive thou these, and commit them
to memory, and have thou power to lay hands upon the Energumens, whether they be
baptized or only Catechumens*." Though this Canon speaks only of exorcising Ener
gumens, or such persons as were supposed to be possessed by evil spirits, we must remember
that the power of such spirits was believed to extend to the whole world outside the
Christian Church.
Thus all converts from Paganism and Judaism, and even the children of
Christian parents were exorcised before being baptized. The practice was closely connected
with the doctrine of original sin, as we see in many passages of S. Augustine, and is declared
by him to be very ancient and universal 5.
In expounding the Creed to candidates for
Baptism, he says : " Therefore, as you have seen this day, and as you know, even little
children are breathed on and exorcised, that the hostile power of the devil may be driven
out of them, which deceived one man in order that he might get possession of all men6."

We find accordingly that Cyril enforces the duty of attending the Exorcisms on all
the candidates alike, and from his use of the Plural (Exorcisms) we see that the ceremony
was often repeated for each person.
Thus in the Clementine Homilies Peter is represented
as saying, " Whoever of you wish to be baptized, begin from to-morrow to fast, and each day
have hands laid upon you i" the imposition of hands being one of the ceremonies used
in exorcism8. From expressions in the Introductory Lecture, "When ye have come in before
the hour of the exorcisms
and again, " when your exorcism has been done, until the
others who are to be exorcised have come '," it seems that before each Catechizing the
candidates were all exorcised, one by one 3, and that the earlier, after returning from their own
exorcism, had to wait for those who came later.
The catechizing was thus frequently
delayed till late in the day, and Cyril often complains of the shortness of the time left at
his disposal 3.

At Antioch, the Catechizing preceded the Exorcism, as we learn from S. Chrysostom :
" After you have heard our instruction, they take off your sandals, and unclothe you, and send
you on naked and barefoot, with your tunic only, to the utterances of the Exorcists
Cyril
says nothing of this unclothing, but mentions another ceremony as practised at Jerusalem :
" Thy face has been veiled, that thy mind may henceforward be free, lest the eye by roving
make the heart rove also.
But when thine eyes are veiled, thine ears are not hindered from
receiving the means of salvations." The veil may also have been a symbol of the slavery
and darkness of sin, as S. Augustine regards the removal of the veil on the octave of Easter
as symbolising the spiritual liberty of the baptized 6. Of this meaning Cyril makes no express
mention.

In the Greek Euchologion, as quoted by Kleopas, the act of the Exorcist is thus described :
" And the Priest breathes upon his mouth, his forehead, and his breast, saying, Drive forth
from him every evil and unclean spirit, hidden and lurking in his heart, the spirit of error, the
spirit of wickedness ?, &c."

3 Origen. Contra Celt. iv. c 34 (p. 184).
4 Fourth Council of Carthage, Can. 7 (a d. 398)1
5 De Nnft. tl Concup. II. | 33 : de Pecc. Orig. f 45 ; centra
aulian Pelag. VI. I tl ; Of. Imperf. e. Julian. I. f 50; III.
Cf. C*t. XX. (Myit. u.) | ■.
1 144, 4c.

« De Symbolo, %

t Hem. iit. c. 73.
8 Orig. in Josu. xxiv. f 1 : " exnrcistarum manus impositione."
9 Procat. 1 13.
« lb. I 14.
2 Aug. Serine de Symb. ii. | 1 : " ut ex locis secretit singuli

produceremini."
orcism immediately before Baptism.

This may possibly refer only to the final ex

3 Cat. xiii. 8 : xv. 33 ; xviii. 16, Ac.
* Ad llluminandet. Cat. i. I a.
6 S. Aug. Serm. 376.

11 Hodie octavs dicuntur Infantinro ;
revclanda sunt capita eorum, quod est indicium libertalis. Habet
enim libertatem ista spiritualis nativitxs, propria: autem carnis
nativitas servitutem."
7 Precat. I 14.

1 3 Precat. I 0.

CEREMONIES OF BAPTISM AND CHRISM.

xxi

Besides such invocations of the names of God, as we have mentioned above, the Exorcist
used set forms of prayer " collected out of the Holy Scriptures."
Their effect, as described
by Cyril, is to " set the soul, as it were, on fire," and scare the evil spirit away ; and his
meaning may be illustrated by a passage of Tertullian, who says8: "All the authority and
power we have over them is from naming the name of Christ, and recalling to their memory
the woes with which God threatens them at the hands of Christ as Judge. ... So at our
touch and breathing, overwhelmed by the thought of those judgment-fires, they leave
the bodies they have entered, at our command, unwilling and distressed, and before
your very eyes put to an open shame."

The Exorcisms were performed in the Church ; where also the Lectures were delivered,
Catechumens of the lower order being exclnded, "and the doors looking towards the city
closed', while those which looked towards the Holy Sepulchre, from which the ruins of
the ancient Temple, Golgotha, and the old city could be seen, were left open

CHAPTER IV.
Ceremonies or Baptism and Chrism.

§ i. Renunciation. We have seen that Cyril's last Catechetical Lecture was delivered
in the early dawn of the Great Sabbath, Easter Eve.
The additional instructions then
promised 1 concerning the behaviour of the Candidates were given on the same day, pro
bably in the evening, when they were all assembled immediately before the administration
of Baptism. The most important parts of the Baptismal ceremony are described by Cyril
in the first Mystagogic Lecture, delivered on the Monday of Easter week.
Thus in § i he
says, " Lit us now teach you these things exactly, that ye may know the significance of the
taings done to you on that evening of your Baptism."

The first act was the renunciation of the Devil and all his works.

This, as described by
Tertullian, was done first in the Church " under the hand of the Bishop," and again imme
diately before entering the water ia.
" First ye
entered into the outer chamber of the Baptistery, and there facing towards the West (as the
region of darkness) ye heard the command to stretch forth your hand, and as in the presence
of Satan to renounce him
For the formula of renunciation in the Apostolical Constitu
tions, see note 2 on Mystag. i. § 8 ; it corresponds closely with Cyril's, except that this is
addressed to Satan as if personally present : " I renounce thee, Satan 3, and all thy works «,
and all thy pomp s, and all thy worship 6."

Cyril speaks of the latter occasion only.

§ 2. Profession of Faith.

After the renunciation of Satan the Candidate immediately turned
to the East and said, " And I associate myself (o-vwwo-o/iat) with Christ"
Cyril does not give
the words, but seems to allude to the custom, when he speaks of the Candidates "turning
from the West to the East, the place of light

Then, still facing the East, the Candidate was bidden to say, " I believe in the Father,
and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost, and in one Baptism of repentance 8." We have
seen that in Cat. xviii. 22, 32, Cyril intimated to his Candidates that they would be required
to profess publicly the Creed which he had delivered to them and which they had repeated
after him.
This public profession of faith ("O/ioXoy/a, "Redditio Symboli") was in some
Churches made on Holy Thursday, according to Canon 46 of the Synod of Laodicea :
"Those to be baptized must learn the Creed by heart, and recite it to the Bishop or

• Afelegtl. c 13.
praise, as if assenting."

» Prvcat. % 9.

*> Cat. xiii. 93 : " Thou seest this spot of Golgotha ? Thou answerest with a shout of

* Jffil. i. fa.

" Cat. xviii. | 33.

J I 4-

4 Is-

«• Dt Cor. Mil. c. 3.

5 I 6.

6 I 8.

1 I 9, not* f,

8 Compare xviii. 99 : " One Baptism of repentance for the remission of sins."

xxii

INTRODUCTION.

But in the Apostolic Constitutions, c. xli., the
Presbyters on the fifth day of the week."
" And
Candidate is required to recite the whole Creed immediately after the Renunciation :
after his renunciation let him in his consociation (owrno-o-iyifvor) say :
' And I associate myself
to Christ, and believe and am baptized into One Unbegotten Being, the Only True God
Almighty, the Father of Christ, .... and into the Lord Jesus Christ .... and I am baptized
into the Holy Ghost, .... into the resurrection of the flesh, and into the remission of sins,
and into the Jcingdom of heaven, and into the life of the world to come.' And after this vow,
he comes in order to the anointing with oil."

Such appears to have been the custom of the Eastern Churches in general and of Jerusalem
in Cyril's time, although he mentions only those articles of the Creed which were commonly
held to be indispensable to a valid profession of Christian belief.

Dr. Swainson0 represents the matter somewhat differently: "When we come to the
profession of his own personal faith which was made at Jerusalem by the Candidate for
Baptism, we find that this was far briefer not only than the collection of 1 necessary things '
(Cat iv.), but also than the Creed of the Church of Jerusalem." Then after quoting the
short form in Cyril, Myst. i. § 9, " I believe in the Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy
Ghost, and in one Baptism of repentance," Dr. Swainson adds : " The words are clear and
In these words each answered the question of which we read elsewhere, 4 Did he
definite.
believe in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit?'
In this his reply the
Candidate 'confessed' what Cyril called 'the saving confession.'"

It is evident that two separate parts of the Baptismal Service are here confused : the
question to which Dr. Swainson alludes, and " the saving confession " of which Cyril speaks
in Mystag. ii. § 4, belong, as we shall presently see, to a later stage of the ceremony.

§ 3. First Unction. On passing from the outer to the inner chamber of the Baptistery, the
Candidate who had made his renunciation and profession barefoot and wearing his tunic
(Xm»i<) 1 only, now put off this inner garment also, as an emblem of putting off the old
man with his deeds*. A further significance is ascribed by Cyril to this unclothing of the
Candidate, as being an imitation both of Christ, who hung naked 3 on the Cross, and by His
nakedness put off from Himself the principalities and the powers, and "of the first-formed
Adam, who was naked in the garden, and was not ashamed."

" Then, when ye were stripped, ye were anointed with exorcised oil, from the very hairs of
your head to your feet 3"." The consecration of the " exorcised oil " is thus described * : " Now
this is blessed by the chief-priest for the remission of sins, and the first preparation for
For he calls thus upon the Unbegotten God, the Father of Christ, the King of all
Baptism.
sensible and intelligent natures, that He would sanctify the oil in the name of tlu Lord Jesus,
and impart to it spiritual grace and efficacious strength, the remission of sins, and the first
preparation for the confession of Baptism, that so the Candidate for Baptism, when he is
anointed may be freed from all ungodliness, and may become worthy of initiation, according
to the command of the Only-begotten."

Bingham's observation, that Cyril describes this first unction as used "between the re
nunciation and the confession 5 " is not quite accurate :
in fact it came between two con
fessions, the one made, as we have seen, immediately after the renunciation in the outer

9 Creeds oftlie Chur.h, p. 17.
1 Pseudo-Dionysius Areopag. Eccl. Hierarch. UL
a Mystag. ii. f 3.
3 This passage has recently (1891) acquired a special interest
from the controversy concerning Mr. Calderon's picture, repre
senting St. Elisabeth uf Hungary as kneeling naked before the
altar. The word " naked " (yvpvoc, nudus) is not in itself de*
cisive, but here in St. Cyril's account of Baotism absolute naked

ness seems to be implied i
for though women sometimes wore
an under-tunic (jpTtovLov), men had nothing beneath the tunic
proper (x^rw), which is here said to be put off.
According to
Theophylact, on Matt. v. 40. the chiton was properly vh ttmft iyw
kcyoptvov iinoicam<roi.
See Dictionary 0/ Biblical Antiouities,
" Baptism." | 48.
3» lb. t 35 Ant. XI. c. 9, 1 t.

4 Const. Apost. vii. c. 4>

CEREMONIES OF BAPTISM AND CHRISM.

xxiii

chamber, the other at the very time of immersion.
Chrysostom 6 clearly distinguishes two
Confessions, but places one before Baptism, and the other after : " What can be more beautiful
than the words by which we renounce the devil? Or those by which we associate ourselves
with Christ ? Than that confession which comes before the washing ? Or that which comes
after the washing ? "

This first unction is not mentioned by Tertullian, nor in any genuine work of Justin
Martyr, but in the Responsiones ad Orthodoxos, a work which though still early is regarded as
certainly spurious, we find the question put, " Why are we first anointed with oil, and then,
having performed the before-mentioned symbolic acts in the Laver, are afterwards sealed with
the ointment, and do not regard this as done in opposition to what took place in our Lord's
case, who was first anointed with ointment and then suffered '? " And in the answer it is stated
that " We are anointed with the simple oil that we may be made Christs (xpio-i-ot), but with
the ointment in remembrance of our Saviour Christ, who regarded the anointing with ointment
as His burial, and called us to the fellowship of His own sufferings and glory, typically in the
present life but truly in the life to come."

Cyril attributes to this " exorcised oil " the same power as to Exorcism itself, " not only to
burn and cleanse away the traces of sin, but also to chase away all the invisible powers of the
evil one 8."

According to the directions concerning this first unction in the Apostolical Constitutions'),
the Bishop was first to anoint the head only, the anointing of the whole body being then
completed by the Deacon or Deaconess.

§ 4. Baptism. After this anointing the Candidates were " led by the hand to the sacred
pool of Holy Baptism ,."
This pool (■roXv^Sijflpn) was supplied with water raised from the
reservoirs, of which, as we shall see, the Bordeaux Pilgrim speaks in his description of the
Basilica.

As great multitudes both of men and women were baptized at the special seasons, the
Baptisteries were large buildings outside the Church, such as the Baptistery of the Lateran,
The font itself also was large enough for
said to have been originally built by Constantine.
several persons to be baptized at the same time.
In some places the men were baptized first,
in others different parts of the Baptistery were assigned to them, and
and then the women :
curtains were hung across the Font itself2.

The consecration of the water is not mentioned in the Didache or Justin Martyr; but
Tertullian thus describes its effect :
" The waters after invocation of God acquire the
sacramental power of sanctification ; for immediately the Spirit comes down from heaven
upon the waters, and rests upon them, sanctifying them from Himself, and they being thus
sanctified imbibe a power of sanctifying 3."

In the prayer of consecration given in the Apostolic Constitutions the Bishop is directed
first to offer adoration and thanksgiving to the Father and Son, and then to call upon
the Father and say :
" Look down from heaven, and sanctify this water, and give it
grace and power, that so he that is to be baptized, according to the command of Thy
Christ, may be crucified with Him, and may die with Him, and may be buried with Him,
and may rise with Him to the adoption which is in Him, that he may be dead to sin,
and live to righteousness

Cyril ascribes the like effect to the consecration of the water, as imparting to it a new
power of holiness by " the invocation of the Holy Ghost, and of Christ, and of the Father K"
While standing in the water the Candidate made what Cyril calls " the saving con-

• Efliet. i. Horn. i. I 3.

» ilfslat- ii. I 4.

* VII. c. 43.

t Qitrrslio 137.

« M/staf. ii. | 3,

• Bingham, Ant. VIII. c. 7, | a ; XI. c. 11. 83.

S Dt Baplismo. c hr.

5 Cat. iii. | 3. See also Introduction, ch. vi. | a.

9 Lib. Hi. c. 15.

xxiv

INTRODUCTION.

fession6." The whole Creed having been already recited (Redditio Symboli) in the outer
chamber immediately after the Renunciation, a short form was now employed containing
only the necessary declaration of faith in the Holy Trinity, and in the Baptism of Repentance
for the remission of sins.

§5. Trine Immersion.

This short confession appears to have been 'made by way of
question and answer thrice repeated. "Thou wast asked, Dost thou believe in God the
Father Almighty? Thou saidst, I believe, and dippedst thyself, that is, wast buried.
Again
thou wast asked, Dost thou believe in our Lord Jesus Christ and in His Cross? Thou
saidst, I believe, and dippedst thyself; therefore thou wast buried with Christ also: for
he who is buried with Christ, rises again with Christ. A third time thou wast asked,
Dost thou believe also in the Holy Ghost? Thou saidst, I believe, a third time thou
dippedst thyself; that, the threefold confession might absolve the manifold fault of thy
former life
But Cyril of Alexandria, as quoted by Bingham 8, " makes these answers
not only to be a confession of the three Persons of the Trinity, but a triple confession
of Christ ; which implies a repetition of the Creed (the shortened form ?) three times over."

In which of these ways the threefold

interrogation (" usitata et legitima verba interrogationis ") was made at Jerusalem, is not quite certain from Cyril's words : " Each
was asked, Dost thou believe in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, and ye made that saving confession, and went down thrice into the water?."
The Didactic" 1 enjoins baptism simply into the names of the Three Persons of the Holy
Justin Martyr1 adds a few words only to the names "of God the Father and
Trinity.
Lord of the universe, and of our Saviour Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit;" and
Tertullian 3 observes that " Wherever there are three, that is, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, there is the Church, which is a body of three."
The trine immersion
had reference not only to the Trinity, but was also a symbol of the three days of our
Saviour's burial «. The use of the three Holy Names was made more strictly indispensable
as heresies were multiplied: thus the 49th Apostolic Canon, which, Hefele says, "must
be reckoned among the most ancient Canons of the Church," orders that " If any Bishop
or Presbyter does not baptize, according to the Lord's command, into the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, but into three Beings without beginning, or into three Sons, or three
Comforters, he shall be deprived."

We see here that the power of administering Baptism was not restricted to the Bishop :
and Cyril speaks of it as possessed by "Bishops, or Presbyters, or Deacons," assigning as the
reason the great increase of believers, "for the grace is everywhere, in villages and in
cities, on them of low as on them of high degree, on bondsmen and on freemen V

Thus the rule of Ignatius s, that " it is not lawful either to baptize or to hold a love-feast
apart from the Bishop (x°>plr toC imaK&ituv)," must be understood to mean " without the
authority and permission of the Bishop."

and the taste of milk and honey administered to the neophyte

Of certain minor ceremonies connected with Baptism, such as the "Kiss of peace,"
no mention is made by Cyril.
§ 6. Chrism. The custom of anointing the baptized with consecrated ointment is
regarded by Cyril as a sacramental act representing the anointing of Jesus by the Spirit
at His Baptism.
" As the Holy Ghost in substance lighted on Him, like resting upon like,
so, after you had come up from the pool of the sacred waters, there was given to you an
unction the counterpart (to dvriVwrox) of that wherewith He was anointed, and this is the Holy
Ghost8." As " He was anointed with a spiritual oil of gladness, that is with the Holy Ghost,

• Mystng. ii. I 4,
•Cap.vii.

' Afolog. I. c

7 Pseudo-Ambros. de Sacramrntii, II. c. 7.

3 Dt Sa/litmc, c vi.

4 Mystag. ii. | 4, note 3.

8 Ant. XI. c. 7, 1 11.

9 Myslag. Hi. | 4.
« AdSmyrn. c via.

7 Bingham, Ant. XII. c. 4, ft 5, 6.

5 Cat. xvii. 35.
I Mytttig. iii. f 1.

CEREMONIES OF BAPTISM AND CHRISM.

called oil of gladness, because He is the author of spiritual gladness, so ye were anointed with
ointment, and made partakers and fellows of the Christ'." The ceremony was very ancient:
there is probably a reference to it in the words of Theophilus of Antioch1 (c. a.d. 170) :
Tertullian, a little
"We are called Christians, because we are anointed with the oil of God."
later, after speaking of Baptism, says : " Immediately on coming out of the Laver we are
thoroughly anointed with a consecrated unction * ;" and again, " After that, the hand is laid
upon us in benediction, invoking and inviting the Holy Ghost V In another passage4
he mentions also the sign of the Cross : " The flesh is washed, that the soul may be cleansed ;
the flesh is anointed that the soul may be consecrated ; the flesh is signed [with the Cross]
that the soul also may be guarded ; the flesh is overshadowed by imposition of the hand, that
the soul also may be illuminated by the Spirit."

The consecration of the ointment is compared by Cyril to the consecration of the
Eucharist ; after the invocation of the Holy Ghost it is no longer simple or common ointment,
but a gift (X<ip«rf«i) of Christ, and by the presence of the Holy Ghost is able to impart
of His Divine Nature. And this ointment is symbolically applied to thy forehead, and thy
other organs of sense'."

The ears, nostrils, and breast were each to be anointed, and Cyril explains the symbolical

meaning in each case by appropriate passages of Scripture 6.

The consecration of the chrism could be performed by none but the Bishop, and he
alone could anoint the forehead
Presbyters being allowed to anoint the breast, but only
The several ceremonies are thus explained in the
with chrism received from the Bishop 8.
Apostolical Constitutions') : "This baptism is given into the death of Jesus: the water is
instead of the burial, and the oil instead of the Holy Ghost ; the seal instead of the Cross ;
the ointment is the confirmation of the Confession *."

In like manner the chrism is explained again, "The ointment is the seal of the

covenants

that is, both of God's promises, and of the Baptismal vows.

The members to be anointed were not the same in all Churches, but everywhere the
chief ceremony was the anointing of the forehead with the sign of the Cross.
This is what
Cyril calls "the Royal Signs," and "the Royal Seal to be borne upon the forehead of Christ's
soldiers*," and again, " The Seal of the fellowship of the Holy Ghost >."

These last were probably the very words pronounced by the Bishop in making the sign
of the Cross on the forehead ; for by Canon 7 of the Second General Council at Antioch
(381), converts from heretical sects were to be " sealed or anointed with the holy ointment
on the forehead, eyes, nostrils, mouth, and ears. And in sealing them we say, ' The seal
of the gift of the Holy Ghost.'"

An additional prayer to be said by the Bishop is given in the Apostolical Constitutions6:
" O Lord God, the Unbegotten, who hast no Lord, who art Lord of all, who madest the odour
of the knowledge of the Gospel to go forth among all nations, grant also now that this
ointment may be efficacious upon him that is baptized (jSonrtfo/trvp), that the sweet odour of
thy Christ may remain firm and stable in him, and that having died with Him, he may arise
and live with Him."

The whole ceremony was called by the Greeks " Chrism," the " Unction " being regarded
by them as the chief part.
In the Latin Church the name Confirmation is of later date, and
indicates that greater importance was then attached to the " Laying on of Hands " with
prayer.

*

9 Mystag. iii. 5 a.
6 Mjrst. iii. S 4.
8 See the authorities in Bingham, Ant. xii. c. 2, H ■■ a.

1 Ad Antofyntm, i.
7 Apost. Const, iii. | 16 : " Let the Bishop anoint those that are baptized with ointment (nvp<o)."

* Dt Resurr. Carnis, c 8.

■ Dt Baft. e. 7.

1 Const. Apost. vii. c. aa.

3 lb. c. 1

S lb. | 3.

« lb. vii. c. 43.

? iii. 17.
i lb. xviii. 33.

* vii. c. 44.

Cf. Cat. iii. 17.

3 Cat. iv. 1 14.

4 lb. xii. I 8.

xxvi

INTRODUCTION.

Another ceremony, not alluded to by Cyril, was the saying of the Lord's Prayer by the
neophyte, standing up, and facing towards the East
after which he was also to pray, " O
God Almighty, the Father of Thy Christ, Thine Only-begotten Son, give me a body undefiled,
a clean heart, a watchful mind, an unerring knowledge, the influence (Ari^ofnpow) of the Holy
Ghost for attainment and full assurance of the truth, through Thy Christ, by whom be glory
to Thee in the Holy Ghost for ever.

Amen."

CHAPTER V.

Eucharistic Rites.

Liturgy.

§ i. First Communion. When the rites of Baptism and Chrism were completed, the newmade Christians, clothed in white robes (Myst. iv. 8), and bearing each a lighted taper in his
hand, passed in procession from the Baptistery into the great " Church of the Resurrection.''
The time was still night, as we gather from the allusion in Procat., § 15 : " May God at length
shew you that night, that darkness which shines like the day, concerning which it is said, The
darkness shall not be hidden from thee, and the night shall be light as the day." As the newlybaptized entered the church, they were welcomed in the words of the 32nd Psalm.
" Even
now," says Cyril (Procat., § 15), "let your ears ring, as it were, with that glorious sound,
when over your salvation the Angels shall chant, Blessed are they whose iniquities areforgiven,
and whose sins are covered ; when like stars of the Church you shall enter in, bright in the
During the chanting of the Psalm the neophytes seem to
body and radiant in the soul."
have stood in front of the raised ' bema ' or sanctuary, as we learn from Cyril's eloquent con
temporary, Gregory Nazianzen, Orat. XL. §46 : " The station in which presently after Baptism
thou wilt stand before the great sanctuary prefigures the glory from yonder heaven ; the
psalmody, with which thou wilt be welcomed, is a prelude of those heavenly hymns ; the
lamps, which thou wilt light, are a mystic sign of the procession of lights, with which bright
and virgin souls shall go forth to meet the Bridegroom, with the lamps of faith burning
brightly."

From the Syriac " Treatise of Severus, formerly Patriarch of Alexandria (Antioch), -con
cerning the rites of Baptism and of Holy Communion (Synaxis) as received among the
Syrian Christians " (Resch, Agrapha, § 12, p. 361;, we learn that it was the custom " to lift up
the newly-baptized to the altar, and after giving them the mysteries the Bishop (Sacerdos)
crowned them with garlands."

The white garments (Procat., § 2 : Mystag., iv. 88) were worn until the Octave of Easter,

Low Sunday, Dominica in Albis (Bingham, XII. c. iv. § 3).

§ 2. The Liturgy.

In Cyril's last Lecture, Mystagogic V., he reminds his hearers of
what they had witnessed at their first Communion on Easter-day, and thus gives a most
valuable testimony to the prescribed form of administering the Holy Eucharist in the Eastern
Church in the middle of the fourth century.

Passing over all the preparatory portion of the Liturgy, he tells us first that the Deacon
brings water to the Bishop or Priest (t<3 UptT) and to the Presbyters who stand round the
altar, that they may wash their hands in token of the need of purification from sin ; a cere
mony which evidently had reference to the words of the Psalmist, " I will wash mine hands
in innocency; so will I compass Thine altar, O Lord1."
In some Churches, perhaps also at
Jerusalem, the words were actually chanted during the ablution*.

" Then the Deacon cries aloud, Receive ye one another : and let us salute (cWnfa>//«0u)

one another."

In the Clementine Liturgy J the " Kiss of Peace " precedes the " Ablution."

7 Const. Apost. vii. c. 44.

> Mystag. v. | 3.

» Did. Ckr. Ant. " Lavabo."

9 Apost. Const, viii. c II.

'

EUCHARISTIC RITES. LITURGY.

xxvii

Sometimes these two sentences are combined : " Salute ye one another with the holy
kiss*."
In the Liturgy of S. James there are two separate rubrics, one immediately after the
dismissal of the Catechumens, " Take knowledge one of another," and a second after the
Creed, " Let us embrace (ciy<«rr;o-<»/ici<) one another with a holy kiss."

" After this the Priest (Uptvs) cries aloud, Lift up your hearts. Then ye answer, We lift

them up unto the Lord

The meaning of this Preface, as explained by Cyril, is an exhortation by the Priest, or
Bishop when present, and a promise by the people, to raise all their thoughts to God on
high, in preparation for the great Thanksgiving to which they were- further invited : " Let
us give thanks unto the Lord,"-" It is meet and right 6."

Then follows a very brief summary of the Eucharistic Preface, and after that the Trisagion i,
corresponding in part to the long Thanksgiving in the Apostolic Constitutions for all God's
mercies in creation, providence, and redemption 8.

It is important to observe how S. Cyril in this and the following sections associates the
people with the Priest, using throughout the Plural "We." That this is intentional and
significant, we may learn from a passage of S. Chrysostom 0 which is so interesting that we
" Sometimes moreover no difference is made
may be allowed to translate it at length :
between the Priest and those over whom he presides, as for example when we are to partake
of the awful mysteries ; for we are all alike deemed worthy of the same privileges : not as in
the Old Covenant some parts were eaten by the Priest, and others by the governed (6 dpxo^cpor),
It is not so now :
and it was not lawful for the people to share in what the Priest partook of.
but one Body is set before all, and one Cup. And in the prayers also one may see the laity
contributing much.
For the prayers on behalf of the Energumens, and on behalf of those in
Penitence are offered in common both by the Priest and by themselves; and all say one
Again, after we have excluded from the sacred
prayer, a prayer that is full of compassion.
precincts those who are unable to partake of the Holy Table, there is another prayer to be
made, and we all alike lie prostrate on the floor, and all alike rise up. When again we are to
receive and give a kiss of peace, we all alike embrace each other.
Again even amid the
over the people, and the people over
most tremendous Mysteries the Priest
the Priest :
for the formula, " With Thy Spirit," is nothing else than this. The words of
the Thanksgiving again are common : for he does not give thanks alone, but also the whole
people.
For having first got their answer, and they agreeing that 1 It is meet and right so to
do,' he then begins the thanksgiving. And why wonder that the people sometimes speak
with the Priest, when even with the very Cherubim and the Powers on high they send up
those sacred hymns in common. Now all this I have said in order that each of the common
people (ray ipxoiiivav) also may be vigilant, that we may learn that we are all one Body,
having only as much difference between one and another, as between members and members,
and may not cast the whole work upon the Priests, but ourselves also care for the whole Church
even as for a common Body."

prays

It is remarkable that in Cyril's account of the Eucharistic rites in this Lecture there is not
the slightest reference to the words of Institution, though these hold so prominent a place
But
before the Invocation both in the Clementine Liturgy and in the Liturgy of S. James.
we cannot justly assume, from a mere omission in so brief a summary, that the Commem
oration of the Institution had no place in the Liturgy then in use at Jerusalem.
It seems
more probable that Cyril did not think it necessary, after his repeated references to the Insti
tution in the preceding Lecture, to make further mention of a custom so well known as the
recitation of Christ's own words in the course of the Prayer preceding the Invocation. On

* Apost. Const. Tin. c. 1 1. Compare Justin M. Analog. I. c. 65.

Sec the Eucharistic Preface of the Liturgy of S. James in note 4 on Mystag. v. | 6.

5 Mystag. v. | 4.

6 1 3.

7 16.

8 Apost. Const, viii. c. 12.
0 In Epist. II. ad Cor. Homil. xviii. | 3.

xxviii

INTRODUCTION.

the previous day he had quoted S. Paul's account of the Institution, with the remark, " Since
then He Himself has declared and said of the Bread, This is My Body, who shall dare doubt
any longer ? And since he has Himself affirmed and said, This is My Blood, who shall ever
hesitate, saying that it is not His Blood 1 ? " The like efficacy he again ascribes to " the Lord's
declaration " concerning both the Bread and the Wine, that they are " the Body and Blood of
Christ ••"

In the Didache", which gives the oldest elements of an Eucharistic Service, there is neither
the Commemoration nor the Invocation, but only two short and simple forms of Thanksgiving
"for the Holy Vine of David," and " for the broken Bread 3."

Justin Martyr seems to imply that the consecration is effected by the Commemoration of
Christ's own words in the Institution : " We have been taught," he says, " that the food which
is blessed by the prayer of the word which comes from Him (rt)v hC eixn' ^oyov roO nap' airov
tixapio-TTiSt'iaav rptxpifv), and by which our blood and flesh are by transmutation nourished, is the
Flesh and Blood of that Jesus who was made Flesh." He gives no separate Invocation of the
Holy Ghost, but this may have been supplied in the "praise and glory" or in the "prayers
and thanksgivings " sent up " to the Father of all through the name of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost 4."

Irenseus is apparently the earliest writer who represents the Invocation of the Holy Ghost
as the immediate act of consecration :
" We make an oblation to God of the bread and
the cup of blessing, giving Him thanks for that He has commanded the earth to bring forth
these fruits for our nourishment. And then, having completed the oblation, we call forth
(fKKa\ovpti>) the Holy Spirit, that He may exhibit this sacrifice, both the bread the Body of
Christ, and the cup the Blood of Christ, in order that the partakers of these antitypes may
obtain the remission of sins and life eternal

Mr. Hammond writes that, " By the Oriental Churches an Invocation of the Holy Spirit is
In the three Oriental Families of Litur

considered necessary to complete the consecration.
gies such an Invocation is invariably found shortly after the Words of Institution 6."

It is in accordance with this statement that, we find Cyril so frequently declaring that the
elements which before the Invocation are simple bread and wine, become after the
In the first of the passages referred to below
Invocation the Body and Blood of Christ
he speaks of " the Holy Invocation of the Adorable Trinity,'' in the others of the Holy Spirit only.
Cyril next describes the Invocation as " completing the Spiritual Sacrifice, the bloodless
Service," and then gives a summary of the "Great Intercession" as made "over that
The Intercession, as represented by Cyril, is not simply
Sacrifice of the Propitiation."
a prayer, but an offering of the Sacrifice 8, arid this is in accordance with the usual language
of the Liturgies.
" We offer to Thee, O Lord, on behalf also of Thy holy places, which
Thou hast glorified by the Theophany of Thy Christ, and by the visitation of Thine
especially on behalf of glorious Sion, the Mother of all the Churches,
All-Holy Spirit :
and on behalf of Thy Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church throughout the whole world '."
In the Liturgy of S. Chrysostom, as now commonly used in the Orthodox Eastern Church,
we find the fuller phrase, "We offer unto Thee this reasonable Service on behalf of the
world, on behalf of the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church a."

In some particulars Cyril's summary agrees most nearly with the Clementine Liturgy,
as, for example, in the prayer "for the King and those in authority, and for the whole
In others he follows the Liturgy of S. James,
army, that they may be at peace with us 3."

• Mystag. i». I I.

5 Frag, xxxviii.

■ lb. } 6 : see also | 7.

6 Liturgies, p. 33*.

8 Mystag. v. | 8 : x/lvttiv irpoo-tpe'p0'"1' T*l*' ftw»«r.

» lb. p. us.

3 Capp. ix., I.

4 Apol. I. cc. 65-67.

7 Mystag. v, I. f 7 ;
1 Hammond, Liturgy ofS. Janus, p. 43.
> lb. p 18.

iii. § 3 ; r. I 7-

EUCHARISTIC RITES. LITURGY.

xxix

as in the intercession for "every Christian soul afflicted and distressed, that stands in
need of Thy pity and succour ♦."

Cyril

next describes the commemoration of departed Saints, and " of all who in
past years have fallen asleep among us," that is, in the bosom of the Church, and states
his belief "that it will be a very great benefit to the souls, for whom the supplication is
put up while that holy and most awful Sacrifice is presented
He refers to objections
against this belief, and brings forward in defence of it a reason applicable only to sinners :
"When we offer," he says, "our supplications for those who have fallen asleep, though
they be sinners, we offer up Christ sacrificed for our sins, propitiating our merciful God
His language on this subject seems in fact to shew
for them as well as for ourselves 6."
an advance in doctrine beyond the earliest Liturgies.
In those of S. James and S. Basil
we find prayers that the offering may be acceptable as a propitiation "for the rest of the
souls that have fallen asleep aforetime;" and again, "that we may find mercy and grace
with all the Saints who have ever been pleasing in Thy sight from generation to generation,
forefathers, fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
holy
men, and every righteous spirit made perfect in the faith of Thy Christ."

Confessors, Teachers,

There is nothing here, nor in the Clementine Liturgy, nor in that of S. Mark, cor
responding to the purpose which Cyril ascribes to the commemoration, " that at their
prayers and intercessions God would receive our petition."
In the Anaphora of S. Chrysostom contained in the later form of the Liturgy of Constantinople we find, apparently for
the first time, this prayer added to the commemoration of- all Saints, "at whose supplications
look upon us, O God."

There was much controversy on the subject of prayers for the dead in Cyril's time,
and the objections which he notices were brought into prominence by Aerius, and rebuked
by Epiphanius i.

From the commemoration of the departed Cyril passes at once to the Lord's Prayer8,
In the
omitting the Preface which is found in the Liturgies of S. James and S. Mark.
Clementine Liturgy, contrary to general use, the Lord's Prayer is not said at all.
Cyril adds
an exposition of each petition, and gives an unusual explanation of «Viou<7toc, for which see the
footnote : he also explains rod novrjpov as referring to " the wicked one," following in this the
Embolismus of S,. James, " deliver us from the wicked one and from his works."

"After this the Bishop says, Holy things for holy men?."

Chrysostom- explains this as
being both an invitation to the Faithful in general to communicate, and a warning to the
unholy to withdraw. " The Bishop, with loud voice and awe-inspiring cry, raising high his arm
like a herald, and standing on high in sight of all, -above that awful silence cries aloud, inv iting
some and repelling others, and doing this not with his hand, but with his tongue more clearly
than with the hand
For when he says, Holy things for the holy, he means this : Who
soever is not holy, let him not draw near '."

In regard to the doctrinal significance of the formula, Dr. Waterland's remarks should be

consulted ".

The response of the people to the " Sancta Sanctis " is given by Cyril 3 in accordance with
the Liturgy of S. James and the Clementine : " One is Holy, One is the Lord, Jesus Christ :"
but he does not mention the " Gloria in excelsis " nor the •' Hosanna," both of which follow
here in the Clementine.

"After this," says Cyril, "ye hear the chanter inviting you with a sacred melody to the
This

Communion of the Holy Mysteries, and saying, O taste and see that the Lord is good*.

4 Hammond, Liturgy o/S. James, p. 44.

I 16 ; Diet. Chr. Biog. "Aerius."
edited after Clirysostom's death.

5 J 9.
8 Mystag. V. § ix.

* I 10.
9 lb. | 19.

7 Hvres. lxxv. g 7.
Cf. Bingh. Ant. XV. c. 3,
1 Horn, jrvii. in Hebr. These Homilies were

» A Review 0/ the Doctrine of the Eucharizt, c. jt.

3 | 19.

4 f 20.

INTRODUCTION.

agrees with the Clementine rubric : " Let the 33rd Psalm be sung while all the rest are par
taking."
In the Liturgy of S. James, while the Bishop is breaking the Bread and dipping it
in the Wine, the " Agnus Dei " and several Psalms were sung : but of these there is no
mention in the Clementine Liturgy or in Cyril.

On Cyril's directions for receiving the Bread and the Cup with due reverence, see the foot

notes on the passages s.

His final injunction to remain for. the prayer and thanksgiving is taken from that in the
Clementine Liturgy : " Having partaken of the precious Body and the precious Blood of
Christ, let us give thanks to Him who hath counted us worthy to partake of His holy Mys
teries" The thanksgiving, benediction, concluding prayers, and dismissal, vary much in the
different Liturgies.

• CHAPTER VI.

Effects of Baptism and of Chrism.

§ 1. Baptism. When we try to ascertain the exact relation between Baptism and the
Unction or Chrism which immediately followed, we find that Cyril's teaching on the subject
has been understood in very different senses. By some he is thought to regard the Unction
as being merely an accessory rite of the one great Sacrament of Baptism ; to others he seems
to draw a clear distinction between them, assigning to each its proper grace and efficacy.

The former view is stated by the Oxford editor, Milles, in his note on the words : " And in
like manner to you also, after you had come up from the pool of the sacred waters, there was
given an unction, a figure (avTirxmov) of that with which Christ was anointed ; and that is the
Holy Ghost »."
" It is evident," says Milles, " from his words here, that the Chrism of which
Cyril treats in this Lecture is not to be referred to the Unction which is administered by the
For every one sees that by Unction in this passage a ceremony
Romanists in Confirmation.
of Baptism is indicated.
The ancients employed two Unctions in Baptism, the first before
the immersion in the water, of which he spoke in the preceding Lecture ; the second imme
diately upon ascending from the water, of which he speaks in this Lecture."

This opinion is elaborately discussed by the Benedictine editor, Toutte"e, Dissertatio iii.
c. 7, who argues that the Unction described by Cyril is a Sacrament distinct from Baptism,
that it has for its proper grace the gift of the Holy Spirit, and further that this gift is not
conferred in Baptism.
Of these assertions the first and second appear to represent Cyril's
view correctly : the last is an exaggeration and a mistake, the tendency of which is to identify
the Chrism of the Eastern Church with that which is used in Confirmation by the Roman
Church, and to exalt the rite of Confirmation as a proper Sacrament distinct from Baptism,
and even superior to it.
A view differing in some respects from both of these has been
recently put forward by a learned and devout writer of our own Church, who has fully dis
cussed the teaching of Cyril and other Eastern Fathers, and gives the result of his investigation
in the following "Summary3:" "For very many centuries the Christians of the East have
never been forced to define to themselves at all clearly the position of a person baptized but
unconfirmed.
Their mode of administering Confirmation (Chrism}) by the hands of the
baptizing Presbyter-though among the Greeks and some others with chrism prepared by the
Bishop - relieves them from the necessity which weighs upon us Westerns, of teaching
Confirmation (Chrism}) is for
Christian children what their status is between the two rites.
Only
them, far more than it has been for a long while in the West, a factor in Baptism.

5 || ai, 22.
» A. J. Mason, D.D., The Relation of Confirmation to Baptitin. p. 389. Though I find myself compelled to differ widely from
my friend Canon Mason in the interpretation of Cyril's teaching on this subject, I cannot refrain from expressing my sincere
admiration of the tone and purpose of his treatise, and of the learning and research which it exhibits.

« Mystag. iii. f i.

EFFECTS OF BAPTISM AND OF CHRISM.

xxxi

a more or less conscious desire not to fall behind Western teachers in honouring the per
fecting Unction can have led their later authorities to treat that Unction as a sacrament
numerically distinct from Baptism. To all the early doctors of the East the two things are
one, and Baptism culminates in the Unction. The tendency among Oriental Christians was,
not to attribute to Baptism in our modern sense the gift of the Holy Ghost, but rather to
consider Baptism by itself as a bare rite, benefiting the body alone, and dependent for its
spiritual efficacy upon other actions, after and before. t Not that this tendency has its full way.
The Greek Fathers may be said certainly on the whole to trace the forgiveness of sins, the
preparatory cleansing, to the baptismal Laver ; the gift of the Holy Ghost, for the ordinary
purposes of Christian living, they trace, like S. Chrysostom, to that act which comes " im
mediately after Baptism, and before the Mysteries."

When we come to inquire how far these several theories agree with the teaching of Cyril
himself, we must in the outset put aside altogether the name Confit mation : for as applied to
the Unction used in the Eastern Church it is only confusing and misleading.
In the early
ages of the Church Confirmation was not known even by name.
In the Latin Church " neither
Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, Augustine, Jerome, nor any of the Latin Fathers, makes mention
Nor have the Greeks any word to answer to this Latin term 3."
of Confirmation in this sense.
So far, therefore, Milles appears to be perfectly right in refusing to connect the Chrism of
which Cyril treats with the Unction used in Confirmation by the Roman Church.

We may add that in Cyril's account of Chrism it is wholly unconnected with Confirmation,
Chrism, he says, is the antitype of
both in its symbolic reference and in its outward form.
the Unction of Christ by the Holy Ghost at His Baptism : Confirmation is universally ad
mitted to have been a following of the Apostles in their laying on of hands.
But in that
Apostolic rite there was no unction, and in Chrism there was no such laying on of hands.

In several passages Cyril clearly distinguishes the outward form of Baptism from the

spiritual grace.

" If thy body be here, but not thy mind, it profiteth thee nothing.

Even Simon Magus
once came to the Laver : he was baptized, but was not enlightened ; and though he dipped
his body in water, he enlightened not his heart with the Spirit : his body went down and came
up, but his soul was not buried with Christ, nor raised with Him*."

It is impossible here to regard " the Spirit " as referring to the grace of Unction : for
(i) Baptism was not accompanied by Unction in the time of the Apostles, and (2) we should
thus make a false antithesis between the outward part of the one rite ("he dipped his body in
Here, therefore, Cyril attributes enlightenment of
water"), and the inward part of the other.
the heart by the Spirit to Baptism apart from Unction, and at the same time lays stress upon
the difference between the worthy and unworthy recipient of the outward form.

The importance of this difference is further enforced throughout the next two sections, and
at the close of § 4 the distinction between the outward sign and inward grace of Baptism,
strictly so called, is again asserted, " though the water will receive thee, the Spirit will not
accept thee."

" Some might suppose," it is said, " from these words that Cyril thought of water and the
Spirit as the sign and the thing signified in Baptism respectively, and a passage in a later
Lecture upon the subject of the Sacrament (of Baptism) at first confirms that impressions."

To suppose that Cyril had any other thought in the former passage, seems to me
impossible for any ordinary reader; and the later passage, not only at first, but more fully
the longer it is considered, confirms that impression beyond all doubt. The whole quotation,
including Cat. iii. §§ 3, 4, is too long to repeat here, but may be read in its proper place.

S Suicerf Thesaurus, Xpt&na.

4 Prccat. I m.

5 Mason, ubi sufr., p. 337.

xxxii

INTRODUCTION.

It will be sufficient to give the passages which are of chief importance in the question before
us, according to Canon Mason's translation.

.

Cat. iii. § 3. " Do not attend to the laver as mere water, but to the spiritual grace given
. " the mere water, receiving the invocation of the Holy Ghost, and
along with the water " .
of Christ, and of the Father, acquires a power of sanctity.
For since man is a two-fold being
composed of soul and body, the cleansing element also is two-fold, the incorporeal for the
incorporeal, the bodily for the body. .And the water cleanses the body, but the Spirit seals
the soul, in order that having our hearts sprinkled by the Spirit, and our bodies washed with
pure water, we may draw nigh to God.
When, therefore, you are about to go down into the
water do not pay attention to the mere nature of the water, but expect salvation by the
operation of the Holy Ghost.

For without both it is impossible for thee to be perfected."

No words could state more clearly the distinction between the outward sign and the
inward grace of Baptism, and the absolute necessity for both. There is no posssible reference
to Unction, but " the operation of the Holy Ghost " in cleansing and sealing the soul is
unmistakably connected with Baptism as " the grace given with the water" (n«a roi viaros),
and below, as " the seal by water " (t>;» 61
uSaror <r<£,.a-yl<5<i), the latter phrase shewing that
Baptism by water is the signum efficax of the grace in question.

Cyril then quotes our Lord's words, Except a man be born of water and the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God, and explains them thus : " On the one hand he who is
being baptized (tfanrifI/jh/oi) with the water, but has not had the Spirit vouchsafed to him
(i«ira£<u0«c), has not the grace in perfection : on the other hand, even if a man be dis
tinguished for virtue in his deeds, but does not receive the seal bestowed by means of water
(n> 81' Iharot afypayiba), he shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven."
Canon Mason,
whose translation I have followed, finds here a reference both to Baptism and to Unction as
" the first baptismal act and the second," and in support of this interpretation gives a second
and more emphatic version : " He who is in course of being baptized with the water, but has
not yet had the Spirit vouchsafed to him, has not the grace in perfection."
This introduction
of the word "yet" in order to represent a distinction between two separate acts, is not
*aTa£iw6th
justified either by the reading of the older editions (oiii r<5 v8an jSan-nfo/ifnor
ii tov Uviviiaros), nor by that of Codices Monac. Roe, Casaub. adopted by Reischl (oCrt
6 BtfiamitTnivos k.t.X.), nor by the Benedictine text (ovtc 6 /3(nrrtf.;/ifxos k.t.X.). The obvious
meaning of the passage, with either reading, is that " the man who in Baptism did not receive
the Holy Spirit, has not the grace (of Baptism) complete." The Benedictine Editor in his
elaborate argument for regarding Chrism as a distinct sacrament s*, does not even refer to
this passage.

A statement which is important in this connexion is found in Mystag. ii. § 6: "Let no
one then suppose that Baptism is the grace of remission of sins only, or further of adoption,
as the Baptism of John conferred only remission of sins ; but as we know full well that
it cleanses from sins and procures a gift of the Holy Spirit, so also it
is a counterpart
(livTiTimov) of the sufferings of Christ."

Here besides "the remission of sins, which no man receiveth without the Holy Spirit6,"
we find "a gift of the Holy Ghost," and the fellowship of Christ's Passion distinctly attributed
to Baptism.

If the " adoption " mentioned at the beginning of this passage were identical (as Toutte"e
thinks) with the " gift of the Holy Ghost," it would by no means follow that Cyril here means
to include Unction in Baptism.
For the grace which beyond all others is exclusively attached
to Baptism, and not to Unction, is the new birth, and this is " the new birth into freedom

5» Dissert, iii. c. 8.

« Hooker, E.P. V. Ixvi. 16.

EFFECTS OF BAPTISM AND OF CHRISM.

xxxiii

and adoption!?
In fact Cyril's teaching on this point is in strict accordance with that
of St. Paul in Gal. iv. 4-6, that we first receive the adoption of sons (vioOttriav), and then
" because ye are sons, God sent forth the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, crying, Abba,
So again in Rom. viii. 15, 16, he says, " Ye received the Spirit of adoption, whereby
Father."
The Spirit Himself beareth witness with our spirit that we are
we cry, Abba, Father.
In both passages St. Paul clearly distinguishes two things, " the
the children of God."
adoption " itself, and the witness of it by " the Spirit of adoption."
Cf. Bengel on v. 4 :
" Prius adoptionem, deinde Spiritum adoptionis accepimus ; " and on v. 6 : " Filiorum statum
sequitur inhabitatio Spiritus Sancti, non hanc ille." The adoption itself belongs to Baptism
strictly so called, in which we are made children of God and joint heirs with Christ (cf.
Cat. iii. 15) : the witness of the indwelling Spirit of adoption is the special grace ascribed
There are many
to Chrism in the Eastern Church, and to Confirmation in the Western.
other passages in which Cyril ascribes to Baptism itself, as distinct from Chrism, a gift
of the Spirit, such as the following : " But He trieth the soul : He casteth not His pearls
before the swine :
if thou dissemble, men will baptize thee now, but the Spirit will not
baptize thee8."

" The Lord, preventing us according to His loving-kindness, has granted repentance
at Baptism, in order that we may cast off the chief-nay, rather the whole burden of
our sins, and having received the seal by the Holy Ghost, may be made heirs of eternal life'."
Again, after speaking of " the invocation of grace having sealed the soul," he adds :
" Having gone down dead in sins, thou comest up quickened in righteousness.
For if
thou hast been united with the likeness of the Saviour's death, thou shalt also be deemed
worthy of His Resurrection'." The benefits ascribed to Baptism in these several passages
without any allusion to Chrism, are brought together with rhetorical effect in the Introductory
Lecture, § 16 : "Great is the Baptism that lies before you ; a ransom to captives, a remission
of offences, a death of sin, a new birth of the soul, a garment of light, a holy indissoluble
seal, a chariot to heaven, the delight of Paradise, a welcome into the kingdom, the gift of
adoption."

From such language it is clear beyond question that in Cyril of Jerusalem, not to speak
of other Oriental Fathers, the tendency is not " to consider Baptism by itself as a bare
rite, benefiting the body alone, and dependent for its spiritual efficacy upon other actions
after and before," but as depending on the power of the Holy Ghost, and the sincerity
of repentance and faith in man.

If further proof were needed, a glance at the Index under the word " Baptism " will
shew the extraordinary richness, variety, and precision of Cyril's teaching, as to the gifts
of the Holy Ghost conferred therein.

§ 2.

Chrism. When spiritual blessings so many and so great have been ascribed to
Does
Baptism, in what light, it may be asked, does Cyril regard the Unction which follows?
he treat it as being merely an additional ceremony subordinate to Baptism, or as having for
its own proper grace some special gift of the Holy Ghost? We find no answer to this ques
tion in the earlier course of Lectures a.
But that Chrism was not regarded by Cyril as a mere
accessory to Baptism, as Milles thought 3, may be safely inferred from the fact that in announc
ing the subjects of his Mystagogic Lectures, he mentions first Baptism, then "the seal of the
fellowship of the Holy Ghost," and then " the Mysteries at the altar of the New Covenant * : "
and this inference is fully confirmed by his language elsewhere: "Ye have heard enough
A mere additional
of Baptism, and Chrism, and partaking of the Body and Blood of Christ

7 Cat. I. ft,

« lb. xvii. t 36.
in Cat. xvi. I 26, see below, p. xxxiv.

VOL. VII.

9 lb. ir 37.
S Note on Myslag. iii. | 1.

1 lb. iii. 1 12.

fl Upon the supposed allusion to Chrism

4 Cat. xviii. % 33.

S Mysiag. v. 1 1.

d

xxxiv

INTRODUCTION.

ceremony of Baptism could not have been so independently placed between the two great
Sacraments, and, as it were, in the same rank with them.

The importance thus attached to Chrism is further shewn in the fact that Cyril uses the
very same language in reference to the consecration of the ointment of Chrism, and of the
water of Baptism, and of the Eucharistic elements.
" The bread and wine of the Eucharist
before the Invocation of the Holy and Adorable Trinity are simple (Jwto's) bread and wine, but
after the Invocation the Bread becomes the Body and the Wine the Blood of Christ6."
" Regard not the Laver as simple (Xirw) water, but rather regard the spiritual grace that is given
with the water?." "The simple water having received the Invocation of the Holy Ghost, and
of Christ, and of the Father, acquires a new power of holiness8."

" But see thou suppose not this to be plain (^t\6v) ointment.

For as the Bread of the
Eucharist, after the Invocation of the Holy Ghost is no longer simple (Xiro't) bread, but the
Body of Christ; so also this holy ointment is no longer plain tyi\6v) ointment, nor, as one
might say, common, after Invocation, but Christ's gift of grace (xapivpa), and is made effectual
to impart the Holy Ghost by the presence of His own Godhead'."

The spiritual benefits which Cyril ascribes to the Unction are set forth in the same
Lecture.
"This holy thing is a spiritual safeguard of the body, and salvation of the soul "
(§ 7) : it sanctifies all the organs of sense : " the body is anointed with the visible ointment,
and the soul is sanctified by the Holy and Life-giving Spirit " (§ 3).
After being anointed the
Christian is now entitled to that name in its fullest sense 1 ; he is clothed with the whole
armour of the Holy Ghost, that he may stand against the power of the adv ersary : he may say,
"lean do all things in Christ who strengtheneth me" (§ 4).

In regard to the supposed identity of Chrism and Confirmation, it is important to notice
carefully how Cyril speaks of the laying on of hands in the only passage where he men
tions it

He first illustrates the freedom of the Spirit, and His independence of human agency, by
the gift of prophecy to the seventy elders, including Eldad and Medad : he then refers to the
gift of the spirit of wisdom to Joshua by the laying on of Moses' hands 3, and adds, " Thou
seest everywhere the figure (twtoi>) in the Old Testament, and in the New the same. In Moses'
time the'Spirit was given by laying on of hands (xttpoStouf), and Peter gives the Spirit by laying
on of hands 4 : and upon thee also, who art to be baptized, the grace is about to come ; but
the manner (to wit) I tell thee not, for I do not forestall the time."

From this passage it has been inferred (1) that Cyril alludes to a gift of the Spirit by laying
on of hands in immediate connexion with Baptism and Unction s, and (2) that he refers this
gift of the Spirit not to Baptism itself, but to the laying on of hands, or to the Unction
as a figure that answers to it6.

(1) The first of these inferences is opposed to the fact that Cyril neither mentions the
laying on of hands as part of the actual ceremonial in Baptism or Unction, nor as the analogous
rite in the old Testament, but on the contrary expressly says? that the symbol (ru aipPa\ov) of
this holy Chrism in the Old Testament lies in the consecration of Aaron to be High Priest,
when Moses, "after the washing in water anointed him, and he was called ' anointed,' evidently
from this figurative unction (toO xp'<rparoi flnAqSr) toC rvniKoi)."

(2) In support of the second inference the argument offered is as follows : "That the Spirit
was to come upon them in the course of their Baptism is here again clearly stated ; but that
Cyril did not intend them to suppose that Baptism itself would convey the gift is equally clear.
Again and again in earlier Lectures, as well as in the words actually before us, Cyril has taught
them to expect the gift in Baptism ; if therefore the immersion ftself were to be the means of

« Myttag. i. I 7.

3 DeuU xxxiv. 9

J Cat. iii. I 3.

4 Acts viii. 17.

« llidcm.

5 Toutt£e.

9 Myslag. iii. 3.

1 lb. iii. 1 1.

6 Mason, p. 341, with note.

« Cut. xvi. f| 35, jfi.
7 Mystag. iii. 6.

EFFECTS OF BAPTISM AND OF CHRISM.

Yet now he says that he will not tell them
receiving it, he has already told them his secret.
That remains for a future occasion8." The mistake, as
'how' they are to receive it.
For of the
I venture to consider it, lies in the words which I have marked with italics.
mysteries which were to be concealed from the unbaptized (<i/iw?roi) the first was the manner
of administering Baptism itself, and the second, the unction of Chrism ; and in the preceding
Lectures Cyril has no more told the secret of the one than of the other.
" Baptism, the
Eucharist, and the oil of Chrism, were things that the uninitiated (d^iJijroi) were not allowed
to look upon s."

"We bless," says S. Basil1, "both the water of Baptism and the oil of the Chrism, and
From what written commands? Is it not from
moreover the baptized (/3oirrtfb7»fi<oi') himself.
a secret (o-ieMra/uVijs) and mystical tradition ?
Again, the very anointing with the oil, what
word of Scripture taught that? And the dipping the man thrice, whence came it? And all
the other accompaniments of Baptism, the renunciation of Satan and his angels, from what
Scripture came they ? Come they not from this unpublished and secret teaching, which our
fathers guarded in a silence with which no prying curiosity might meddle, having been well
For how could it have been right
taught to preserve the sanctity of the mysteries by silence ?
to publish in writing the doctrine of these mysteries, which the unbaptized are not even
allowed to look upon ? "

As these secret ceremonies of Baptism' and Unction are revealed by Cyril only in the
Mystagogic Lectures, the supposed reason for saying, that in Cat. xvi. 26, the promised gift of
the Spirit refers not to Baptism but only to Unction, at once falls to the ground.

The true state of the case is well expressed by Bingham % " Though the ancients acquainted
the Catechumens with the doctrine of Baptism so far as to make them understand the spiritual
nature and design of it, yet they never admitted them to the sight of the actual ceremony, nor
so much as to hear any plain discourse about the manner of its administration, till they were
fitted and prepared for the actual reception of it,"-or rather, till they actually received it.

There is in fact no reason to exalt the benefits of Unction, or Confirmation, by robbing
Baptism of its proper grace.
" It was this Unction, as the completion of Baptism, to which
they ascribed the power of making every Christian in some sense partaker of a royal priesthood.
To it they also ascribed the noble effects of confirming the soul with the strength of all spiritual
graces on God's part, as well as the confirmation of the profession and covenant made on
man's parts." We may well be satisfied that the doctrine of the early Church has been so
fully retained in essential points in our own Office of Confirmation, recalling as it does by the
ratification of the baptismal vows the immediate connexion of the ancient Unction with
Baptism, arid in its Prayers invoking the same gifts of the Holy Spirit,-" Strengthen them, we
beseech Thee, O Lord, with the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and daily increase in them Thy
manifold gifts of grace ; the spirit of wisdom and understanding ; the spirit of counsel and
ghostly strength ; the spirit of knowledge and true godliness ; and fill them, 0 Lord, with the
Amen."
spirit of Thy holy fear, now and for ever.

CHAPTER VII.

EUCHARISTIC DOCTRINH.

We have seen that Cyril makes the consecration of sacramental elements in every case
consist in the Invocation of the Holy Ghost, after which the water of Baptism is no longer

» Miwn, p. 341.
3 Bingh. XII. iii. I 3.

9 Basil, afud Bingham, X. 5, 1 4.

« De Spirit* S. c xxra.

» Ant. X.

| 4.

Cf. Afost. Const. III. c. 17. " This Baptism therefore is into the death of Jesus : the water is instead
of the burial, and the oil instead of the Holy Ghost ; the seal instead of the Cross ; tie ointment it the confirmation of tke Con
fusion." VII. aa : " that the anointing with oil may be the participation of the Holy Spirit, and the water the symbol of the death,
and the ointment the seal of the covenant*.''

d a

xxxvi

INTRODUCTION.

mere simple water », the ointment no longer plain ointment ', the bread and the wine no longer
plain bread and wine, but the Body and Blood of Christ 3.

Upon these statements an argument against Transubstantiation has been founded by Bishop
Cosin *, and adopted both by Dr. Pusey 5 and Dean Goode 6.
It being universally admitted
that the substance of the water and of the ointment remains unchanged, it is argued from the
identity of the language employed in each case that, according to Cyril, no substantial change
takes place in the Bread and Wine.
Bishop Cosin quotes the following passage, of which the
" Take heed thou dost not think that this is a mere ointment only.
original is given below :
For as the bread of the Eucharist after the invocation of the Holy Ghost is no longer ordinary
bread, but is the body of Christ ; so this holy ointment is no longer a bare common ointment
after it is consecrated, but is the gift or grace of Christ, which, by His Divine Nature, and
the coming of the Holy Ghost, is made efficacious ; so that the body is anointed with the
ointment, but the soul is sanctified by the holy and vivifying Spirit • "

Bishop Cosin proceeds to argue thus: "Can anything more clear be said?

Either the
ointment is transubstantiated by consecration into the spirit and grace of Christ, or the bread
and wine are not transubstantiated by consecration into the Body and Blood of Christ.
Therefore as the ointment retains still its substance, and yet is not called a mere or common
ointment, but the Chrism or grace of Christ : so the bread and wine remaining so, as to their
substance, yet are not said to be only bread and wine common and ordinary, but also the Body
and Blood of Christ."

Notwithstanding the great authority of Bishop Cosin, and the assent of Theologians of such
opposite schools as Dr. Pusey and Dean Goode, it must be admitted that the argument, even
as against Transubstantiation, is pressed beyond its just limits. The identity of language
extends only to two points, (i) the mode of consecration by Invocation, (2) the effect
negatively stated, that the material element in each case is no longer simply a material element.
A change, therefore, of some kind has taken place, and we have still to inquire how the change
in each case is described by Cyril.
" The water acquires a power of sanctity," otherwise
described as " the spiritual grace given with the water 8."

" The ointment is Christ's gift of grace (x.Jpio-^o), and becomes effectual to impart by the
" The Bread becomes the Body and

presence of the Holy Ghost His Divine Nature
the Wine the Blood of Christ ,."

There is here no such identity of language as would justify the assertion that the change
described is of the same nature in each case, that because it leaves the substance of the water
and the ointment untouched, therefore the substance of the Bread also must, according to
Cyril, remain unchanged :
this must be proved by other arguments. We must also remember
that if this argument based upon the identity of the language used on the two sides of a com
parison is trustworthy, there is another passage in Cyril to which it may be applied :
" He
once, in Cana of Galilee, changed the water into wine akin to blood (mkuov ni/i<m)a, and is it
incredible that He changed wine into blood?" The change of the water into wine was
a change of substance : are we then prepared to agree with the Roman Church that the change
of the bread also is a change of substance ? Nay further, would the Roman Church itself
accept the principle of the argument ? For observe that in fact Bishop Cosin himself, when he
comes to deal with this passage, gives up his former argument, and distinctly rejects it.

■ Mystag. iii. f 3.

' Cat. Hi. § 3.
3 Mystag. iii. % 3.

In the same Lecture,»$ 7, the consecration
of the bread and wine is said to follow " the Invocation of the
Holy and Adorable Trinity."

4 The History ofPopish Transubstantiation, Ch. v. % 14.
5 The Doctrine 0/the Real Presence, pp. 277-281.
6 The Nature 0/Christ's Presence in the Eucharist, p. 483.
7 'AAA' 000. flrj viropoTftrr/f tKtivo TO fivpop 0 1 Aur t\vflu. worcp yap

6 apTOC TTJ5 cvxaptarrt'ac ucra Tl\v iwixkifviv too aytov Tlvrvuarot
ovk in apTos AiTiSf, aAAa o*«o|ia Xpio-TOti, ovt» «ai to aytov rovro
uvpoy ovk fn ^tAov, ovi' «s av rlirot Tts rotvoy prr' cirijcAnirii',
aAAa XpioTOV xapt-Tua, kox nvev/iarof ayi'ov irapovaHa t^s avTOv
dcornroc evepyijTiKOv yivoueroy.

8 Cat. iii. 3.

9 Mystag. iii. 3. On the translation see note on the passage.
• lb. i. I 7.
* On this reading, see Mystag. iv. f 2, note 4.

EUCHARISTIC DOCTRINE.

xxxvii

" Protestants," he says, " do freely grant and firmly believe that the wine, in the sense already
often mentioned, is changed into the Blood of Christ ; but every change is not a transubstantiation ; neither doth Cyril say that this change (i.e. of the wine) is like that of the water, for
then it would appear to our senses ; but that He who changed the water sensibly can also
change the wine sacramentally, will not be doubted by any V Again, in describing the act
of consecration, Cyril says : " We beseech the merciful God to send forth His Holy Spirit
upon the gifts lying before Him, that He may make the bread the Body of Christ, and the
wine the Blood of Christ, for certainly whatsoever the Holy Ghost has touched, is sanctified
and changed (fiyiaarat «ai iuTaPi$\r)Tu) «."
Here again, as in the passage quoted from Myst.
iii. § 3, a sacramental change of some sort is asserted, but its specific character is not defined.
There is, however, apassage which throws some light on Cyril's conception of the change in
" In the figure of Bread is given to thee His Body, and in the figure of Wine
Myst. iv. § 3 :
His Blood ; that thou by partaking of the Body and Blood of Christ mightest be made of the
For thus we come to bear Christ in us, His Body
same body and the same blood with Him.
and His Blood being distributed to our members (tit ra fnurtpa dmSiSo^vov pe\n)-"
Several
good MSS. read avaitbtynivot, which would give the meaning, " having received of His Body
This does not alter the general sense of the pissage ;
and of His blood into our members."
but the reading avabilopivov is supported by another passage, Myst. v. § 15: "Our common
bread is not substantial (eVioio-iot) : but this Holy Bread is substantial, that is, appointed for
the substance of the soul.
This Bread goeth not into the belly and is not cast out into the
draught, but is distributed (avahihoTai) into thy whole system for the benefit of body and soul."
In order to accommodate these passages to the Roman doctrine of Transubstantiation
the Benedictine Editor here introduces the idea of species, the outward forms or accidents of
the bread.
" We must not suppose," he says, " that Cyril thought the Body of Christ to be
divided and digested (digeri) into our body ; but by a customary way of speaking he attributes
to the Holy Body what is suitable only to the species which conceal it. And he does not
deny that the species pass into the draught, but only that the Body of Christ does so."

But Cyril draws no such distinction between the species and the Body of Christ : to him the
Bread and Wine after consecration are the Body and the Blood of Christ.
For how could it
be said that the species, which in Transubstantiation are the mere outward accidents of bread
and wine, are distributed into the whole system for the benefit of body and soul}

In whatever sense the bread and wine become by consecration the Body and Blood of
Christ, in that same sense the Body and Blood of Christ are, according to Cyril, distributed to
our whole system.

This was no new doctrine : Ignatius, Ephes. xxi., speaks of Christians as " breaking one
Bread, which is the medicine of immortality, and the antidote that we should not die, but live
for ever in Jesus Christ."
This is perhaps the earliest expression of the belief that the resur
rection of the body is secured by the communion of the Body of Christ in the Eucharist. The
manner in which this communion is effected is described by Justin Martyr (Apolog. I. g 66) in
language which shews clearly what Cyril meant : " We do not receive these things as common
bread and common drink : but in the same way as Jesus Christ our Saviour was made flesh by
the Word of God, and took both flesh and blood for our salvation, so we have been taught
that the food over which thanksgiving has been made by prayer in the word received from
Him (r$» iC d^nt ~k6yov roC nap qvtov tvxapi<nT)0€~tvaii Tf.ocpqv), from which (food) our blood and
flesh are by transmutation (nai-d /i«Ta/3o\iji') nourished, is both the Flesh and Blood of Him the
Incarnate Jesus."

Here it is plainly taught that by consecration the Bread and Wine have become the
Flesh and Blood of Christ, and that as such they nourish our " blood and flesh " (observe the

J 0/ Tntuuittantialion, Ch. vi. 1 14.

4 Mystag. v. I 7.

xxxviii

INTRODUCTION.

inverted order) by undergoing a change : in other words, the Eucharistic Body and Blood of
Christ are changed into nourishment of our blood and flesh, by being distributed (as Cyril
says) to all our members, that is by being subjected to the natural processes of digestion and
assimilation. The unusual order of the words " our blood and flesh " is not accidental, but
answers to the process of assimilation, in which the digested food first nourishes the blood,
and then the blood nourishes the flesh.

The meaning is, as Otto says in his note, "that the divine food passes away into our
bodies entire, so that nothing remains:" and Dr. Pusey seems to take the same view, in his
note on the words, "from which (food) through transmutation our blood and flesh are
nourished :" "i.e. the material parts are changed into the substance of the human body5."

Thus then, according to Cyril, the Eucharistic Body and Blood of Christ are distributed to
all our members ; His Flesh and Blood pass by a change into our blood and flesh, and we
thereby become "of the same body and the same blood with Him6:" and " this Bread does
not pass into the belly, and is not cast out into the draught '," but wastes away as the body
itself wastes 8.

However much this view of the Sacramental mystery may differ from later theories, it was
certainly held by many of the Greek Fathers.
Irenaeus, for example, in addition to those
already mentioned, thus writes: "When therefore both the mingled cup and the created bread
receive the Word of God, and the Eucharist becomes the Body of Christ, and from these the
substance of our flesh increaseth and consisteth, how say they that the flesh is incapable of the
gift of God which is eternal life, that flesh which is nourished from the Body and Blood of
the Lord, and is already (inapxovaa) a member of Him ?-even as the blessed. Paul saith, that
we are members of His Body, of His Flesh, and of His Bones8*."

That this was also the teaching of Cyril's contemporaries is clear from the famous passage
It will be sufficient to
of Gregory of Nyssa, in which this doctrine is fully developed.
quote here the latter part of the passage, in which Gregory is speaking of the Wine.
" Since
then that God-containing flesh partook for its substance and support of this particular
nourishment also, and since the God who was manifested infused Himself into perishable
humanity for this purpose, viz. that by this communion with Deity mankind might at the same
time be deified, for this end it is that, by dispensation of His grace, He disseminates Himself
in every believer through that flesh whose substance comes from bread and wine, blending
Himself with the bodies of believers, to secure that, by this union with the immortal, man too
may be a sharer in incorruption. He gives these gifts by virtue of the benediction through
which He transelements the natural quality of these visible things to that immortal thing 9."

In another remarkable passage 1 Cyril gives a further explanation of the effect of conse
cration : " In the New Testament there is heavenly Bread and a Cup of salvation, sanctifying
soul and body :
for as the Bread corresponds to the body, so also the Word (6 Adyor) is
With this language of Cyril we may compare further what is said by
appropriate to the soul."
Gregory of Nyssa in the context of the passage already quoted : " Just then, as in the case of
ourselves, as has been repeatedly said already, if a person sees bread he also in a kind of way
looks on a human body, for by being within this it becomes this, so in that other case the Body
into which God entered (to OtMxov o-w^a), by partaking of the nourishment of bread was in
a certain sense the same with it, since that nourishment, as we have said, is changed into the
nature of the body : for that which is proper to all men is acknowledged also in the case of

5 Real Presence, p. 144. See note 8, below.
6 Mystag. iv. || 1. 3.
6 See Pusey, R. P. p. 151, note 3: "Dr. Gaisford, on my
applying to him, kindly answered me,-' trxva-voKltrimriax.
It
appears to me that this word can onty be explained by a peri
phrasis. The writer appears to me to mean that the elements are

7 lb. v. ft 15.

not thrown off like ordinary food, but that they become blended
or assimilated to the body, and waste away as the body wastes
9* V. ii. | 3.
away.' Mr. Field gives the same meaning."
The whole chapter should
be read with the Rev. W. Moore's notes in this Series, Vol. V.
" Mystag. iv. I 5.
pp. 504-506.

9 Oratio Catechetica, c. xxxvii.

EUCHARISTIC DOCTRINE.

xxxix

That Flesh, namely, that That Body too was maintained by bread ; which Body also by the
indwelling of God the Word was changed into the dignity of Godhead.
Rightly then do we
believe that now also the bread which is sanctified by the Word of God is changed into the
For even that Body was once virtually (rjj Swa/ict) bread, but has
Body of God the Word.
been sanctified by the inhabitation of the Word that tabernacled in the flesh."

In this passage we have the full explanation of what Irenseus meant when he said that the
elements " by receiving the Word of God become the Eucharist," and what Cyril meant by
saying that " as the Bread corresponds to the body, so also the Word is appropriate to the
soul."
Their common doctrine is, that besides the Body and Blood of Christ, that is, His
Humanity offered upon the Cross for our redemption, His Divine Nature, the Word, is also
present, and that it is by receiving the Divine Word that the Bread is made the Body of
" The fathers," says Touttee, " often play upon the ambiguity of the term, saying at
Christ
one time that the Divine Word, at another that the word and oracles of God nourish our soul.
Both are true.
For the whole life-giving power of the Eucharist is derived from the Divine
Word united with the flesh which He assumed : and the whole benefit (fruclus) of Eucharistic
eating consists in the union of our soul with the Word, by meditation on His mysteries and
words, and conformation thereto "." O si sic omnia I

In this view the Bread and Wine are signs or figures of the natural Body of Christ
crucified ; but they are also much more, they are endued by the Divine Word, and through
the operation of the Holy Ghost, with the life-giving power of the same Body and Blood of
Christ, -a power which being imparted to the faithful recipient makes him to be " of the same
body and the same blood with Christ," thereby assuring him of the resurrection of the body to
eternal life, and at the same time strengthening and refreshing the soul by its being united
through faith with the Word, and being thus made " partaker of the Divine nature."

This is not the language of the Western Church, whether Roman, Lutheran, or Anglican,
but it is the language of the earliest Greek Fathers, and of Cyril, as is partly and reluctantly
admitted by so cautious a writer as Dr. Waterland.
After referring to the passage quoted
above from Justin Martyr {Apol. i. 66) he proceeds : "There is another the like obscure hint
in Irenseus, which may probably be best interpreted after the same way. He supposes the
elements to become Christ's body by receiving the word (Word). He throws two considerations
into one, and does not distinguish so accurately as Origen afterwards did between the
symbolical food and the true food." The elements, Waterland adds, "are made the repre
sentative body of Christ; but they are at the same time, to worthy receivers, made the means
of their spiritual union with Christ Himself; which Irenseus points at in what he says
of the bread's receiving the Logos, but should rather have said it of the communicants them
selves, as receiving the spiritual presence of Christ, in the worthy use of the sacred symbols 3."
Again, in c. vii., he says more explicitly of Irenseus, what is equally true of Cyril ; " Least
for his doctrine runs directly counter to
of all does he favour the figurists or memorialists ;
them almost in every line : he asserts over and over, that Christ's body and blood are eaten
and drunk in the Eucharist, and our bodies thereby fed ; and not only so, but insured thereby
for a happy resurrection : and the reason he gives is, that our bodies are thereby made or
continued members of Christ's body, flesh, and bones."

From this view of Cyril's doctrine concerning the Sacramental elements we can easily
understand in what sense he applies the terms " type " and " antitype " to the Eucharistic
elements.
" The Sacrament of the Holy Eucharist having two parts, an outward and an
inward, and the outward part having been instituted by our Blessed Lord with a certain
relation to the inward, and gifted with a certain significance of it, nothing is more natural than
that the titles, type, antitype, symbol, figure, image, should be given to the outward part*."

• Mystag. iv. note 4.

1 Revlraj 0/the Dectrint of the Euckarist, c V.

4 Pu»ey, R. P. p. 94-

xl

INTRODUCTION.

Add to this that, according to Cyril's doctrine as already explained, the bread after the
Invocation, without ceasing to be bread, not only signifies but also is the Body, and we see
how natural it was for him to say in one passage that " His Body bore the figure of bread 5," and
in another that "in the figure of bread the Body is given6." The Body which "is given"
cannot be an absent Body of our Lord, but must be that Sacramental Body, of which Cyril
goes on to say in the same sentence that it is " distributed to our members." Thus the Bread
broken is a type or figure of Christ's Body as crucified for us; and by virtue of its union with
the Divine Word it becomes the life-giving Body, which makes the faithful recipient to be, in
Cyril's words, " of the same body and same blood with Christ."

Another term applied by Cyril and other Greek Fathers to the sacramental elements is

" antitype."

In Mystag. ii. § 6, where Baptism is called " the counterpart (&*/rv*or) of Christ's suffer
ings," the meaning is clearly explained by the context : for in § 5 the reality of Christ's
sufferings is emphatically and repeatedly contrasted with the figurative representation of the
same ; and this figurative representation no less emphatically contrasted with the real and
actual bestowal of the grace of salvation : «V (Ikovi rj pi'pqow, *V dXij&i'a 8« 17 <Ta>njpla, . ... urn rfi
pipTjcret rutv TraOrjpaTtav aiirov KoivoiVJjtravrft, d\r]0(tq rrjv (rarqpiav KtpbrffTutpev.

We have thus a clear distinction of (1) the 'res sacramenti,' Christ's Death and Resurrec
tion, (2) the 'sacramentum ' or 'sign,' the outward form of Baptism, and (3) the 'virtus sacra
menti,' our real participation in the benefits of Christ's Passion, "a death unto sin, and a new
Thus, as Cyril adds at the end of the section, Baptism "has the
birth unto righteousness."
fellowship by representation of Christ's true sufferings," it is the spiritual counterpart in us of
that which was actual in Him.

In Mystag. iii. § 1, speaking of the Chrism, Cyril says, "Now ye have been made Christs
(Xpiaoi) by receiving the antitype of the Holy Ghost, and all things have been wrought in you
by imitation, because ye are images of Christ:" and again, "there was given to you an
Unction, the antitype of that wherewith Christ was anointed, and this is the Holy Ghost."

Here again we have (1) the ' res sacramenti,' the anointing of Christ with the Holy Ghost
at His Baptism, (2) the sacramental sign or figure, the anointing of the baptized, and (3) the
spiritual benefit received in the gift of the Holy Ghost, for, as Cyril adds at the end of § 3,
" while Thy body is anointed with the visible ointment, thy soul is sanctified by the Holy and
Life-giving Spirit"
In these passages we see a distinction between Twror and cWTim-or. The
former is simply the outward sign or figure ; the latter includes with the sign the spiritual
counterpart in us of the thing signified, the benefits of Christ's Passion in the one case, the gift
of the Holy Ghost in the other.

It only remains to inquire whether there is the same distinction in the meaning of the words

as applied to the Holy Eucharist.

In Mystag. v. § 20, Cyril informs us that during the Administration the words, " O taste
and see that the Lord is good," were sung : and in reference to that passage he adds, " In
tasting we are bidden to taste not bread and wine, but the antitypical Body and Blood of
Christ." To taste " the antitypical Body " is therefore to taste " that the Lord is good," whence
it clearly follows that " the antitypical Body " is not the mere sign or figure of Christ's own
natural Body, but the sacramental and spiritual counterpart of it, by which those who faithfully
receive it are so united to Him, that their spirit, and soul, and body, are to bepreserved entire
without blame at His coming 6.

5 Cat. xilL. f 19 • to cuifJ.a. avrov xara to evayy&iov tvttov (fytptv aprov.

^ Mystag. iv. % 3 ; iy TViry yap diptov Si&orai trot to trdfis.

7 x Thess. v. 23, quoted at the end of Mystag, v. | 33.

PLACE OF S. CYRIL'S LECTURES.

xli

CHAPTER VIII.
Place of S. Cyril's Lectures.

We have seen fn a passage already quoted 1 that at Milan S. Ambrose expounded the
But whatever may have been the custom in other
Creed to Catechumens in the Baptistery.
places, it
is certain from numerous passages in Cyril's Lectures that they were delivered
in the great Basilica, or Church of the Resurrection, built by Constantine on the site of the
Holy Sepulchre, and consecrated, as we have seen, with great splendour in the year 335 a.
In a passages where Cyril is speaking of the descent of the Holy Ghost on the day of
Pentecost, he says, " as we discourse on Christ and Golgotha here in Golgotha, so it were
most fitting that we should also speak concerning the Holy Ghost in the Upper Church ;
yet since He who descended there jointly partakes of the glory of Him who was crucified
here, we here speak concerning Him also who descended there."
It appears from a passage
in the Introductory Lecture 4 that it was delivered in the Church itself before the whole
congregation, after that portion of the daily Service to which Catechumens were usually
admitted :
Dost thou view
her order and discipline, the reading of Scripture, the presence of the Ordained, the course
of instruction?" The same custom was retained in Jerusalem in the time of John, Cyril's
successor in the Bishopric, who in writing to Jerome says, "The custom with us is that
we deliver the doctrine of the Holy Trinity publicly during forty days to those who are to be
baptized V

" Dost thou behold this venerable constitution of the Church ?

The Mystagogic Lectures were delivered not in the Church, but after the conclusion
of the public Service "in the Holy Place of the Resurrection itself6," that is, in the small
Chapel which contained the Holy Sepulchre, and to which the name " Anastasis " more
Happily we are not required by the purpose of this work to enter into
properly belonged.
the disputed questions concerning the Holy Places.
Whether the cave re-fashioned and
adorned by Constantine was the actual sepulchre in which our Lord's body was laid, and
whether the present Churches occupy the same site as the Basilica and Anastasis of
Constantine, are matters still under discussion, and awaiting the result of further researches.
What more properly concerns us is to collect the chief passages in which Cyril refers to
these localities, and to try to give a fair representation of his testimony, comparing it with
that of earlier or contemporary writers.

Next to Eusebius, and the Bordeaux Pilgrim who visited Jerusalem in 333, Cyril is the

earliest and most important witness as to the site of Constantine's Churches.
In Cat. xiv. § 5, he says, " It was a garden where He was crucified.

For though it has
now been most highly adorned with royal gifts, yet formerly it was a garden, and the signs
and the remnants of this remain." From this it is evident that the traces of a garden close
Twice again in § n he
to the Church were still visible both to Cyril and his hearers.
mentions the garden, which he had most probably himself seen in its former state, before
the ground was cleared at the time of the recovery of the Holy Sepulchre in 326.

On this point it may be well to quote the words of Mr. Walter Besant, Honorary Secretary
of the Palestine Exploration Fund, who, in an article on " The Holy Sepulchre " in the
Dictionary of Christian Antiquities, writes as follows : " While the temple of Venus with its
foundations was being cleared away, there might have been, and most probably was present,
a Christian lad, native of Jerusalem, eleven years of age, watching the discovery, which
did as much as the great luminous cross which appeared in the sky four (? twenty-four) years
later to confirm the doubtful and strengthen the faithful, that of the rock containing the

* Ch. II. I 3.

4 Procat. | 4.

■ See above. Ch. I. p. a.
5 Hicron. £/. 61 (al. 36). The passage is quoted more fully below on p. xliv.

Cf. Cat. iv. 10 ; x. 19 ; xiii. 4, », 39 ; xiv. 9, 14, 22, Ac.

3 Cat. xvi. 84.

« Cat. xviii. | 33.

xlii

INTRODUCTION.

sacred tomb.
It was Cyril, afterwards Bishop of Jerusalem. One must not forget that he
is the third eye-witness who speaks of these things ; that though he was a boy at the time of
the discovery, he lived in Jerusalem, and must have watched, step by step, the progress of
the great Basilica; that he was ordained before the completion and dedication of the
buildings, and that many, if not all, of his lectures were delivered in the Church of the
Anastasis itself."

That Cyril's testimony concerning the Holy Places was in full accordance with the general
belief of his contemporaries is clear from the fact that he so frequently points to the traditional
sites as bearing witness to the truth of the Crucifixion and Resurrection. He speaks of
Golgotha in eight separate passages, sometimes as near to the Church in which he and his
hearers are assembled7, and sometimes as standing up above in their sight8.
In one place
he asks, " Seest thou this spot of Golgotha ? " and the hearers answer with a shout of
approval'.
In other passages he speaks as if the Church itself was in or rather on Golgotha1,
the same Preposition (cV) being repeated when he mentions " Him who was crucified
thereon."

In explanation of these different modes of speaking, the Benedictine Editor comments
thus 2 : " The Church of the Resurrection was built on part of the hill Golgotha (intra
montem G.) : but the actual rock on which our Lord was crucified was not within the
limits of the Church, yet not far off, namely about "a stone's throw," as the author of the
Jerusalem Itinerary says.
For the Church had been built on the site of the Sepulchre.
Some think that the place of Crucifixion was included in the vast area which was enclosed
. that Golgotha was midway
with colonnades between the Sepulchre and the Basilica, .
between the Basilica of the Crucifixion, and the Anastasis or Sepu4chre.
But the area
in question Constantine paved with stones, and it must therefore have been flat, as we learn
from Eusebius3; Golgotha, on the contrary, stood up high*, and moreover shewed a cleft
made there at Christ's deaths, which would either have been a hindrance to the paving
In addition to this, from the doors of the Basilica there seems to have
or covered up by it.
been a view of the Sacred Tomb 6.
This would have been obstructed if Golgotha had been
between them."

.

The cleft in the rock of Golgotha is mentioned in a fragment of the defence made before
Maximinus in 311 or 312 by Lucian the Martyr of Antioch? : " If yet you believe not, I will
also offer you the testimony of the very spot on which the thing was done. The place itself
in Jerusalem vouches for these facts, and the rock of Golgotha broken asunder under the
weight of the Cross : that cave also, which when the gates of hell were burst, gave back the
Body in newness of life" On this passage Dr. Routh remarks that MaundreU, Journey Jrom
Aleppo to Jerusalem, at Easter, 1697, " shews that the rock had been rent not by any instru
ment, but by the force of an earthquake.
Also it is related by Eusebius in his Theophania,
a book now recovered, that there was one cave only in this cleft of the rock."

According to Eusebius in the passages of the Life of Constantine already referred to,
the Emperor first beautified the monument or sepulchre with rare columns, then paved
with finely polished stone a large area open to the sky, and enclosed on three sides with
long colonnades, and lastly erected the Church itself " at the side opposite to the cave,
which was the Eastern side."

7 xiii. f 4 : o£toc 6 ToAyoflof ot nkr\trio¥ vvv iraiTts napeo~fiev.
19 : oT. o aytor oStoc 6 uircpawcrnpcwc naprvptL tV'i'd8 X.
Cf. xiii. 19.
peroc.

9 xiii. § 33 : 'Opaf TOV ToAyoPa rby towqv ; 'Effip*oas ciralpu uc

trvpTtfc'ficrof.

1 iv. § 10 : 6 pcucapto? o£to? r. iv £ rfir cUa rby tv avru
Cl- } 14 : 6 fv Tif T, TOVTif trrav-

ffravpuidcVra cnryie«poT»i/it0a.
pw0<it.

xiii. i 22 : xvi. 4 : cf tu I1 roiiry Aeyoficr.

» Cat. xiii. I 4, note x.
4 Cat. x. ( 19 ; xiii. | 39.
6 Eus. Vit. Const, iii. c. 36.
7 The fragment is added by Rufinus to his Latin translation
of Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. tx. 6, and is also given in Routh, JttU.
Sacr. iv. p. 6.

3 Vit. Const, iii. c. 33.
5 xiii. ( 39.

THE TIME AND ARRANGEMENT OF S. CYRIL'S LECTURES, xliii

The following is the statement of the Bordeaux Pilgrim : " From thence (the Palace
of David) as you go out of the wall of Sion walking towards the gate of Neapolis, on the
right side below in the valley are walls where the house or Prastorium of Pontius Pilate was :
here our Lord was tried before His Passion. On the left hand is the little hill (moniiculus)
About a stone's throw from thence is a vault
of Golgotha, where the Lord was crucified.
(crypto) wherein His body was laid, and rose again on the third day.
There by command
of the Emperor Constantine has now been built a Basilica, that is to say, a Church of
wondrous beauty, having at the side reservoirs (exceptorid) from which water is raised,
and a bath behind in which infants are washed (baptized)."
Neapolis was the name given
by Vespasian to the ancient city of Shechem, now Nabulus : the " porta Neapolitana "
therefore was in the North wall of Sion.

In reference to the passage quoted above, Mr. Aubrey Stewart says : "The narrative
is clear and connected, and it is hardly possible, for any one who knows the ground, to read
it without feeling that the Pilgrim from Bordeaux actually saw Constantine's buildings
standing on the site now occupied by the Church of the Holy Sepulchre 8."

From these earlier testimonies, compared with the several passages already quoted from
Cyril, we may safely draw the following inferences,
(i) The Anastasis properly so called,
or Church of the Holy Sepulchre, in which the five Mystagogic Lectures were delivered,
was built by Constantine over the cave which, according to the evidence then existing, was
fully believed to be the Burial-place of our Lord.
(2) The Great Basilica, called also
the Church of the Holy Cross, in which the Catechetical Lectures were delivered, was
erected on the East of the Anastasis, and separated from it by a large open area.
(3) The
hill of Golgotha (on which at a later period there was built a third Church, called the Church
of Golgotha, of Holy Calvary, or of Cranium) stood about a stone's throw on the North side
of Constantine's two Churches, and about equidistant from them.

CHAPTER IX.
The Time and Arrangement of S. Cyril's Lectures.

§ 1. The Year.

The incidental notes of time in the Catechetical Lectures are sufficient

to determine with considerable probability the exact year in which they were delivered.

In Cat. xiv. 14, Cyril speaks in the Plural of the Emperors then reigning (o! vvv 0ao-iX«r)
as having completed the building (t(tipyturarro) and embellishment of the great Church
This can only apply to the sons of Constantine, Constans and
of the Resurrection.
Constantius ; and as Constans died early in 350, the Lectures must have been delivered
before that year.

In Cat. xv. § 6, Cyril asks, "Is there at this time war between Persians and Romans,
or no ? " The time thus indicated was apparently that of the campaign which ended in
the disastrous defeat of Constantius at Singara, 348, the battle being soon followed by
a suspension of hostilities

The Benedictine Editor tries to find another proof of the date of the Lectures in Cyril's
description of the state of the Church in Cat. xv. § 7 : " If thou hear that Bishops advance
against Bishops, and clergy against clergy, and laity against laity, even unto blood, be not
troubled."
Toutt£e refers this account to the fierce dissensions which followed the Synod of
Sardica, where Athanasius and Marcellus were declared innocent and received into com
munion, while the Encyclical of the dissentient Bishops, who had withdrawn to Philippopolis,
But it is now ascertained that the Synod of Sardica was held not in
condemned them both.
347, as Toutt£e supposed, but in 344* : and Cyril's description may unhappily be applied to

• The Bordeaux Pilgrim, Introd. p. ix.
p. 100, note ; Hefcle, Council!, M 58, 66, 67.

« See Gibbon, c. xviii. vol. ii. p. 370.

« Diet. Chr. B'ugr. " Athanasius,"

xliv

INTRODUCTION.

the state of the Church at almost any time from the Council of Tyre, by which Athanasius
had been deposed in 335, until long after any date which can possibly be assigned to
Cyril's Lectures.

There is a much more definite note of time in Cat. vi. § 20, where speaking of Manes
Cyril says : " The delusion began full seventy years ago."
If we may assume that the
outbreak of this heresy is to be dated from the famous disputation between Archelaus
and Manes in 277 s,
it follows that Cyril must have made this statement in 347 or 348.
And further, if Dr. Routh* is correct in fixing the date of the Disputation between July
and December 277, the Lent in which the Lectures were delivered must have been, as
Touttde decides, that of 348, not of 347, as Tillemont had supposed.

§ 2. The days.

It is expressly stated by Sozomen ' that " the interval called Quadra
gesima " was made to consist of six weeks in Palestine, " whereas it comprised seven weeks
in Constantinople and the neighbouring provinces."

It is certain the Catechetical Lectures i.-xviii. were all delivered in these six weeks, beins
preceded by the Procatechesis, which was addressed to the candidates before the whole
In the same context Cyril says, "Thou
congregation at the public Service on Sunday (§ 4).
hast forty days for repentance," and again in Cat. i. § 5, " Hast thou not forty days to be free
for thine own soul's sake?"
It thus appears probable that the first of the eighteen Cate
chetical Lectures was delivered on the Monday of the first week of the Fast, the forty days
being completed on the night preceding the Great Sabbath, that is to say, the night of Good
Friday, when the fast was brought to an end at a late hour.

With regard to the date of Cat. iv., which contains a brief preliminary statement of
all the articles of the Creed, we may obtain some evidence from an incident recorded
in a letter of Jerome6 to Pammachius.
John, who had then succeeded Cyril as Bishop
of Jerusalem, had on a certain occasion discoursed on the Creed and all the doctrines
of the Church in the presence of Epiphanius and the whole congregation.
Jerome, being
ignorant of the peculiar custom of the Church of Jerusalem, rebukes the supposed pre
sumption of the Bishop, "that a man deficient in eloquence should in one discourse in
Church discuss all the doctrines concerning the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Crucifixion,
the descent into hell, the nature of angels, the state of, departed souls, the Resurrection
of Christ, and of ourselves, and other subjects." The rebuke calls out a statement from John :
" The custom among us is that for forty days we publicly deliver the doctrine of the Holy and
Adorable Trinity to those who are to be baptized."
This being the custom at Jerusalem
in Cyril's time, we may conjecture that Cat. iv., which corresponds closely to the descrip
tion of John's discourse, was delivered, like that, on a Sunday before the whole congregation :
and this is in fact suggested by Cyril's own words in § 3 : " Let those here present, whose
habit of mind is mature, and who have their senses already exercised to discern good and evil,
That this could not have been
endure patiently to listen to things fitted rather for children."
later than the Sunday following that on which the Procatechesis was delivered, is shewn by
the mention in the same section of " the long interval of the days of all this holy Quadra
gesima," an expression which could not well have been used later than the second Sunday
in Lent

In Cat. iv. § 32, Cyril speaks of having discoursed on Baptism "the day before yesterday,"

that is, on the Friday.

In Cat. v. we have first a discourse on the nature of faith, and then towards the end,
between § 12 and § 13, the actual words of the Creed are for the first time recited by Cyril
In the next four Lectures there are no marks of time, except that
to the candidates alone.

3 Cat. vi. I 27.
Cat. iv. pp 49, jo.

4 Rell. Sac. v. p. it.

t Hut. Eccltt. vii. c. 19.

« Ep. 61 (al. 38).

Cf. Ben. Ed. Praetoq. ad

THE TIME AND ARRANGEMENT OF S. CYRIL'S LECTURES, xlv

vi., vii., viii., were delivered on successive days, as is proved by the word " yesterday "
(rj xe" h^i'a) in vii. § i, and viii. § i.
It thus appears probable that the five Lectures, v.-ix.,
belong to the five days, Monday to Friday inclusive, of the second or third week.

In Cat. x. § 14 Cyril reminds his hearers that he had preached on the words after the order
of Mclchizedck at the public Service on the Lord's day.
As he does not here employ his
usual phrase "yesterday," we may infer that Cat. x. was delivered not earlier than the
Tuesday following the 4th Sunday in Lent, the Epistle for that Sunday in the Eastern
Church being Heb. vi. 13-20, which ends with the words on which Cyril had preached.
The next two Lectures followed Cat x. immediately on successive days, Wednesday and
Thursday, the word "yesterday " recurring in xi. § 1, and xii. § 4.

it certainly came a few days only before Cat xiv. § 1.

Cat xiii., which is occupied with the Crucifixion and Burial, seems to have followed them
For
immediately on the Friday :
speaking there of the preceding Lecture, Cyril says, " I know the sorrow of Christ's friends
in these past days ; because, as our discourse stopped short at the Death and the Burial, and
did not tell the good tidings of the Resurrection, your mind was in suspense to hear what you
were longing for." Now we know that Cat. xiv. was delivered on the Monday after Passion
Sunday: for the Epistle for that 5th Sunday in Lent was Heb. vi. 11 - 14, referring to the
Ascension?: and in § 24 Cyril says, "The grace of God so ordered it, that thou heardest
most fully concerning it, so far as our weakness allowed, yesterday on the Lord's day, since
by the providence of divine grace the course of the Readings (avayiw/mj-uv) in Church
included the account of our Saviour's going up into the heavens."

In Cat. xv. there is no note of time to determine on what day it was spoken ; but
in § 33 Cyril speaks as if his course of teaching was to be interrupted for a little while :
" If the grace of God should permit us, the remaining Articles also of the Faith shaU be in
good time (koto Kaipov) declared to you." We may therefore assign Cat. xv. to the early part of
Passion week, and the three remaining Catechetical Lectures to the week before Easter. This
arrangement seems to be confirmed by Cat. xvii. 34, where Cyril speaks of the two Lectures
on the Holy Spirit, xvi. and xvii., as " these present Lectures," distinguishing them from " our
In the same section he refers to " the fewness of the days," and in § 20
previous discourses."
speaks of "the holy festival of the Passover" as being close at hand. We may therefore
probably assign xvi. and xvii. to two consecutive days in the earlier part of the week
before Easter.

Cat. xviii. contains many indications from which we may conclude with certainty that it
was delivered either on the night of Good Friday, or in the early hours of the morning of the
"Great Sabbath." Thus in § 17 he speaks of "the weariness caused by the prolongation
(vmpdiofas) of the fast of the Preparation (Friday), and the watching."
In § 21 he calls upon
the Candidates to recite the Creed, which he had dictated to them, and which they would
be required to repeat more publicly immediately before their Baptism, as we learn from § 32 :
"Concerning the holy Apostolic Faith which has been delivered to you to profess {tit iirayyfXiof), we have spoken through the grace of the Lord as many Lectures as was possible in
these past days of Lent. . .
. But now the holy day of the Passover is at hand, and ye, beloved
in Christ, are to be enlightened by the washing of regeneration. Ye shall therefore again be
taught what is requisite if God so will; with how great devotion and order you must enter in
when summoned, for what purpose each of the holy mysteries of Baptism is performed, and
with what reverence and order you must go from Baptism to the holy altar of God, and enjoy
its spiritual and heavenly mysteries." The additional instructions here promised were to be
given on the same day as the last Lecture, Cat xviii., that is on Easter Eve immediately
For it was forbidden to reveal the mysteries of Baptism, Chrism, and the
before Baptism.

» Diet. Chr. Antiq. *' Lcctionary," p. 958 b.

xlvi

INTRODUCTION.

Holy Eucharist to the uninitiated, and yet it was necessary that the Candidates should
not come wholly unprepared to perform what would be required of them. The full
explanation of the various ceremonies and ot
the doctrines implied in them was re
served for the M^stagogic Lectures, which were to be delivered on Easter Monday and
the four following days, after the public Service, not in the great Basilica, but in the
Holy Sepulchre itself.

§ 3. Arrangement. The Lectures of S. Cyril have a peculiar value as being the first and
only complete example of the course of instruction given in the early centuries to Candidates
peeking admission to the full privileges of the Christian Church.
" The Great Catechetical
Oration " of Gregory of Nyssa is addressed not to the learner but to the teacher, in accordance
with the opening statement of the Prologue, that "The presiding ministers of the mystery of
godliness have need of a system in their instructions, in order that the Church may be
replenished by the accession of such as should be saved, through the teaching of the word of
Faith being brought home to the hearing of unbelievers."
As an instruction to the Catechist
how he should refute the opponents of Christianity, it is an apologetic work rather than
a Catechism.
S. Augustine's treatise De catcchitandis rudibus is also addressed to the teacher,
being an answer to Deogratias, a Deacon of Carthage, who on being appointed Catechist had
written to Augustine for advice as to the best method of discharging the office.
S. Augustine's
Sermons De tradiiione Symboli, and De redditione Symbol/, are not a connected series, bit
single addresses to Catechumens consisting of brief comments on a few chief articles of thi
Creed.

Cyril's Lectures thus remain unique in character.

After the Procatechesis, which is simply an introductory exhortation to the newly admitted
Candidates, he devotes three Lectures to the need of a sincere purpose of mind, the efficacy
of repentance, and the general nature and importance of Baptism.
The fourth Lecture gives
"a short summary of necessary doctrines," stating with admirable clearness and brevity ten
chief points of the Faith, and the arguments on each point, which are to be developed in the
remaining Catechetical Lectures v.-xviii. He thus traverses the whole ground of Theology
as expressed in the Creed of Jerusalem, of which the exact language is given in the titles
of the successive Lectures.
These instructions to the ' Illuminandi ' (0<arifo/ifV<oi-) were followed
on Easter-day by the administration of Baptism, Chrism, and Holy Communion : and on the
following days of Easter- week the ceremonies and doctrines proper to each of these Sacraments
were explained in the five Lectures on the Mysteries (Mvarayayiai) to the newly-baptized (npot
roit Ntoi/)tt.Ti'aTouf).
These Mystagogic Lectures thus form a most important record of the
Sacramental Rites and Doctrines of the Eastern Church in the fourth Century, the most critical
period of Ecclesiastical History.

CHAPTER X.

The Creed or Jerusalem : Doctrine of The Holy Trinity.

§ 1. The Creed.

The ancient Creed which was used by the Church of Jerusalem in the
middle of the fourth Century, and which Cyril expounded in his Catechetical Lectures, was
recited by him to the Catechumens at the end of the fifth Lecture, to be committed to memory,
but not to be written out on paper (§ 12). Accordingly it is not found in any of the MSS., but
instead of it the Nicene Creed with the Anathema is there inserted in Codd. Roe, Casaub.
This could only have been added after Cyril's time, when the motives for secrecy had ceased
The Creed which Cyril really taught and expounded may be gathered from various passages

in the Lectures themselves, and especially from the Titles prefixed to them.

With the Creed of Jerusalem thus ascertained, it will be instructive to compare the Nicene

formula, and for this purpose we print them in parallel columns.

THE CREEDS OF JERUSALEM AND NIC/EA.

xlvii

CREED OF S. CYRIL OF JERUSALEM.

CREED OF NIC^A.
From S. Athanasius, De Decretis Fidei
Nicmwe.

Hio-rtvoptv tit iva Qtov 1,
Tlartpa 3 HavTVKpdropa 3,
Hoiijttjv oipavoii Kai yffl
'Oparav Tt navruv xai aaparav *•

Kai tit tva Ki'ptop 'irjaovv Xptoroi'
r'ov Yiov tov Otov
tov Movoytvri,
t6» tK tov TlaTpbt ytvi t]BiVTa9
Ofor a\rj?lrov
7T(J0 TTaVTWLi TttiV atcovtov,
it ov to. TTiivra iytvtTo 6,

roc trapKodivra leal ivavSputir^aaura 7,
(TTavpuiOtvTa Kai rafptvra ,
to! amo-Tiivra « vtKpiv rg rpirg r/pt'pa,
xai aYrXdo'ira fit Tour uvpuvuvs,
tat naBiauvTO. fx &t£t£»> tov Oarpo's 9,

cat waXe* ipx&ptvov iv Jo^j
Kp'tvai (oivrat Kat vtKpovs,
ov rrjt fiaoiktiai ovk coral T«'Xof *•

Kai (If J» ayov HV<V/K1
top nn/iaxX^roF,
ro XaXJjo'ai' sv Toes irpo<pnTatt

xai fit Ji' fitamapa ptravolat fit <"<p(<Tiv ipapTtav*,
tat tit p.iav ityiav Kadu\tKi)v CKKX^ereuy,
Kai tit oapxbt avuaTaair,
Kat tit £a>r)v eiecowop

» Cat. vi. tit.
5 z. tit. : vii. 4.
9 xiv. tit., cf. 1 27 : xv. 3.
3 xviii. aa.

' vii. tit. ; I 4.
6 xi. tit. ; ( at.
4 xviii. tit. ; | 33.

t xv. tit. ; I a.

3 viii. tit.

7 xii. tit. a

4 ix. tit. : | 4.
_ 8 xiii*tit.
■ xvi. tit. ; xviii. 3.

TlifTrevoptv tit tra Qtow,
UaTtpa navrt<KpuTnpat
•naviwv bpajStv Tt
Kai tUtpaTW ITOU/TOP,

Kai tit tva Kvpiov 'IqeroiV Xptoror,
t6v Yide TOV 0€Oti,
ytvvr)dtvTa tK Tttv Ilarpds pttvoytvrj,
TOVTttJTIV (K Tr)s OVO'itlt Toil Uarpot,
Qtbv iK Ofot», <£ok «k <pa.Tot. Qtbv d\rjBtvbv «K Qtov

ytvvr\Btvra ov iroinBtiTa, bpaovoiav Tep Harpl,
dt ov ra Ttavra fycVfTO,
Ta Tt *v rep ovpttvm Kol rei fVi Trjr yr)9,
rol» tV ryue'it row* ttvBpunovt Kai Sea rr/i/ qptTtpar

aWrjBi'-ov,

&a>Tnpiav 1

Kar«X#oVra.Kai aapKaBt'vra, ivai'Bpanrjaayra, TtaBivra
xai etVoerraiTa t# TptTrj rjptpat
amXBoma fit ovpavolt,
Kai tp^optvov
Kplvai {£>vrat Kai yiKpovt,

xai fZt rd ayeov lliitvpa.

Tox/t ii Xtyovrat' %v rtort OTt ovk fjf, rat irp'f
oereiji' tytvtro,
yeifi'^Brjt/ni oik rjv,
r) J£ tTt'pat vjTotJTdotQis
f) two-tat <j>aoKovTat ttvai
rj KTIOTOP Tj TptTTTOV tj dWoiuTulf TtiV Ylbv TOV SfOO.
tivaCtpaTi^ti f) KafoXiKe) <KxXr/ot'a.

Kai ori

fjiJK

• Cyril, Cat. iv. 9 ; xii. 3 ; Myslag. ii. 7.

§ 2. Doctrine ofthe Holy Trinity. The doctrinal position of S. Cyril is admirably described,
and his orthodoxy vindicated by Cardinal Newman in the following passage of his Preface to
" There is something very remarkable and even
the Lectures in the Library of the Fathers.
startling to the reader of S. Cyril, to find in a divine of his school such a perfect agreement,
for instance as regards the doctrine of the Trinity, with those Fathers who in his age were
more famous as champions of it.
Here is a writer, separated by whatsoever cause from what,
speaking historically, may be called the Athanasian School, suspicious of its adherents, and
suspected by them ; yet he, when he comes to explain himself, expresses precisely the same
doctrine as that of Athanasius or Gregory, while he merely abstains from the particular
theological term in which the latter Fathers agreeably to the Nicene Council conveyed it.
Can we have a clearer proof that the difference of opinion between them was not one of
ecclesiastical and traditionary doctrine, but of practical judgment? that the Fathers at Nicaea
wisely considered that, under the circumstances, the word in question was the only symbol
which would secure the Church against the insidious heresy which was assailing it, while
S. Cyril, with Eusebius of Caesarea, Meletius and others shrank from it, at least for a while.

xlviii

INTRODUCTION.

as if an addition to the Creed, or a word already taken into the service of an opposite heresy,
and likely to introduce into the Church heretical notions? Their judgment, which was
erroneous, was their own ; their faith was not theirs only, but shared with them by the
whole Christian world '."

In regard to the doctrine of the Trinity in general the two great heresies which distracted
the Church in S. Cyril's day were Sabellianism and Arianism, the one "confounding the Per
sons," the other " dividing the substance " of the indivisible Unity of the Godhead. Both these
opposite errors Cyril condemns with equal energy : " Do thou neither separate the Son from
the Father, nor by making a confusion believe in a Son-Fatherhood V Again he says : "Our
hope is in Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost. We preach not three Gods ; let the Marcionites
be silenced ; but with the Holy Ghost through One Son we preach One God.
The Faith
is indivisible; the worship inseparable. We neither separate the Holy Trinity, like some
(that is the Arians) ; nor do we, as Sabellius, work confusion 3."
" He says not, I am the
Father, but the Father is in Me, and I am in the Father. And again He said not, I and the
Father am one, but, 1 and the Father are One, that we should neither separate them, nor make
a confusion of Son-Father «."

In the sequel of this last passage Cyril proceeds to argue that this unity of the Father and
the Son lies in their Nature, " since God begat God," in their Kingdom 5, in their Will 6, and
in their joint Creation

thus at each step rejecting some prominent heretical tenet.

The question, however, of Cyril's orthodoxy depends especially upon his supposed oppo
sition to the Creed of Nicaea, of which no evidence is alleged except his attendance at the
Council of Seleucia, and the absence from his Lectures of the word

The purpose of Cyril's attendance at Seleucia was to appeal against his deposition by
Acacius, and there is apparently no evidence of his having taken part in the doctrinal
discussions, or signed the Creed of Antioch 8. What is certain is that Cyril's bitterest enemies
who refused to sit with him in the Council were Acacius and his Arian allies, who expressly
rejected both o>ooi5o-ior and onoiovaios and "altogether denied the Nicene formula and censured
the Council, while the others, who were the majority, accepted the whole proceedings of the
Council, except that they complained of the word 'Co-essential,' as obscure, and so open to
suspicion 9."
It thus appears that Cyril's friends at Seleucia were partly those who approved
the word "Co-essential," and partly those of whom Athanasius speaks as "brothers, who
mean what we mean, and dispute only about the word '."
It needed in fact the profound
insight of an Athanasius to foresee that in the end that word must triumph over all opposition,
and be accepted by the Universal Church as the one true safeguard of the Christian Faith.
Meanwhile it was the standard round which debate, and strife, and hatred, and persecution,
were to rage for fifty years with unexampled fury.

Was Cyril to be blamed, ought he not rather to be commended, for not introducing such
a war-cry into the exposition of an ancient Creed, in which it had no place, the Creed' of his
own Church, the Mother of all the Churches, whose Faith he as a youthful Presbyter was
commissioned to teach to the young Candidates for Baptism ?

But if we compare his doctrine with that of the Nicene formula, we shall find that,
as Dr. Newman says, "His own writings are most exactly orthodox, though he does not in
the Catechetical Lectures use the word

The first point to be noticed in the comparison is the use of the title " Son of God."

1 Prrfiut, p. ix.
3 Cat. xvi. | 4.

• Cat. iv. | 8.

1 lb. Or. iii. I 11, 3 : "Such then being the Son, there'ore

See the notes on this and the preceding when the Son works, the Father is the Worker."

passage.

8 There is, I believe, no extant list o( signatures: "Whether
6 Athan. Contra Arian. Or. ii. | 31,1: "For the Word of' the few Homou»ians and Hilary were among those who signed

s Cat. XV. | 27, note 3.

4 Cat. xL I 16.

God is Framer and Maker, and He is the Father's Will.
Or. iii. | 63 fin.

Cf. I is not said " (Hefcle, Councils, II. p. 264).
" lb. c. 41.
.Is Athan. Dt Synod, c. n.

* Prt/acc. p. 14.

THE CREEDS OF JERUSALEM AND NICrEA.

xlix

Athanasius explains
For this Eusebi us in his Creed had substituted " Word of God."
the
significance of the change : " Uniting the two titles, Scripture speaks of 1 Son '
in order to herald the natural and true offspring of His essence (oJo-mt) ; and on the
other hand that none may think of the offspring as human, in again indicating His essence
it calls Him Word, and Wisdom, and Radiance ; for from this we infer that the generation
was impassible (airaBts), and eternal, and becoming to God 3."

Cyril is here in full accord with Athanasius : in his Creed he found "Son of God," and
in his exposition he states that the Father is " by nature and in truth Father of One only,
the Only-begotten Son ♦ : " " One they are because of the dignity pertaining to the Godhead,
since God begat God 5 : " " The Son then is Very God, having the Father in Himself, not
changed into the Father6." When he says that the Son is in all things like (oVotos *V iruo-tv)
to Him who begat Him ; begotten Life of Life, and Light of Light, Power of Power, God
of God, and the characteristics of the Godhead are unchangeable (unapaWaKToi) in the Son',"
he is using in all good faith the very words of the orthodox Bishops at Nicasa, " Sfioiov rc cat
drrapiiXXaKTOv alruv Kara iravra rtS Harpi "."

The further significance which Athanasius ascribes to the title " Logos," is also expressed
fully and repeatedly by Cyril : " Whenever thou hearest of God begetting, sink not down in
thought to bodily things, nor think of a corruptible generation, lest thou be guilty of
ynpiety 9."

The "passionless generation," to which so much importance was attached at Nica?a and
by Athanasius, is also asserted by Cyril when he says that God "became a Father not
by passion (ui ndda Hot^p ytvipcvos) '." The eternal generation is most emphatically declared
again and again : the Son, he says, " began not His existence in time, but was before
all ages eternally and incomprehensibly begotten of the Father ; the Wisdom, and the Power
of God, and His Righteousness personally subsisting2:" "Throughout His being (»£ olntp
a being by eternal generation, He holds His royal dignity, and shares His Father's seats."
" Believe that of One God there is One Only-begotten Son, who is before all ages God the
AVord ; not the uttered word diffused into the air, nor to be likened to impersonal words ;
but the Word, the Son, Maker of all who partake of reason, the Word who heareth the
Father, and Himself speaketh ♦."

The importance of such language is better understood when we remember that Marcellus,
"another head of the dragon, lately sprung up in Galatias," entirely rejected the word
"Begotten," as implying a beginning, and "contradicting the eternity of the Logos, so
distinctly proclaimed by S. John." An eternal generation, as stated by Athanasius and others,
was to him unimaginable.
The Logos in His pre-existence was unbegotten, and could not
be called Son, but only the Logos invested with human nature was Son of God and be
gotten 6."
These heretical opinions of Marcellus had been condemned in several Councils
within a few years preceding Cyril's Lectures.

The next supposed proof of Cyril's opposition to the Nicene doctrine is that he has not
adopted in his Lectures the phrases " of the essence (ulaias) of the Father," and " of one
essence (opoovoiov) with the Father."
This omission is the chief ground of the reproaches
cast upon the memory of Cyril by the writers of Ecclesiastical History ; for this he was
described by Jerome as an Arian, and by Rufinus as a waverer, while his formal acceptance
of the terms used at Nicaea is called by Socrates and Sozomen an act of repentance.
By
others he was denounced as ' \paav6<ppu>v because he had addressed his letter to Constantius
as " the most religious king," and never used the word ipooiaiov in his Lectures.

S Contra Arianotj Or. L 28.

9 Cat. xi. I 7.

4 Cat. vii. | 5.
« lb. vii. s : see note there.

5 lb. xi. I 16.

• lb. I 17.

7 lb. 1 18. -

a lb. iv. 7.

3 lb.

* lb. iv. f 8.

8 Athan. Dc Drcnlis, e. ao.
5 lb. xv. | 37.

6 Zahn, Manellu* of Aturyra, as quoted by Hefcle, Councils, II. p. 31, slightly abridged.

See also Hefele, p. 186.

vol. vii.

e

INTRODUCTION.

We shall be better able to estimate the justice of these reproaches, if we consider first the
history of these words oiala and 6>oor'o-tor, and the reasons which Cyril may have had for not
employing them in the instruction of youthful Candidates for Baptism.

It is strange to find that seven hundred years before the great controversy at Nicsea on
the introduction of the word oiala into the Creed, it had been the war-cry of almost as fierce
a conflict between rival schools of philosophy.

"There appears," says Plato in the person of the Eleatic stranger, "to be a sort of war
of the giants going on between them because of the dispute concerning oiala. Some of them
are dragging all things down from heaven and from the invisible to earth, grasping rocks and
oaks in their hands ; for of all such things they lay hold, in obstinately maintaining that what
can be touched and handled alone has being (eivai), because they define ' being ' and ' body '
as one ; and if any one else says that what is not a body has being, they altogether despise
him, and will hear of nothing but body. .
. Therefore their opponents cautiously defend
themselves from above out of some invisible world, mightily contending that certain in
telligible and incorporeal ideas are the true essence (ovo-iav) '."

.

It is apparently to this passage of Plato that Aristotle refers in describing the ambiguity of
the word oiala* : " Now Ouo-la seems to belong most manifestly to bodies : wherefore animals
and plants and their parts we say are oio-lat, also natural bodies as fire and water and earth and
all such things, and all either parts of these, or products either of parts or the whole, as the
heaven and its parts, stars, moon, and sun.
But whether these are the only olalai or there are
others also, or none of these but others of a different kind, is a matter for inquiry. Some think
that the boundaries of bodies, as a surface, and a line and a point and a unit (jiovas), are olalai,
even more so than body and solid.
Further, one class of persons thinks that besides things
sensible there is no oiala, and another that there are many things, and these more enduring
(dtSia), as Plato thinks that the ideas (tT3ij) and the mathematical elements are two kinds
of ovala. and that the oiala of sensible bodies is a third."
.
more : the essential nature (to rl
the subject (to vttok*Iihvov).
of the term olaia to the matter, the form, and the resulting whole.
we may see that the use of the word in philosophy was full of difficulty and ambiguity.

In proceeding to define the term, Aristotle says that oiala is used in four senses if not
»*>"»)> the universal (to ko66\ov) the genus, and a fourth
Under this fourth sense he proceeds to discuss the application
Without going further

The ambiguity is thus expressed by Mr. Robertson » : " We may look at a concrete term
as denoting either this or that individual simply (robe ti), or as expressing its nature, and so
as common to more individuals than one. Now properly (TrpaTas) oiala is only appropriate
to the former purpose.
But it may be employed in a secondary sense to designate the latter,
in this sense species and genera are boircpai olalai, the wider class being less truly ovalai than
the former."
where he
describes the Logos as " having been begotten from the Father, by His power and will,
but not by abscission (dn-oTo^v), as if the oiala of the Father were divided, as all other things
His example was fire, from which
when divided and cut are no longer the same as before."
other fires are kindled, while it remains undiminished and unchanged.
According to
Dr. Newman2, oiala here means " substance, or being."

Perhaps the earliest use of oiala in Christian writings is in Justin M.

In Clement of Alexandria 3, oiala means a "nature" common to many, for he speaks
of the Gnostic Demiurge as creating an irrational soul ouoolaiov with the soul of the beasts;"
and again as implanting in man " something co-essential (o>oouo-io>>) with himself, inasmuch
as he is invisible and incorporeal; his essence (olalav) he called "the breath of life," but
the thing formed (pop<pu9iv) became "a living soul," which in the prophetic Scriptures he

7 Plato, Sophist. | 246. " The passage is quoted by Theodoret, Gra-carum affectiontm Curat o, ii. p. 733." (Heindorf.)

8 Mttafik. vi. I a.

9 Athanasius, ProUg. p. xxxi., in this Series.

' Try//,, c. 128'.

' Artarts, p. 186.

3 Fragm. % 50, Sylb. 341.

THE CREEDS OF JERUSALEM AND NIG/EA.

It

confesses himself to be.
" the body of Jesus is co-essential (ouooiotov) with the Church."

Again in § 42 of the same Fragment, according to the Valentinians,

So Hippolytus* speaks of the Son Incarnate as being " at one and the same time Infinite
God and finite Man, having the nature (olo-ia») of eacli in perfection : " and again, " There
has been effected a certain inexpressible and irrefragable union of the two (the Godhead and
the Manhood) into one subsistence (vxoaTaaip)."

In Origen we find the two words oloia (essence, or substance) and Morons (individual
Quoting the description of Wisdom, as being the
subsistence) accurately distinguished.
breath (<Wuis) of the power of God, and pure effluence (anoppota) from the glory of the
Almighty, and radiance (anaiyaopa) of the Eternal Light
he says that " Wisdom proceeding
from Him is generated of the very substance of God," and adds that "these comparisons
For
most manifestly shew that there is community of substance between Father and Son.
m effluence appears to be i/iooia-tos, that is, of one substance with that body from which it is
an effluence or vapour."

On the other hand he writes, " We worship the Father of the Truth, and the Son who is
the Truth, being in subsistence (rjj imoaTaaei) two6." On this passage Bishop Bull remarks :
" The words vnuoraots and oloia in ancient times were variously used, at least by the
Christians.
That is to say, sometimes lirooraots was taken by them for what we call oioia,
and vice versa, oloia for what we call vKuoraois : sometimes the ancients even before the
Council of Nicffia used vnioTaais for what we now call 'person' or 'subsistence'.'"
This
Bishop Bull presently explains again as "an individual thing subsisting by itself, which
in rational beings is the same as person."

For examples of these interchanges of meaning, we may notice that the Synod of Antioch
(a.d. 269), in the Epistle addressed to Paul of Samosata before his deposition, speaking
of the unity of Christ's Person, says that " He is one and the same in His oloia*." On this
passage Routh remarks that " The words oloia and (plots are sometimes employed by the
ancients for a personal subsistence (persona subsistente), as is plainly testified by Photius."

In the earlier part 9 of the same Epistle the Son is described as " being before all ages,

not in foreknowledge, but in essence and subsistence (i» oloia na\ {moorduti)."

The confusion arising from the uncertainty in the use of these two words is well illustrated
in the account which Athanasius 1 himself gives of this same Synod of Antioch : " They who
deposed the Samosatene, took Co-essential (d/ioowtoi) in a bodily sense, because Paul had
attempted sophistry and said, ' Unless Christ has of man become God, it follows that He is
Co-essential with the Father ; and if so, of necessity there are three essences (oloiat), one the
previous essence, and the other two from it;' and therefore guarding against this they said
with good reason, that Christ was not Co-essential (opoolotov)."
Athanasius then explains on
what grounds the Bishops at Nicsa "reasonably asserted on their part, that the Son was CoAthanasius himself states that, in giving this explanation of the rejection of 6>oessential "
ovoiov by the Bishops who condemned the Samosatene, he had not their Epistle before him3;
and his statement, that Paul used the term not to express his own view, but to refute that of
the Bishops, is thought to be opposed to what Hilary says 3, " Male d/ioui/ow Samosatenus
confessus est : sed numquid melius Ariani negaverunt ? "

That the statement of Athanasius himself is not free from difficulty is clear from the way
in which so great a Theologian as Bishop Hefele endeavours to explain it : " Athanasius says
that Paul argued in this way : If Christ is 'Opwoioios with the Father, then three subsistences
(oloiat) must be admitted- one first substance (the Father), and two more recent (the Son and

4 Adv. Beron. et Hel. Fragm. i.

5 Wisdom of Solomon, vii. 25, quoted by Origen, tfragrn. in Episi. ad Hebraos^ Lommatzsch,

V. p. 300.

9 lb. p. 29a

* Contra Cetsum, viii. p. 386.

z D* Synodis, c 45, p. 474, in this Series.

7 Dtf. Fid. Nic. II. c. 9. § 11.
3 lb. c. 43.

8 Routh, Ret.. Sacr., III. p. 299

S Libtr dt Synodit, 5x3.

lii

INTRODUCTION.

the Spirit) ; that is to say, that the Divine Substance is separated into three p.irts «." The
logical subtlety of Paul was better understood by Basil the Great * : " For in truth they who
met together about Paul of Samosata found fault with the phrase, as not being distinct ; for
they said that the word d/ioouo-tor gave the idea of an alala and of those derived from it,
so that the title ononvo-iov assigned' the olo-iu separately to the subjects to which it was
distributed : and this notion has some reason in the case of copper and the coins made
from it ; but in the case of God the Father, and God the Son, there is no substance
for to say and to think this surpasses
conceived to be antecedent and superior to both :
all bounds'of impiety."

The confusion arising from the uncertainty in the use of these words had been the cause
of strife throughout the Christian Church for more than twenty years before the date of Cyril's
Lectures ; and though it was declared at the Council of Alexandria (362) to be but a con
troversy about words'", it had long been and long afterwards continued to be a fruitful cause
of dissension between men who, when forced to explain their meaning, were found to be in
substantial agreement.
That Cyril abstained from introducing into his elementary teaching
terms so provocative of dangerous controversy, is a reason for commendation, not for censure.
But if it is alleged that he denied or doubted or failed to assert the essential Godhead of
the Son, the suspicion is unfounded and easily refuted. To the many passages already
quoted concerning the eternal generation of the Son, it will be enough to add one single
sentence which ought to dispel all doubt of his orthodoxy.
"The Only-begotten Son,
together with the Holy Ghost, is partaker of the Godhead of the Father (i-ijr dtornTof rijr
UarpiKrjt icoivuidf)." The word chosen by Cyril to express the Divine Essence (tWnr)
common to the three Persons of the Godhead is at least as appropriate as ola-ia.

If we now look at the particular errors mentioned in the Anathema of the Nicene

Council, we shall find that every one of them is earnestly condemned by Cyril.

" Once He was not (*h» irort art ovk 71/).

This famous Arian formula is expresslv rejected
in Cat. xi. § 17 : "Neither let us say, There was a time when the Son was not." The
eternity of the Son is asserted again and again, in reference, for instance, to His generation6,
His Priesthood

and His throne8.

" Before His generation He was not" {pp\v ytwnOrjvu ovk rjx).

Compare with this Cyril's
repeated assertions that "the Son is eternally begotten, by an inscrutable and incom
prehensible generation
"the Son of God before all ages, without beginning1," that
" time intervenes not in the generation of the Son from the Father 2."

"He came to be from nothing" (if ovk 5to f'y«Wo).

Cyril's language is emphatic: "As
I have often said, He did not bring forth the Son from non-existence («'« tov ^ Svros) into
being, nor take the non-existent into Sonship \"

" That He is of other subsistence or essence " (f'f tripos wnxmiacur f) ol<r!as).

It is certain
that Cyril has given no countenance to the error or errors condemned in this clause, but is
in entire agreement with the Council.

On the question whether indarao-is and olala have in this passage the same or different
meanings, see Bull, Def. Fid. Nic. II. 9, 11, p. 314 (Oxf. Ed.).
Athanasius expressly states
that they are perfectly equivalent : " Subsistence (inoo-raats) is essence (oia-ta), and means
nothing else but very being, which Jeremiah calls existence (vwapgis)."
Basil distinguishes
them, and is followed by Bishop Bull, whose opinion is controverted by Mr. Robertson
in an Excursus on the meaning of the phrase, on p. 77 of his edition of Athanasius in this
Series. The student who desires to pursue the subject may consult in addition to the works

4 Councils, I. p. X24.

HI 5, 6.

» Cat. iv. I 7.

5 Epitt. 300 (al. 52), quoted by Bull, D.F.N, ii. s, I II.
7 lb. x. I 14.

«lb. xir. |«7.

» Cat. xi. I 4.

5* Athan. Tomus aet A iitiochmos,

' « 5.

' I 7.

3 I 14.

Cf. S. Alex. F.pist. apud Theodoret, 84:" That the Son of God was not made ' from things which are not,' and chat

' there was no time when He was not,' the Evangelist John sufficiently shews" (Ante-Nic. Library).

,

S. CYRIL'S WRITINGS.

liii

just named, and the authorities therein mentioned, Dr. Newman's Arians of the Fourth
Century, especially chap. v. sect. i. 3, and Appendix, note iv., on "the terms alaia and
inoaTauit as used in the early Church ; " Mr. Robertson's Prolegomena, ch. ii. §3 (2) (b); and
the Rev. H. A. Wilson's Prolegomena to Gregory of Nyssa, ch. iv., in this Series,

CHAPTER XL

S. Cyril's Writings.

§ 1.

List of Works.

Besides the Catechetical and Mystagogic Lectures translated in this
volume, the extant works of S. Cyril include (1) the " Letter to the Emperor Constantius
concerning the appearance at Jerusalem of a luminous Cross in the sky:" (2) "The
Homily on the Paralytic at the Pool of. Bethesda:" and (3) Fragments of Sermons on
the Miracle of the water changed into wine, and on Joh. xvi. 28, "I go to My Father."

Another work attributed by some authorities to Cyril of Jerusalem and by others to Cyril
of Alexandria is a Homily De Occursu Domini, that is, On the Presentation of Christ in the
Temple, and the meeting with Symeon, called in the Greek Church 7 'Ynanavrrj.

The other Fragments and Letters mentioned in the Benedictine Edition have no claim to

be considered genuine.

§ 2.

Authenticity of the Lectures. The internal evidence of the time and place at which the
Lectures were delivered has been already discussed in chapters viii. and ix., and proves beyond
doubt that they must have been composed at Jerusalem in the middle of the fourth century.
At that date Cyril was the only person living in Jerusalem who is mentioned by the Ecclesi
astical Historians as an author of Catechetical Lectures : and S. Jerome, a younger contem
porary of Cyril, expressly mentions the Lectures which Cyril had written in his youth
In fact their authenticity seems never to have been doubted before the seventeenth century,
when it was attacked with more zeal than success by two French Protestant Theologians
of strongly Calvinistic opinions, Andrew Rivet {Critic. Sacr. Lib. iii. cap. 8, Genev. 1640), and
Edmund Aubertin (De Sacramento Eucharistioz, Lib. ii. p. 422, Ed. Davent., 1654).
Their
objections, which were reprinted at full length by Milles at the end of his Edition, were
directed chiefly against the Mystagogic Lectures, and rested on dogmatic rather than on
critical grounds. The argument most worthy of notice was that in a MS. of the Library of
Augsburg the Mystagogic Lectures were attributed to John, Bishop of Jerusalem.
This
Mvorayayinai ran^o-fts ir*W 'Iaxuvov
is admitted by Milles, who gives the title thus:
'EiritTKonov 'itpoiroXvuav, ntpi fJarm07101-0s, xplap-aTot, traumas, «ral alliums Xpiarov.

I do not find this Codex Augustinus mentioned elsewhere by any of the Editors under
that name : but the Augsburg MSS. were removed to Munich in 1806, and in the older
Munich MS. (Cod. Monac 1), the title of the first Mystagogic Lecture is Mvarayayia irpartj
Also in Codd. Monac. 2, Ottobon. there is added at the
'laavyov into-Konov 'Upoo-okvpav.
end of the Title, toO avnv K»/>iAXou *<u 'ladvvov imanoirov.
That John, Cyril's successor, did
deliver Catechetical Lectures, we know from his own correspondence with Jerome : and this
very circumstance may account for his name having been associated with, or substituted for
that of Cyril.

To Rivet's objection Milles makes answer that if the mistakes of a transcriber or the
stumbling of an ignorant Librarian (imperiti Librarii ccespitationes) have in one or two MSS.
ascribed the Lectures to John or any one else, this cannot be set against the testimony of
those who lived nearest to the time when the Lectures were composed, as Jerome and
Theodoret. Also the internal evidence proves that the Lectures could not have been delivered
later than the middle of the fourth century, whereas John succeeded Cyril about 386.

Moreover it is quite impossible to assign the two sets of Lectures to different authors.

liv

INTRODUCTION.

In Cat. xviii. § 33 the author promises, as we have seen, that he will fully explain the
Sacramental Mysteries in other Lectures to be given in Easter week, in the Holy Sepulchre
itself, and describes the subject of each Lecture ; to which description the Mystagogic
Other promises of future explanations are given in
Lectures correspond in all particulars.
Cat. xiii. § 19, and xvi. § 26, and fulfilled in Myst. iv. § 3, and ii. § 6, and iii. § 1. On the
other hand the author of Myst. i. § 9, after quoting the words, " I believe in the Father, and
in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost, and in one Baptism of repentance," adds, "Of which
things I spoke to thee at length in the former Lectures."

By these and many other arguments drawn from internal evidence Toutte'e has shewn
convincingly that all the Lectures must have had the same author, and that he could be
no other than Cyril.

§ 3. Early Testimony.

Under the title " Veterum Testimonia de S. Cyrillo Hierosolymitano ejusque Scriptis," Milles collected a large number of passages bearing on the life and
writings of S. Cyril, of which it will be sufficient to quote a few which refer expressly to his
Lectures.

S. Jerome, in his Book of Illustrious Men, or Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers, composed
at Bethlehem about six years after Cyril's death, writes in Chapter 112: "Cyril, Bishop of
Jerusalem, having been often driven out from the Church, afterwards in the reign of
Theodosius held his Bishopric uudisturbed for eight years : by whom there are Catechetical
Lectures, which he composed in his youth."

Theodoret, born six or seven years after the death of Cyril, in his Dialogues (p. an
in this Series) gives the "Testimony of Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, from his fourth Catechetical
Oration concerning the ten dogmas.

Of the birth from a virgin, " Believe thou this, &c."

Theophanes (575 circ.) Chronographia, p. 34, Ed. Paris, 1655, defends the orthodoxy of
Cyril, as follows : " It was right to avoid the word <S/ioou<nor, which at that time offended
most persons, and through the objections of the adversaries deterred those who were to be
baptized, and to explain clearly the co-essential doctrine by words of equivalent meaning :
which also the blessed Cyril has done, by expounding the Creed of Nicaea word for word, and
proclaiming Him Very God of Very God."

Gelasius, Pope 492, De duabus in Christo naturis, quotes as from Gregory Nazianzen the

words of Cyril, Cat. iv. § 9 : Ain-Xoir 5" ° Xptorrfr, k.t.\.

Leontius Byzantinus (610 circ), Contra Nestor, et Eutychem, Lib. I. quotes the same
passage expressly as taken "From the 4th Catechetical Oration of Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem."
Many other references to the Catecheses as the work of Cyril are given by Toutt£e,

pp. 306-315.

§ 4. Editions.

1. Our earliest information concerning th? Greek text and translations of

S. Cyril's Lectures is derived from John Grodecq, Dean of Glogau in Bohemia.

From his statement it appears that Jacob Uchanski, Archbishop of Gnessen and Primate
of Poland, had obtained from Macedonia a version of the Catecheses in the Slavonic dialect,
and had translated it into the Polish language some years before 1560.

2. In that year Grodecq himself published at Vienna an edition of the Mystagogic

Lectures, thus described in the catalogue of the Imperial Library :-

" S. Cyril's Mystagogic Lectures to the newly baptized, which now for the first time are
edited in Greek and Latin together, that he who doubts the Latin may have recourse to the
Greek, and he who does not understand Greek well may read the Latin, translated by John
Grodecq."

Nothing more is known of this edition : Fabricius, Milles, Toutte'e, and ReischI, all say
that they have been unable to find any trace of it.
Uchanski about this time sent to
Grodecq his Slavonic and Polish versions, in order that they might be compared with the

S. CYRIL'S WRITINGS.

Iv

Greek original The result according to Grodecq was that the fidelity of both versions was
clearly shewn, and " there could not possibly remain any doubt that these Lectures of Cyril
are perfectly genuine."

Whether Uchanski's book was written or printed is unknown, as no trace of it has

hitherto been found.

3. S. Cyrilli Hier1. Catecheses ad Illuminandos et Mystagogicse.

Interpretatus est Joannes

Grodecius.

Romae 1564.

8°.

Grodecq had come to Rome in the suite of Stanislaus Hosius, Cardinal Legate at the
Council of Trent, who in the year 1562 had published in the Confession of Petricow the
4th and part of the 3rd Mystagogic Lectures from a Greek MS. belonging to Cardinal Sirlet.
From this MS. Grodecq made his Latin translation, using also the work of Uchanski before
The translation
mentioned.
was published in the following year at Rome, Cologne, Antwerp, and Paris, and often
elsewhere until superseded by the new Latin Version of Toutte'e in the Benedictine Edition.

The preface is dated from Trent, on the 9th of July, 1563.

4. In the same year, 1564, the Mystagogic Lectures and Catecheses iv., vi., viii.-x., xv.,
xviii. were published at Paris by William Morel, the King's Printer, under the following title:-
"S. Cyrilli Hier. Catecheses, id est institutiones ad res sacras, Grace editae, ex bibliotheca
Paris. G. Morel., 1564.

Cura Guil.

Morellii.

Latina.

Henrici Memmii, cum versione
4° min."

The Greek text depending on de Mesme's one MS., and that mutilated and faulty, is
said by Toutte'e to have many faults and omissions, but to have been nevertheless very useful
to him in correcting the text. The MS. itself had entirely disappeared. The Latin version,
appended to the copy in the Royal (National) Library at Paris, but not always attached to
the Greek, is said by Toutte'e to be a careful and elegant version, independent of Grodecq's.

A copy of Morel's Edition which formerly belonged to Du Fresne, containing various
readings in the margin from two other MSS., was lent to Toutt£e from the Library of
S. Genevieve (Genovef.).

Reischl describes the MS. as "Cod. Mesmianus (Montf. I. 185).
5. "S. Cyrilli H. Catecheses Greece et Latine ex interpretatione Joan. Grodccii nunc
primum editae, ex variis bibliothecis, praccipue Vaticana, studio et opera Joan. Prevotii. Paris.
(Claude Morellus), 1608."
Prevot,
a native of Bordeaux, states in the Dedication to Pope Paul V., that by the help of MSS.
" melioris notae " found in the Vatican, he had both corrected the text of the Lectures
previously published by Morel, and carefully transcribed the rest. He made, according
to Toutte'e, many useful emendations, but did not mention the number, age, nor various
readings of the MSS. employed.

This was the first complete edition of the Greek text.

Sec. xi."

6. "S. Cyrilli Hier. Arch, opera qua; supersunt omnia; quorum quaedam nunc primum
ex Codd. MSS. edidit, reliqua cum Codd. MSS. coniulit, plurimis in locis emendavit, Notisque illustravit Tho. Milles S.T.B. ex Aide Christi Oxoniae, e Theatro Sheldoniano, Impensis
Richardi Sare Bibliopol. Lond. mdcciii."

The author of this fine Edition gives us in his Preface the following description of his work :-
" In the first place I wished to amend more thoroughly the text of J. Prevot, which,
as I said, he himself largely corrected and supplied from MSS. in the Vatican, and which
I have printed in this Edition : I have therefore compared it with all the other Editions that
I could collect, and in this manner have easily removed many errors both of the printers and
Afterwards I carefully compared all the Catecheses and the Epistle to
of Prevot himself.
Constantinus with two MSS. and some with three, namely iv., vi., viii.-x., xv., xvi., xviii.
The
first Coclex, written on parchment apparently six hundred years ago, I found among those
MSS. which Sir Tho. Roe, our first Ambassador from King James I. to the Great Mogul,
The second we owe to the
brought from the East, and presented to the Bodleian Library.

Ivi

INTRODUCTION.

diligence of Isaac Casaubon, who collated the Catecheses and Epistle to Constantius with
a MS. which he chanced to find, I think, in some Library in France, and carefully noted
all the various readings in the margin.
This copy of Casaubon's the Right Reverend
Father in Christ, John Bishop of Norwich, very kindly lent to me out of his well-furnished
Library, and of his great love for learning did not disdain to shew the highest favour to
my slight endeavours."

Touttde thinks that the MS. from which Casaubon drew his various readings was
C. Roe itself, or that one of the two MSS. had been copied from the other, or both from
the same.

7. "S. Cyrilli Arch. Hier. opera quae exstant omnia et ejus nomine circumferuntur, ad
MSS. codices necnon ad superiores Editiones castigata, Dissertationibus et Notis illustrata,
Cura et studio Domni Antonii-Augustini
cum nova interpretatione et copiosis indicibus.
ToutteM, Presbyteri et Monachi Benedictini e Congregatione S. Mauri. Paris. Typis Jac
Vincent. 1720, fol (Recusa Venet. 1763)."

Of the Greek text the Editor says, "I have collated it as carefully as I could with
Grodecq's translation, Morel's and Prevo.t's Editions, and with MSS. to be found in this City.
The various readings of the Roman MSS. I have obtained by the help of friends : those which
Milles had collected from the English Codices I have adopted for my own use."

8. "S. Cyrilli Hier. Arch. opp. quae supersunt omnia ad libros MSS. et impressos
recensuit Nolis criticis commentariis indicibusque locupletissimis illustravit Gulielm. Car.
Reischl S. Th. D. et Reg. Lycei Ambergensis Professor. Vol. I. Monac. m dccc xlviii."

The Editor says in his Preface that he has altered the Benedictine text only when the
evidence was very weighty, and has then given all the various readings in the critical notes.
The exegetical commentary was to be reserved for the 2nd Volume, but this Dr. Reischl did
not live to complete.

The Prolegomena contain (1) ToutteVs inordinately long "Life of Cyril," (2) a Disser
tation on the general character and authenticity of the Catecheses, and (3) an "Apparatus
Litterarius," to which I have been indebted.

Vol. ii., containing Catecheses xii. -xviii., Myst. i.-v., and the other works, genuine and

spurious, attributed to Cyril, was published by J. Rupp at Munich, i860.

The MSS used in revising the text of this, the best critical edition, will be noticed below.
9. An Edition of the Catecheses only was published at Jerusalem in 1867, having been
commenced in 1849 at the request of the Archbishop, Cyril II., by Dionysius Kleopas,
Principal of the Theological School of Jerusalem, and, after his death in 1861, continued
by his successor Photius Alexandrides, "Archdeacon of the Apostolic and Patriarchal See
of Jerusalem, and Principal of the Theological School."

The Editor gives in the Preface an interesting account of the life of Kleopas, and of

the work which he left unfinished.

§ 5. Manuscripts.

From the preceding account of the various Editions of S. Cyril we
may obtain the following list of authorities which have been hitherto used in revising the Text.

1. Codex Sirletianus, known only by Grodecq's Latin version, Rome, 1564.
a. C. Mesmianus, known only in Morel's edition, Paris, 1564.
3. Vatican MSS. used by Prevot, 1608, but not identified. Cf§ i. 5.
4. C. Roe, Bibl. Bodleian. Oxon. "Codex membranaceus in folio, ff. 223, sec. xi., binis

Cf. § i. 4.

Cf. § i. 3.

columnis bene exaratus;" [ol. 271].

5. C. Casaubon. On this and the preceding MS. see Milles as quoted above, § i. 6.
6. C. Ottobonianus (1) ol. Rom. iv. membran. sec. xi. "Continet Catecheses omnes
Multas habet insignes ab editis varietates."

et Epist. ad Constantium.

C. Ottob. (2), " Chartaceus et recens est, nihil fere ab editis discrepans."
These are the Roman MSS. mentioned by Toutt^e : see above, § i. 7.

Continet
Procatechesis.

S. CYRIL'S WRITINGS.

lvii

7. C. Coislin. 227 (ol.

xi.
important emendations " (Touttde, Notitia Codicum MSS.).

Membran. Saec.

101).

circ.

"From this came many

In the descriptions of the following MSS. of the National Library at Paris there is so

much discrepancy between Touttee and Reischl, that it is better to quote both.

8. "Catecheses xii., xiii., xiv., xv., comparavi cum Codice Reg. bibliothecas num. 2503
Scriptus est in bombycina charta an. 1231, quam anni notam apposuit calligraphus " (Touttee,
Not. Codd. MSS.).

Reischl has no notice of a MS. at all answering to this description.
9. Cod. Reg. alter, "ol. 1260, nunc 1824, qui S. Basilii opera complectitur, sub ejus
nomine Procatechesin continet " (Touttee, Not. Codd. MSS.) : aliter, "Cod. Reg. ol. 260, nunc
1284, pag. 254, qui duodecimi circiter est saeculi, in quo habetur Procatechesis haec sub
nomine S. Basilii " (Id. Monit. in Procatechesin).

"Cod. Reg. 467 (apud Toutteum, 1824) Fontehlandensis, chartac. fol. sec. x.

Basilii nomine Orationem de Baptismo, qua est S.

sub S.
C. Reg. Touttdi " (Reischl).

Cyrilli

Hier.

10. "Cod. Reg. 969 (ol. Mazarin.) Epistolarum S. Basilii. 40. Sec. xiv.

Exhibet sub n. 7
Basilii homiliam quo (sic) ostenditur Deum esse incomprehensibiUm, qua? non S. Basilii, sed
Cyrilli est Procatechesis " (Reischl).

This description agrees in substance with ToutteVs.
"Catecheses iv.,
11. C. Colbert.

vi.,

ix., x., xv., xviii., contuli cum cod. Colbert.
viii.,
Biblioth. chartaceo et recenti 4863 notato ... In omnibus pene cum Morelliana editione
consentit " (Touttee, Notitia Codd. MSS.).
Reischl makes no mention of this MS.
12. C. Colbert, alter, "membran. sign. 1 717, Sec. xiii. diversas Patrum homilias continet,
et Cat. xiii. exhibet sub nomine Cyrillianae in Crucem et Porasceven homilice" (Touttee,
Notitia).

This is described by Reischl as "Cod. Reg. 771 (ol. 171 7) Colbertinus.

Membran. fol.

scculi xiii.-xiv."

The following MSS have been used in Editions later than the Benedictine.
13. " C. Monacensis I. 394 membran, fol., titulis et initialibus miniatis, f. 261 nitidissime

uncialibus minutis circiter seculo decimo in Oriente scriptus."

This was regarded both by Reischl and by Rupp as the most important authority for the
it is much older than Codd. Roe, Casaub., and seems to be related to Codd. Ottobon.

text :
Coislin.

C. Mon. 2 of the 16th Century is of little value.
14. " C. Vindobonensis, 55, membran. fol antiquissimus, sed incerto sseculo "
A full account is given by Rupp in the Preface to Vol. ii.

It was collated by Joseph

Miiller, 1848, and contains all Cyril's Lectures, except the Procatechesis.

15. Codex A, found by Kleopas in the Library of the Archbishop of Cyprus, and used

as the basis of his text, sometimes stands alone in preserving the true reading.

§ 6.

the Latin Translations published with
mentioned above, Reischl mentions the first three of the following :-

Versions.

Besides

the Greek text,

as

(a) Les catecheses de Sainct Cyrille.
(b) Cyrill's Schriften iibersetzt und mit Anmerkungen versehen von J. Mich. Feder.

Traduit par Louis Ganey.

Paris, r 564.

Bamberg, 1786.

(c) Cyrilli Hier Catecheses in Armen. Linguam versae.
(d) The Catechetical Lectures of S. Cyril, Archbishop of Jerusalem, Translated,
(Library of Fathers of the Holy Catholic Church.)

Viennas. 1832.

with Notes and Indices '
Parker, Oxford, 1838. See Preface.

VOL. VII.

f

Iviii

INTRODUCTION.

{e) S. Cyril on the Mysteries.

(The five Mystagogic Lectures.)

H. de Romestin.

Parker, Oxford, 1887.

(/) On Faith and the Creed.

Divinity, and Canon of Christ Church, Oxford.
Contains, with other Treatises, the Fourth Catechetical Lecture of S. Cyril.

C. A. Heurtley, D.D-, Margaret Professor of
Parker, 3rd Ed., 1889.

In the present volume the translation given in the Oxford "Library of Fathers" has
been carefully revised throughout
Where it has been found necessary to depart from the
Benedictine text, the Editor has consulted the readings and critical notes of Milles, Reischl,
and Rupp, and the Jerusalem edition of Kleopas and Anaxandrides.

A few additions have been made to the Index of Subjects : the Indices of Greek Words
and of Scripture Texts have been much enlarged, and carefully revised.
For any errors which
may have escaped observation the indulgence of the critical reader will not, it is hoped,
be asked in vain.

E. H. G.

.

THE

CATECHETICAL LECTURES

OF

S. CYRIL,

ARCHBISHOP OF JERUSALEM.

CONTENTS.

Or, Prologue to trie Catechetical Lectures of our Holy Father, Cyril, ArcribUnop of Jerusalem

Procatechesis,

To those who are to be enlightened : with a Reading from Isaiah L 16

First Catechetical Lecture :-

On Repentance and Remission of Sins, and Concerning the Adversary : Ezekiel xviii. 20-23

Lecture II.

On Baptism : Romans vi. 3, 4

On the Ten points of Doctrine : Colossians ii. 8

On Faith : Hebrews si. I, 3

Lecture III.

Lecture IV.

Lecture V.

.

Concerning the Unity of God. On the words, I BELIEVE IN ONE GOD.

Lecture VI.

Also concerning Heresies :

Isaiah xlv. 16, 17 (Sept)

The Father : Ephesians iii. 14, 15

Almighty : Jeremiah xxxix. 18, 19 (Sept.)

Lecture VII.

Lecture VIII.

'..

On the words, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and of all things visible and invisible:

Lecture IX.

Job xxxviii. 2, 3
Appendix to Lecture IX

»

On tie Words, And in one Lord Jesus Christ :

1 Corinthians viii. 5, 6

Lecture X.

On the words, The Only-Begotten Son of God, Begotten of the Father Very God before

all ages, By Whom all things were made : Hebrews i. I, 2

Lecture XI.

fACP

lx

CONTENTS.

On the words, Incarnate, and made Man : Isaiah vii 10-14

Lecture XII.

On the words, Crucified and Buried : Isaiah liii. i-7

Lecture XIII.

On the words, And rose again from the dead on the third day, and ascended into the

Heavens, and sat on the right hand of the Father :

1 Corinthians xv. 1-4

Lecture XIV.

On the words, And shall come in glory to judge the quick and the dead; of whose

kingdom there shall be no end : Daniel vii. 9-14

Lecture XV.

Lecture XVI.

On the words, And in one Holy Ghost, the Comforter, which spake in the Prophets :

I Corinthians xii. I-4

Continuation of the Discourse on the Holy Ghost :

I Corinthians xii. 8

Lecture XVII.

On the words, And in One Holy Catholic Church, And in the Resurrection of the Flesh,

And the Life Everlasting : Ezekiel xxxvii. 1

Lecture XVIII.

Five Catechetical Lectures to the Newly Baptized :-

First Lecture on the Mysteries.

Lecture XIX.

With a Lesson from the First General Epistle of Peter v. 8-14

On Baptism : Romans vi. 3-14

On Chrism : I John ii. 20-28

Lecture XX.

Lecture XXI.

On the Body and Blood of Christ :

Lecture XXII.

I Corinthians xi. 23

On the Sacred Liturgy and Communion :
Indices: -Subjects

Greek Words
Texts of Scripture

Lecture XXIII.

I Peter ii. I

FAGI

1 75

PROCATECHESIS,

OR,

PROLOGUE TO THE CATECHETICAL LECTURES OF OUR HOLY FATHER,

CYRIL, ARCHBISHOP OF JERUSALEM.

1. Already there is an odour of blessedness
upon you, O ye who are soon to be enlight
ened1 : already ye are gathering the spiritual'
flowers, to weave heavenly crowns : already the
fragrance of the Holy Spirit lias breathed upon
you : already ye have gathered round the
vestibule of the King's palace 3 • may ye be led
in also by the King !
For blossoms now have
appeared upon the trees*; may the fruit also be
found perfect ! Thus far there has been an
inscription of your names 5, and a call
to
service, and torches6 of the bridal train, and a
longing for heavenly citizenship, and a good
purpose, and hope attendant thereon.
For
he lieth not who said, that to them that love
God all things work together for good. God
is lavish in beneficence, yet He waits for each
man's genuine will :
the Apostle
added and said, to them that are called ac
cording to a purpose ?. The honesty of purpose
makes thee called : for if thy body be here
but not thy mind, it profiteth thee nothing.

therefore

2. Even Simon Magus once came to the
Laver8 : he was baptized, but was not enlight
ened ; and though he dipped his body in water,
he enlightened not his heart with the Spirit : his

1 The "blessedness" is the grace of Baptism, the hope of
which is as a fragrant odour already borne towards the Candi
dates.
These were called no longer Catechumens, but </>wrt£o-
. as already on the way " to be enlightened." Compare xvi.
■
uri
»6, tne last sentence, andsee Index, " enlighten."
' wTrrd. The word is much used by Plato to distinguish
things which can be discerned only by the mind from the objects
of sight and sense.
Here " the spiritual (or, mental) flowers ' are
the Divine truths in which 11 the fragrance of tile Holy Spirit "
breathes.
3 By "the vestibule" is meant "the outer hall of the Bap
tistery ' (xix. a), and by " the King's Palace " the Baptistery
the inner chamber" (xx. i) and "the
itself, which Cyril calls
See Index, " Baptistery." Here
bridc-chambcr '(iii. a ; xxii. 2).
the local terms have also an allegorical sense, Baptism being
regarded as the marriage of the Soul to Christ.
4 Another allegory, from the season of Spring, when the Lec
tures were delivered.
5 ovojiaroypacua.
6 That the Candidates on their first admission carried torches
or lighted tapers in procession is a conjecture founded on this
passage and Lect. I- I : "Ye who have just Hehted the torches
of faith, preserve them in your hands unquenclled."
But see
Index, " Lights."
In S. Paul's argument the "purpose" is
Cod's eternal purpose of salvation through Christ (Eph. i. 11 ;
iii it) : but Cyril applies it here to sincerity of purpose in coming
8 Acts viii. 13.
to Baptism.

7 Rom. viii. 28.

See Index.

VOL. VII.

B

body went down and came up, but his soul was
not buried with Christ, nor raised with Him ».
Now I mention the statements 1 of (men's) falls,
that thou mayest not fall :
for these things
happened to them by way of example, and
they are written for the admonition'' of those
who to this day draw near.
Let none of you
be found tempting His grace, lest any root of
bitterness spring up and trouble you 3. Let none
of you enter saying, Let us see what the faith
ful « are doing : let me go in and see, that I
may learn what is being done.
Dost thou
expect to see, and not expect to be seen ?
And thinkest thou, that whilst thou art search
ing out what is going on, God is not searching
thy heart ?

3. A certain man in the Gospels once pried
into the marriage feast5, and took an unbe
coming garment, and ca.me in, sat down, and
ate :
But
for the bridegroom permitted it.
when he saw them all clad in white 6, he ought
to have assumed a garment of the same kind
himself: whereas he partook of the like food,
but was unlike them in fashion and in purpose.
The bridegroom, however, though bountiful,
was not undiscerning : and in going round to
each of the guests and observing them (for his
care was not for their eating, but for their
seemly behaviour), he saw a stranger
not
having on a weddinggarment, and said to him,
In what
Friend, hour earnest thou in hither?
a colour 7 !
With what a conscience 1 What
though the door-keeper forbade thee not, be
cause of the bountifulness of the entertainer ?
what though thou wert ignorant in what fashion
thou shouldest come in to the banquet ?-thou

9 Rom. vi. 4 ; Col. ii. 12.
1 Greek, viroypa^r), meaning either an "indictment," or a de.
For the former meaning, see Plato, Thiatt.
scriptive " sketch."
17a, E. viroypacpT)!' .
. i)r avTuiiOtriav xaAov(rtv.
.
3 1 Cor. x. it.
3 Heb. xii. 15.
4 "The faithful" are those who have been already baptized,
and instructed in those mysteries of the Christian Faith which
were reserved for the initiated. See Index, " Faithful."
5 Matt. xxii. 12. The same passage is applied to Baptism in
Cat. iii. 2.
7 The^ Greek word (ypu/ja) is used by Ignatius in the begin
ning of his Epistle to the Romans ot a discolouring stain.

<> See Cat. xxii. 8 and Index, " White."

PROCATECHESIS.

didst come in, and didst see the glittering
fashions of the guests : shouldest thou not have
been taught even by what was before thine
Shouldest thou not have retired in
eyes ?
good season, that thou mightest enter in good
season again ?
But now thou hast come in
unseasonably, to be unseasonably cast out.
So he commands the servants, Bind his feet,
which daringly intruded : bind his hands, which
knew not how to put a bright garment around
him : and cast him into the outer darkness ; for
he is unworthy of the wedding torches 8. Thou
seest what happened to that man : make thine
own condition safe.

defiled.

Enter thou

one, and occupying, as

4. For we, the ministers of Christ, have
admitted every
it
were, the place of door-keepers we left the
door open : and possibly thou didst enter
with thy soul bemired with sins, and with a
didst, and wast
will
allowed : thy name was inscribed.
Tell me,
dost thou behold this venerable constitution of
the Church ? Dost thou view her order and
disciplines, the reading of Scriptures
the pre
sence of the ordained a, the course of instruc
tion 3? Be abashed at the place, and be taught
by what thou seest
Go out opportunely
now, and enter most opportunely to-morrow.

If the fashion of thy soul is avarice, put
Put off thy
on another fashion and come in.
former fashion, cloke it not up.
Put off,
pray thee, fornication and uncleanness, and
put on the brightest robe of chastity.
This
charge I give thee, before Jesus the Bridegroom
of souls come in and see their fashions. A
long notice' is allowed thee; thou hast forty6
days for repentance : thou hast full oppor
tunity both to put off, and wash, and to put
on and enter.
But if thou persist in an evil
purpose, the speaker is blameless, but thou
for the water
must not look for the grace :
will receive, but the Spirit will not accept thee 1.
If any one is conscious of his wound, let

• Compare I i, note 6.
9 The Greek word (irmmj^nj) which commonly means "know
ledge" or "understanding." is applied here and in vi. 35 to the
intelligence and skill displayed in the arrangement of the public
services of the Church. Compare Apostolic Constitutions, ii. 57,
where the Bishop is exhorted to have the assemblies arranged
turra natr^s iwi<rrrju.yji.
1 In the same passage of the Apostolic Constitutions precise
directions are given for reading a Lesson from the Old Testament,
singing the Psalms, and reading the Epistle and Gospel.
3 By "the ordained" (nwoi-iinui') are meant all whose names
were registered as bearing office in the Church, Priests, Deacons,
Deaconesses, Monks, Virgins, Widows, all having their appointed
places and proper duties. Apost. Canon. 70, «i rts cxio-kotoc. ij
irp«o~0vTffpof, n oioxoyoc, rj oA»c rov ffaroAoyov ruy cAimLxwr,
X.T.A.
3 Compare Apost. Const, as above: "Let the Presbyters one
by one, not all together, exhort the people ; and the Bishop last,
as being the commander."
4 S. Aug. dt Civit. Dei, ii. 28 : " Though some come to mock
at such admonitions, all their insolence is either humbled by a
sudden conversion (immutatio) or suppressed by fear or shame. 1
5 Greek, irpdcoTxta. Compare Gal. iv. a : " the time appointed
of the father." At Athens it meant a " limitation." or fixed period
within which a debt must be claimed or paid, or an action com
menced.

7 Compare xvii. 36.

* Index, " Lent."

him take the salve ;
arise.
no hypocrisy, no idle
matter.

if any has fallen, let him
Let there be no Simon among you,
curiosity about the

5. Possibly too thou art come on another
pretext.
It is possible that a man is wishing
to pay court to a woman, and came hither
on that account 8.
The remark applies in
like manner to women also in their turn. A
slave also perhaps wishes to please his master,
and a friend his friend.
I accept this bait for
the hook, and welcome thee, though thou
earnest with an evil purpose, yet as one to be
saved by a good hope.
Perhaps thou knewest
not whither thou wert coming, nor in what kind
of net thou art taken.
Thou art come within
the Church's nets0 : be taken alive, (lee not :
for Jesus is angling for thee, not in order to
kill, but by killing to make alive : for thou
For thou hast heard
must die and rise again.
the Apostle say, Dead indeed unto sin, but living
unto righteousness
Die to thy sins, and live to
righteousness, live from this very day.

then

6. See, I pray thee, how great a dignity Jesus
Thou wert called a Cate
bestows on thee.
chumen, while the word echoed' round thee
from without ; hearing of hope, and knowing
it not ; hearing mysteries, and not understand
ing them ; hearing Scriptures, and not knowing
their depth. The echo is no longer around
thee, but within thee; for the indwelling Spirits
henceforth makes thy mind a house of God.
When thou shalt have heard what is written
concerning the
wilt thou
mysteries,
understand things which thou knewest not
And think not that thou receivest a small
thing : though a miserable man, thou receivest
Hear St. Paul saying,
one of God's titles.
God isfaithful*.
Hear another Scripture say
ing, God is faithful andjust*. Foreseeing this,
the Psalmist, because men are to receive a title
of God, spake thus in the person of God :
/ said, Ye are Gods, and are all sons of the
Most /fish6.
But beware lest thou have the
title of "faithful," but the will of the faithless.
Thou hast entered into a contest, toil on
through the race : another such opportunity
thou canst not have?.
Were it thy weddingday before thee, wouldest thou not have dis
regarded all else, and set about the prepara
tion for the feast ? And on the eve of con
secrating thy soul to the heavenly Bridegroom,
wilt thou not cease from carnal things, that
thou mayest win spiritual ?

8 S. Ambrose on the 119th Psalm, Serm. xx. | 48, speaks
of some who pretended to be Christians in order to marry one
whose parents would not give her in marriage to a heathen.

9 Matt. xiii. 47.
a S. Cyril plays upon the word " Catechumen," which has
the same root as
4 t Cor. i. 9.
3 Rom. viii. 9, it.
7 Compare xvii. 36.
6 Ps IxxW

1 Rom. vi t«f 14.

Si John i. 9.

echo."

PROCATECHESIS.

7. We may not receive Baptism twice or
thrice ; else it might be said, Though I have
failed once, I shall set it right a second time :
whereas if thou fail once, the thing cannot be
set right ; for there is one Lord, and one faith,
and one baptism 8 : for only the heretics are rebaptized s, because the former was no baptism.
8. For God seeks nothing else from us, save
Say not, How are my sins
a good purpose.
thee, By willing, by
tell
blotted
believing '.
What can be shorter than this ?
But if, while thy lips declare thee willing, thy
heart be silent, He knoweth the heart, who
judgeth thee.
Cease from this day from every
Let not thy tongue speak unseemly
evil deed.
words, let thine eye abstain from sin, and from
roving 2 after things unprofitable.

out ?

9. Let thy feet hasten to the catechisings; re
ceive with earnestness the exorcisms 3 : whether
thou be breathed upon or exorcised, the act
is to thee salvation.
Suppose thou hast gold
unwrought and alloyed, mixed with various
substances, copper, and tin, and iron, .and
lead : we seek to have the gold alone ; can
gold be purified from the foreign substances
without fire ?
Even so without exorcisms the
soul cannot be purified ; and these exorcisms
are divine, having been collected out of the
divine Scriptures. Thy face has been veiled 4,
that thy mind may henceforward be free, lest
the eye by roving make the heart rove also.
But when thine eyes are veiled, thine ears are
not hindered from receiving the means of
salvation.
For in like manner as those who
are skilled in the goldsmith's craft throw in
their breath upon the fire through certain
delicate instruments, and blowing up the gold
which is hidden in the crucible stir the flame
which surrounds it, and so find what they are
seeking ; even so when the exorcists inspire
terror by the Spirit of God, and set the soul,
as it were, on fire in the crucible of the
body, the hostile demon flees away, and there
abide salvation and the hope of eternal life,
and the
is cleansed from
Let us then,
its sins and hath salvation.
brethren, abide in hope, and sugender our
selves, and hope, in order th9^^ God of
11s from
all mav see our purpose, ancUfi

soul henceforth

«

to

the

Attend closely

our sins, and impart to us good hopes of our
estate, and grant us repentance that bringeth
salvation. God hath called, and His call is
to thee.
10.

catechisings,
and though we should prolong our discourse,
let not thy mind be wearied out.
For thou art
receiving armour against the adverse power,
armour against heresies, against Jews, and
Thou hast many
Samaritans s, and Gentiles.
enemies ; take to thee many darts, for thou
hast many to hurl them at : and thou hast
need to learn how to strike down the Greek,
how to contend against heretic, against Jew
and Samaritan. And the armour is ready, and
most ready the sword 0/ the Spirit6 ; but thou
also must stretch forth thy right hand with
good resolution, that thou mayest war the Lord's
warfare, and overcome adverse powers, and
become invincible against every heretical at
tempt.

Suppose it

it be made right?

1 1. Let me give thee this charge also. Study
our teachings and keep them for ever.
Think
not that they are the ordinary homilies'; for
though they also are good and trustworthy, yet
if we should neglect them to-day we may study
them to-morrow.
But if the teaching concern
ing the laver of regeneration delivered in a
consecutive course be neglected to-day, when
is the
shall
season for planting trees : if we do not dig, and
that be planted
dig deep, when else can
rightly which has once been
planted ill ?
Suppose, pray, that the Catechising is a kind
of building :
if we do not bind the house
together by regular bonds in the building,
lest some gap be found, and the building
become unsound, even our former labour is of
no use.
But stone must follow stone by
course, and corner match with cor.ier, and by
our smoothing off inequalities the building
must thus rise evenly.
In like manner we are
bringing to thee stones, as it were, of know
ledge.
Thou must hear concerning the living
God, thou must hear of Judgment, must hear
of Christ, and of the Resurrection. And many
things there are to be discussed in succession,
which though now dropped one by one are
afterwards to be presented in harmonious con
nexion.
But unless thou fit them together in
the one whole, and remember what is first, and
what is second, the builder may build, but thou
wilt find the building unsound.

-

. therefore, the Lecture is delivered,

e frequently mentioned by Epiphanius and
ih century among the chief adversaries
i >eir humble synagogue, at the foot of the
1 ; Samaritans still worship, the oldest and
(Stanley, Sinai and Palatini,
the world. '
1 See above, 8 4, note 3.

PROCATECHESIS.

both

Thus is

if a Catechumen ask thee what the teachers have
said, tell nothing to him that is without 8.
For
we deliver to thee a mystery, and a hope of
Guard the mystery for Him
the life to come.
Let none ever say
who gives the reward.
to thee, What harm to thee, if I also know
it? So too the sick ask for wine ; but if it be
given at a wrong time it causes delirium, and
two evils arise ; the sick man dies, and the
it also with the
physician is blamed.
Catechumen, if he hear anything from the
believer :
Catechumen becomes
delirious (for he understands not what he has
heard, and finds fault with the thing, and scoffs
at what is said), and the believer is condemned
as a traitor.
But thou art now standing on
the border : take heed, pray, to tell nothing
out ; not that the things spoken are not worthy
to be told, but because his ear is unworthy to
receive. Thou wast once thyself a Catechu
men, and I described not what lay before thee.
When by experience thou hast learned how
high are the matters of our teaching, then thou
wilt know that the Catechumens are not worthy
to hear them.

the

13. Ye who have been enrolled are become
sons and daughters of one Mother. When ye
have come in before the hour of the exorcisms,
let each one of you speak things tending to
godliness : and if any of your number be not
If thou wert called to
present, seek for him.
a banquet, wouldest thou not wait for thy
fellow guest ?
If thou hadst a brother, wouldest
thou not seek thy brother's good ?

Afterwards busy not thyself about unprofit
able matters : neither, what the city lias done,
nor the village, nor the Kings, nor the Bishop,
nor the Presbyter. Look upward ; that is what
thy present hour needeth. Be still10, and know
that I am God.
If thou seest the believers
ministering, and shewing no care, they enjoy
security, they know what they have received,
they are in possession of grace.
But thou
standest just now in the turn of the scale,
to be received or not : copy not those who
have freedom from anxiety, but cherish fear.

.14. And when the Exorcism has been done,
until the others who are being exorcised have
let men be with men, and women with
come
women.
For now I need the example of
Noah's ark : in which were Noah and his sons,

8 On the Disciplina Arcani, or rule against publishing the
Christian Creed and Mysteries to Catechumens and Gentiles, see
Index, "Mysteries."
v The title " Kins; " (Bao\Afvc) is used in the Greek Liturgies
and Fathers of the Roman Emper jr, as in the Cletncntii e Liturgy :
uTTfp Toy 3acrtA«'ci)c, xai tui; iv virepoxj), where it is taken from
1 Tim. ii. 2. Compare Cat. x.v. 14, and 22: KuforaiTtvov roD
0acrtAcMC.
,J Ps. xlvi. 10. Sept. <rxoKairaTr. "give attention freely."
M From S. Augn-tine, tie Symbolo, i. 1 (Mignc T. vi. p. 930),
we learn that the Candidates were brought in be ore the Con
gregation one by one fur exorcism ; and so, as Cyril here shews,
they had to wait outside tJl the others returned.

and his wife and his sons' wives.
For though
the ark was one, and the door was shut, yet
had things been suitably arranged.
If the
Church is shut, and you are all inside, yet let
there be a separation, men with men, and
women with women 1 :
lest the pretext of
salvation become an occasion of destruction.
Even if there be a fair pretext for sitting near
each other, let passions be put away.
Fur
ther, let the men when sitting have a useful
book ; and let one read, and another listen :
and if there be no book, let one pray, and
another speak something useful. And again
let the party of young women sit together in
like manner, either singing or reading quietly,
so that their lips speak, but others' ears catch
not the sound : for I suffer not a woman to
speak in the Church''. And let the married
woman also follow the same example, and
pray ; and let her lips move, but her voice be
unheard, that a Samuel 3 may come, and thy
barren soul give birth to the salvation of
" God who hath heard thy prayer ;" for this
is the interpretation of the name Samuel.

15. I shall observe each man's earnestness,
Let your mind be
each woman's reverence.
refined as by fire unto reverence ; let your soul
be forged as metal : let the stubbornness of
unbelief be hammered out : let the superfluous
scales of the iron drop off, and what is pure
remain ; let the rust of the iron be rubbed off,
and the true metal remain. May God some
time shew you that night, the darkness which
shines like the day, concerning which it
is
said, The darkness shall not be hidden from tliee,
and the night shall shine as the day *. Then
may the gate of Paradise be opened to every
man and every woman among you.
Then may
you enjoy the Christ-bearing waters in their
fragrance 5. Then may you receive the name
of Christ6, and the power of things divine.
Even now, I beseech you, lift up the eye of the

t I>Chrys. in Matt. Horn, lxxiv. § 3: "You ought to have
within you the wall that separates you from the women : but
since ye will n ;t, our fathers have thought it necessary to separate
you at least by these boards ; for I have heard from my elders
that there were not these walls in old times." These barriers had
not yet been introduced at Jerusalem, or Cyril's admonition would
have been needless.

Comp.ire Apostolic Constitutions, II. 57.

a 1 Cor. xiv. 34; 1 Tim. ii. 12.
3 1 Sam. i. m, 20. On the various interpretations of the name
Samuel, see Diet. Bib. "Samuel," and Driver on the passage.
Cyril adopts the meaning " heard of God."
4 Ps. exxxix. 12. On Easter Eve the Church was full of lights
which were kept burning all night, and the newly-baptized earned
torches.
Gregory' of Nyssa, preaching on the Resurrection
iOrat. iv.), describes the scene: "This brilliant night, by ming
ling the flames of torches with the niurnini; rays of the sun, has
made one continuous day, not divided by the interposition of
darkness."
5 Or, as the Benedictine Editor conjectures, "the waters
wh'ch have a Christ-bearing (xpiffTo^oporJ fragrance." On the
epithet xpioroctopos, see IJishop Liglilfo.u's note on Ignat. ad
Eph. Jf 1 and § 9.
Its meaning, as well as that of 8«rov>ppos is
defined in the answer of Ignatius to Trajan, 'O Xpiffrbr i\tuv
iv tTTtpvoit(.lfar/j'r. Ign. Ant. § 1).
1: "made partakers therefore of Christ, ye are
rightly called Christs."

6 Cat- xxi.

PROCATEOHESIS.

mind : even now imagine the choirs of Angels,
and God the Lord of all there sitting, and His
Only-begotten Son sitting with Him on His
right hand, and the Spirit present with them ;
and Thrones and Dominions doing service,
and every man of you and every woman
receiving salvation.
Even now let your ears
ring, as it were, with that glorious sound, when
over your salvation the angels shall chant,
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven,
and whose sins are covered t : when like stars
of the Church you shall enter" in, bright in the
body and radiant in the soul.

1 6. Great is the Baptism that lies before
you 8 : a ransom to captives ; a remission of
offences ; a death of sin ; a new-birth of the
soul ; a garment of light ; a holy indissoluble
seal ; a chariot to heaven ; the
delight of
Paradise ; a welcome into the kingdom ; the
But there is a serpent by
gift of adoption!
the wayside watching those who pass by :
beware lest he bite thee with unbelief. He
sees so many receiving salvation, and is seeking
-.vhorn he may devour-9. Thou art coming in
unto the Father of Spirits, but thou art going
past that serpent. How then mayest thou
pass him ?
Have thy feel shod with the pre
paration of thegospel ofpeace 1 / that even if he
bite, he may not hurt thee.
Have faith in
dwelling, stedfast hope, a strong sandal, that
thou mayest pass the enemy, and enter the
presence of thy Lord.
Prepare thine own
heart for reception of doctrine, for fellowship
in holy mysteries.
Pray more frequently, that
God may make thee worthy of the heavenly
and immortal mysteries.
Cease not day nor
night : but when sleep is banished from thine
eyes, then let thy mind be free for prayer.
And if thou find any shameful thought rise up
in thy mind, turn to meditation upon Judgment
to remind thee of Salvation.
Give thy mind
wholly to study, that it may forget base things.
If thou find any one saying to thee, Art thou
then going in, to descend into the water ?
Has the city just now no baths ? take notice
that it is the dragon of the sea 3 who is laying

7 Ps xxxii. i, which verse is still chanted in the Greek Church
as soon as the Baptism is completed.
s S. Basil has a passage in praise of Baptism almost the same,
It is more likely to have been borrowed
word for word, with this.
from Cyril by Basil and other Fathers, than to be a later interpo
...
lation here.
■ Is. xxvn. 1.

9 i Pet v. 8.

E Eph vi. 15.

these plots against thee:
Attend not to the
lips of the talker, but to God who worketh in
thee.
Guard thine own soul, that thou be not
ensnared, to the end that abiding in hope thou
mayest become an heir of everlasting salvation.
17. We for our part as men charge and
teach you thus : but make not ye our build
ing hay and stubble and chaff, lest we suffer
but
loss, from our work being burnt up :
make ye our work gold, and silver, and pre
cious stones* I For it lies in me to speak, but
in thee to set thy mind 4 upon it, and in God to
make perfect.
Let us nerve our minds, and
brace up our souls, and prepare our hearts.
The race is for our soul : our hope is of things
eternal : and God, who knoweth your hearts,
and observeth who is sincere, and who a
hypocrite, is able both to guard the sincere,
and to give faith to the hypocrite : for even to
the unbeliever, if only he give his heart, God is
able to give faith. So may He blot out the
handwriting that is against you s, and grant you
forgiveness of your former trespasses ; may He
plant you into His Church, and enlist you in
His own service, and put on you the armour of
righteousness 6 : may He fill you
the
heavenly things of the New Covenant, and
give you the seal of the Holy Spirit indelible
throughout all ages, in Christ Jesus Our Lord :
to whom be the glory for ever and ever !
Amen.

with

{To the Render i.)
These Catechetical Lectures for those who
are to be enlightened thou mayest lend to
candidates for Baptism, and to believers who
are already baptized, to read, but give not at
all 8, neither to Catechumens, nor to any others
who are not Christians, as thou shalt answer to
the Lord. And if thou make a copy, write
this in the beginning, as in the sight of the
Lord.

S Col. ii. 14.

6 a Cor. vi. 7 ; Rom. vi. 13.

3 1 Cor. iii. ia, 15.
4 Greek n-pooieVdai, Sept. Deut. xiii. 4, " cleave unto Him."
Compare Josh, xxiii. 12; Ps. lxii. 10, "Set not your heart upon
them."
7 It is doubtful whether this caution proceded from Cyril him
self when issuing a written copy of his Lectures, or from some
later editor.
Kuscbius (E.H. v. 20) has preserved an adjuration
by Irenajus at the end of his treatise, On the Ogtioad: I adjure
thee, who mayest transcribe this book, by Our Lord Jesus Christ,
and uy His glorious advent, when He Cometh to judge the quick
and the dead, to compare what thou hast written and correct it
carefidly by this copy, from which thou hast transcribed it ; this
adjuration also thou shalt write in like manner, and set it in the
copy,a Gr. to o*vvoAov.

Plat. Leg. 654 B ; Soph. 230 b.

FIRST CATECHETICAL LECTURE

OF

OUR HOLY FATHER CYRIL,

ARCHBISHOP OF JERUSALEM,

to those who are to be enlightened, delivered extempore at jerusalem, as
an Introductory Lecture to those who had come forward for Baptism 1 :

WITH A READING FROM ISAIAH,

Wash you, make you clean ; put away your iniquitiesfrom your souls, from before
mine eyes, and the rest*.

1. Disciples of the New Testament and
partakers of the mysteries of Christ, as yet by
calling only, but ere long by grace also, make
you a new heart and a new spirit 3, that there
may be gladness among the inhabitants of
heaven : for if over one sinner that repenteth
there isjoy, according to the Gospel 4, how much
more shall the salvation of so many souls move
the inhabitants of heaven to gladness.
As ye
have entered upon a good and most glorious
path, run with reverence the race of godliness.
For the Only-begotten Son of God is present
here most ready to redeem you, saying, Come
unto Me all that labour and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest*. Ye that are clothed with
the rough garment6 of your offences, who are
holden with the cords of your own sins, hear
the voice of the Prophet saying, Wash you,
make you clean, put aivay your iniquities from
before Mine eyes? :
that the choir of Angels
may chant over you, Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered*. Ye who have just lighted the torches
of faith f, guard them carefully in your hands
unqtienched ; that He, who erewhile on this
all-holy Golgotha opened Paradise to
the
robber on account of his faith, may grant
to you to sing the bridal song.

2. If any here is a slave of sin, let him
promptly prepare himself through faith for the
new birth into freedom and adoption ; and
having put off the miserable bondage of his
sins, and taken on him the most blessed
In the
See Index,

1 The title prefixed to this Lecture is given in full.

following Lectures the form will be abbreviated.
avayvuais and axtStaodtlaa.

» Is. i. 16.
3 Lzck. xviiL 31.
6 Compare xv. 25.

Procat. 15.

4 Luke xv. 7.
7 Is. i. 16.
9 Procat. f, note 6.

5 Matt. xi. 28.
• Ps. xxxii, 1. See

the

into

bondage of the Lord, so may he be counted
worthy to inherit the kingdom of heaven.
the old man, which
Put off, by confession
waxcth corrupt after the lusts of deceit, that ye
may //// on the new man, which is reneived
according to kno7vledge of Him that created
him a. Get you the earnest of the Holy Spirit 3
through faith, that ye may be able to be
received
everlasting habitations *.
Come for the mystical Seal, that ye may be
easily recognised by the Master ; be ye num
bered among the holy and spiritual flock of
Christ, to be set apart on His right hand, and
inherit the life prepared for you.
For they to
whom the rough garment5 of their sins still
clings are found on the left hand, because
they came not to the grace of God which
is given through Christ at the new birth of
Baptism : new birth I mean not of bodies,
but the spiritual new birth of the soul.
For
our bodies are begotten by parents who are
seen, but our souls are begotten anew through
faith : for the Spirit blowcth where it tisteth 6:
and then, if thou be found worthy, thou
mayest hear,
Well done, good and faithful
servant
when thou art found to have no de
filement of hypocrisy in thy conscience.

3. For if any of those who are present
should think to tempt God's grace, he de
ceives
himself, and knows not its power.
Keep thy soul free from hypocrisy, O man,
because of Him wlio searcheth hearts and
reins 8.
For as those who are going to make
a levy for war examine the ages and the bodies

1 See Index, "Confession."
» Eph. iv. 32 ; Col. iii 1a
5 Compare xv. 35.
8 Ps. vii. jo.

3 2 Cor. i. 22.

' John iii. 8.

* Luke xvi. 9.

7 Matt. xxv. 31.

LECTURE I.

of those who are taking service, so also the
Lord in enlisting souls examines their pur
pose : and if any has a secret hypocrisy, He
rejects the man as unfit for His true service ;
but if He finds one worthy, to him He readily
gives His grace. He gives not holy things to
the dogs' ; but where He discerns the good
conscience, there He gives the Seal of salva
tion, that wondrous Seal, which devils tremble
at, and Angels recognise ; that the one may
be driven to flight, and the others may watch
around it as kindred to themselves. Those
therefore who receive this spiritual and saving
Seal, have need also of the disposition akin
For as a writing-reed or a dart has
to it.
need of one to use it, so grace also has need
of believing minds.

4. Thou art receiving not a perishable but
a spiritual shield. Henceforth thou art planted
in the invisible 1 Paradise. Thou receivest a
new name, which thou hadst not before. Here
tofore thou wast a Catechumen, but now thou
wilt be called a Believer. Thou art trans
planted henceforth among the spiritual 3 olivetrees, being grafted from the wild into the
good olive-tree', from sins into righteousness,
Thou art made
from pollutions into purity.
partaker of the Holy Vine*.
Well then, if
thou abide in the Vine, thou growest as a
iruitful branch; but if thou abide not, thou
wilt be consumed by the fire. Let us therefore
bear fruit worthily. God forbid that in us
should be done what befell that barren figtree 5, that Jesus come not even now and curse
But may all be able to
us for our barrenness.
use that other saying, But I am like a fruitful
olive-tree in the house of God : I have trusted
in the mercy of God for ever*',-an olive-tree
not to be perceived by sense, but by the mind',
As then it is His part to
and full of light.
plant and to water 8, so it is thine to bear fruit :
it is God's to grant grace, but thine to receive
and guard it
Despise not the grace because
it is treely given, but receive and treasure it
devoutly.

5. The present is the season of confession :
confess what thou hast done in word or in
deed, by night or by day; confess in an
acceptable time, and in the day of salvation 9
receive the heavenly treasure.
Devote thy
time to the Exorcisms : be assiduous at the
Catechisings, and remember the things that
shall be spoken, for they are spoken not for
thine ears only, but that by faith thou mayest

» Matt. vii. 6.
1 Or. roTjrov, i.e. the true Paradise, to he seen by the mind,
3 Rom. xi. 24.
* John xv. 1, 4, 5.
5 Matt. xxi. 19.
7 i-oirnj, see note I, above.
8 1 Cor. iii. 6. When Paul plants and Apollos waters, it is God

not bv the eye.
6 Pj. [,,. jo.
Himself who works through His ministers.

» See preceding note.

Apoc. xii. 7, 17.

» 2 Cor. vi. a.

seal them up in the memory.
Blot out from
thy mind all earthly 1 care : for thou art running
for thy soul.
Thou art utterly forsaking the
things of the world : little are the things which
thou art forsaking, great what the Lord is
Forsake things present, and put thy
giving.
trust in things to come.
Hast thou run so
many circles of the years busied in vain about
the world, and hast thou not forty days to be
free (for prayer2), for thine own soul's sake?
Be still'3, and know that I am God, saith the
Scripture.
Excuse thyself from talking many
idle words : neither backbite, nor lend a willing
ear to backbiters ; but rather be prompt to
that thy
prayer.
heart is nerved *. Cleanse thy vessel, that thou
mayest receive grace more abundantly.
For
though remission of sins is given equally to
all, the communion of the Holy Ghost is
bestowed in proportion to each man's faith.
If thou hast laboured little, thou receivest
little ; but if thou hast wrought much, the
reward is great. Thou art running for thyself,
see to thine own interest.

Shew in ascetic

exercise

it not far better

6. If thou hast aught against any man,
forgive it : thou comest here to receive for
giveness of sins, and thou also must forgive
him that hath sinned against thee.
Else with
what face wilt thou say to the Lord, Forgive
me my many sins, if thou hast not thyself
forgiven thy fello v-servant even his little sins.
Attend diligently the Church assemblies' ; not
only now when diligent attendance is required
of thee by the Clergy, but also after thou hast
For if, before thou hast
received the grace.
received it, the practice is good, is it not also
good after the bestowal?
If before thou be
grafted in, it is a safe course to be watered
and tended, is
after the
Wrestle for thine own soul, espe
planting?
cially in such days as these.
Nourish thy soul
with sacred readings ; for the Lord hath pre
pared for thee a spiritual table ; therefore say
thou also after the Psalmist, The Lord is my
shepherd, and I shall lack nothing: tn a place
ofgrass, there hath He made me rest ; He hath
fed me beside the waters of comfort, He hath
converted my soul 6 : - that Angels also may
share your joy, and Christ Himself the great
High Priest, having accepted your resolve,
may present you all to the Father, saying.
Behold, I and the children whom God hath
given MeT. May He keep you all well-pleasing
in His sight ! To whom be the glory, and
the power unto the endless ages of eternity.
Amen.

s Literally ' human."
■ Some MSS. omit rjj npoa-evxfi after vxoXa^tit.
Compare Procht. 13.
3 Ps. xlvi. to: tr\oKavaT€
4 Compare Procau 17 : xviii. 1. (
7 Is. viii. x8 ; Heb. ii. 13.
6 Ps. xxiii. 1-3.

5 See Index, e-vVafK.

LECTURE II.

On Repentance and Remission of Sins, and concerning the Adversary.

Ezekiel xviii. 20-23.

The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked
shall be upon him. But if the wicked will turn from all his sins, 6-v.

1. A fearful thing is sin, and the sorest dis
ease of the soul is transgression, secretly cut
ting its sinews, and becoming also the cause
of eternal fire ; an evil of a man's own choos
ing, an offspring of the will
For that we sin of
our own free will the Prophet says plainly in
a certain place : Yet J planted thee a fruitful
vine, wholly true : how art thou turned to bit
terness, (and become) the strange vine 2 ? The
planting was good, the fruit coming from the
will is evil; and therefore the planter is blame
less, but the vine shall be burnt with fire ;
since it was planted for good, and bore fruit
unto evil of its own will.
For God, according
to the Preacher, made man upright, and they
have themselves sought out many inventions 3.
For ive are His workmanship, says the Apostle,
created unto good works, which God afore pre
pared, that we should walk in them *.
So then
the Creator, being good, created for good
works ; but the creature turned of its own
free will to wickedness.
Sin then is, as we
have said, a fearful evil, but not incurable ;
fearful for him who clings to it, but easy of
cure for him who by repentance puts it from him.
For suppose that a man is holding fire in his
hand; as long as he holds fast the live coal he is
sure to be burned, but should he put away the
coal, he would havecast away the flame also with
it.
If however any one thinks that he is not being
burned when sinning, to him the Scripture
saith, Shall a man wrap up fire in his bosom,
and not burn his clothes*? For sin burns the
sinews of the soul, [and breaks the spiritual
bones of the mind, and darkens the light of
the heart6].

2. But some one will say, What can sin
be? Is it a living thing? Is it an angel?

" Soul."

' Jer. ii. si.

1 For references to Cyril's doctrine of Free-will, see Index,
* Eph. ii. 10.
° Milles and the Benedictine Editor omit these clauses, but the
more recent editions of Keischl and Alexandrides insert them
on the auth<t->y of the Munich, Jerusalem, and other good MSS.

3 Ecclcs. vii. 29.

5 Prov. vi. 37.

Is it a demon ? What is
this which works
within us? It is not an enemy, O man, that
assails thee from without, but an evil shoot
growing up out of thyself. Look right on with
thine eyesi, and there is no lust.
[Keep thine
own, and 8] seize not the things of others, and
robbery has ceased 9. Remember the Judg
ment, and neither fornication, nor adultery,
nor murder, nor any transgression of the' law
shall prevail with thee.
But whenever thou
forgettest God, forthwith thou beginnest to
devise wickedness and to commit iniquity.

3. Yet thou art not the sole author of the
evil, but there is also another most wicked
prompter, the devil. He indeed suggests, but
does not get the mastery by force over those
who do not consent.
Therefore saith the
Preacher, If the spirit of him that hath power
rise up against thee, quit not thy place1.
Shut
thy door, and put him far from thee, and he
shall not hurt thee.
But if thou indifferently
admit the thought of lust, it strikes root in
thee by its suggestions, and enthrals thy mind,
and drags thee down into a pit of evils.

But perhaps thou sayest, I am a believer,
and lust does not gain the ascendant over me,
even if I think upon it frequently.
Knowest
thou not that a root breaks even a rock by
long persistence? Admit not the seed, since
it will rend thy faith asunder :
tear out the
evil by the root before it blossom, lest from
being careless at the beginning thou have
afterwards to seek for axes and fire. When
thine eyes begin to be diseased, get them
cured in good time, lest thou become blind,
and then have to seek the physician.

4. The devil then is the first author of sin,
and the father of the wicked : and this is the
Lord's saying, not mine, that the devil sinneth

7 Prov. iv. 85.
9 Gr. xexotfinrat,
1 Eccles. x. 4. Compare Eph. iv. 27

8 Omitted by recent editors with the
" Neither give place to

" has fallen asleep."

best MSS.
the devil."

LECTURE II.

from the beginning' : none sinned before him.
But he sinned, not as having received neces
sarily from nature the propensity to sin, since
then the cause of sin is traced back again to
Him that made him so ; but having been
created good, he has of his own free will
become a devil, and received that name from
his action.
For being an Archangel 3 he was
afterwards called a devil from his slandering :
from being a good servant of God he has be
come rightly named Satan; for "Satan" is
interpreted the adversary*. And this is not my
teaching, but that of the inspired prophet
Ezekiel : for he takes up a lamentation over
him and says, Thou wast a seal of likeness, and
a crown oj beauty ; in the Paradise of God wast
thou born s .• and soon after, Thou wast born
blameless in thy days, from the day in which
thou wast created, until thine iniquities were
Very rightly hath he said, were
found in thee.
found in thee; for they were not brought in
from without, but thou didst thyself beget the
evil. The cause also he mentions forthwith :
Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty :
for the multitude of thy sins wast thou wounded,
and I did cast thee to the ground.
In agree
ment with this the Lord says again in the Gos
pels : / beheld Satan as lightning fall from
heaven 6. Thou seest the harmony of the Old
Testament with the New. He when cast out
drew many away with him.
It is he that puts
lusts into them that listen to him : from him
come adultery, fornication, and every kind of
eviL
Through him our forefather Adam was
cast out for disobedience, and exchanged a
Paradise bringing forth wondrous fruits of its
own accord for the ground which bringeth
forth thorns.

5. What then ? some one will say. We
Is there
have been beguiled and are lost.
then no salvation left ? We have fallen : Is it
not possible to rise again? We have been
blinded : May we not recover our sight ? We
have become crippled : Can we never walk up
In a word, we are dead : May we not
right?
rise again ? He that woke Lazarus who was
four days dead and already stank, shall He
not, O man, much more easily raise thee who
art alive ? He who shed His precious blood
for us, shall Himself deliver us from sin.
Let
let us
us not despair of ourselves, brethren ;
not abandon ourselves to a hopeless condition.

• 1 John iii. 8 ; John viii. 44.
3 On Cyril's doctrine of the Angels, see Index, "Angels."
* z Kings v. 4, &c
5 Ezck. xxviii. 1a-17, an obscure passage, addressed to the
Prince of Tyre, and meaning that he was "the perfect pattern "
of earthly glory, set in a condition like that of Adam in Paradise,
and, seeminglv, blameless as Adam before his fall.
Cyril seems
to regard the Prince of Tyre as an embodiment of Satan, because
he was deified as the object of national worship: v. x, "Thou
hast said, I am a God, I sit in the seat of God."

' Luke x. 18.

For it is a fearful thing not to believe in a hope
of repentance.
For he that looks not for sal
vation spares not to add evil to evil : but to
him that hopes for cure, it is henceforth easy
to be careful over himself.
The robber who
looks not for pardon grows desperate; but,
if he hopes for forgiveness, often comes to re
pentance.
What then, does the serpent cast
its slough 1, and shall not we cast off our sin ?
Thorny ground also,
if cultivated well, is
turned into fruitful ; and is salvation to us ir
recoverable ? Nay rather, our nature admits of
salvation, but the will also is required.

6. God is loving to man, and loving in no
small measure.
For say not, I have com
mitted fornication and adultery : I have done
dreadful things, and not once only, but often :
will He forgive?
Will He grant pardon?
Hear what the Psalmist says : How greet
is the multitude of Thy goodness, O Lord*/
Thine accumulated offences surpass not the
multitude of God's mercies : thy wounds sur
pass not the great Physician's skill.
Only
give thyself up in faith :
tell the Physician
thine ailment : say thou also, like David : /
said, I will confess me my sin unto the Lord:
and the same shall be done in thy case, which
he says forthwith : And thou forgavest the
wickedness of my heart*.

7. Wouldest thou see the loving-kindness of
God, O thou that art lately come to the
catechising?
Wouldest thou see the lovingkindness of God, and the abundance of His
long-suffering ? Hear about Adam.
Adam,
God's first-formed man, transgressed : could
He not at once have brought death upon
him ?
But see what the Lord does, in His
great love towards man. He casts him out
from Paradise, for because of sin he was
unworthy to live there ; but He puts him to
dwell over
that seeing
against Paradise 1 ;
whence he had fallen, and from what and into
what a state he was brought down, he might
afterwards be saved by repentance.
Cain the
first-born man became his brother's murderer,
the inventor of evils, the first author of
murders, and the first envious man.
Yet
after slayjng his brother to what is he con
demned ? Groaning and trembling shalt thou
be upon the earth a. How great the offence, the
sentence how light !

8. Even this then was truly loving-kindness
in God, but little as yet in comparison with
what follows.
For consider what happened
in the days of Noe. The giants sinned, and

Diet. Chr. Biogr., Afacarius, p. 770 a.

7 Literally, "its old age" (to yopuc). Compare iii. 7, and
8 Ps. xxxi. ao.
1 This is the reading of the Septuagint instead of-"He placed
3 Gen. iv. xa : "A fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be upon

at the east of the garden of Eden."
the earth.

9 Ps. xxxii. 5.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

much wickedness was then spread over the
earth, and because of this the flood was to
come upon them : and in the five hundredth
year God utters His threatening ; but in the
six hundredth He brought the flood upon the
earth. Seest thou the breadth of God's lovingkindness extending to a hundred years? Could
He not have done immediately what He did
then after the hundred "ears ?
But He ex
tended (the time) on purpose, granting a
respite
Seest thou God's
goodness ? And if the men of that time had
repented, they would not have missed the
loving-kindness of God.

.or repentance.

9. Come with me now to the other class,
those who were saved by repentance.
But
perhaps even among women some one will
say, I have committed fornication, and adul
tery, I have defiled my body by excesses of all
kinds : is there salvation for me? Turn thine
eyes, O woman, upon Rahab, and look thou
also for salvation ; for if she who had been
openly and publicly a harlot was saved by
repentance, is not she who on some one
receiving grace committed
occasion before
fornication to be saved by .repentance and
fasting ? For inquire how she was saved : this
only she said : For your God is God in heaven
and upon earth 3. Your God ; for her own she
did not dare to say, because of her wanton
life. And if you wish to receive Scriptural
testimony of her having been saved, you have
it written in the Psalms : I will make mention
of Rahab and Babylon among them that know
me*. O the greatness of God's loving-kindness,
making mention even of harlots in the Scrip
tures : nay, not simply / will make mention of
Rahab and Babylon, but with the addition,
among them that knozv me.
There is then in
the case both of men and of women alike
the salvation which is ushered in by repent
ance.

10. Nay more, if a whole people sin, this
surpasses not the
loving-kindness of God.
The people made a calf, yet God ceased not
from His loving-kindness. Men denied God,
but God denied not Himselfs.
These be thy
gods, O Israel6, they said : yet again, as He
was wont, the God of Israel became their
Saviour.
And not only the people sinned,
For it is
but also Aaron the High Priest.
Moses that says : And the anger of the Lord
came upon Aaron: and I prayedfor him, saith
he, and God forgave him t.
What then, did
Moses praying for a High Priest that sinned

prevail with God, and shall not Jesus, His
Only-begotten, prevail with God when He
prays for us? And if He did not hinder
Aaron, because of his offence, from entering
upon the High Priesthood, will He hinder
thee, who art come out from the Gentiles,
from entering into salvation?
Only, O man,
repent thou also in like manner, and grace is
Render thy way of life
not forbidden thee.
truly
for God is
henceforth unblameable ;
loving unto man, nor can all time8 worthily
tell out His loving kindness ; nay, not if all
the tongues of men unite together will they be
able even so to declare any considerable part
For we tell some
of His loving-kindness.
part of what is written concerning His lovingkindness to men, but how much He forgave
the Angels we know not : for them also He
forgives, since One alone is without sin, even
Jesus who purgeth our sins. And of them
we have said enough.

11. But if concerning us men thou wilt have
other examples also set before thee s>, come on
to the blessed David, and take him for an ex
Great as he was, he
ample of repentance.
fell : after his sleep, walking in the eventide
on the housetop, he cast a careless look, and
felt a human passion. His sin was completed,
but there died not with it his candour con
Nathan
cerning the confession of his fault.
the Prophet came, a swift accuser, and a
The Lord is wroth, he
healer of the wound.
says, and thou hast sinned1.
So spake the sub
ject to the reigning king.
But David the king a
was not indignant, for he regarded not the
speaker, but God who had sent him. He was
not puffed up s by the array of soldiers standing
round : for he had seen in thought the angel-host
of the Lord, and he trembled as seeing Him who
is invisible « ; and to the messenger, or rather
by him in answer to God who sent him, he said,
/ have sinned against the Lord 5. Seest thou the
humility of the king? Seest thou his confession?
For had he been convicted by any one ? Were
many privy to the matter ? The deed was
quickly done, and straightway the Prophet
appeared as accuser, and the offender con
fesses the fault.
And because he candidly
confessed, he received a most speedy cure.
For Nathan the Prophet who had uttered the
threat, said immediately, The Lord also hath
put away thy sin.
Thou seest the swift re
lenting of a merciful God. He says, however,
Tliou hast greatly provoked the enemies of the

. $ Josh. iL it.
4 Ps. lxxxvii. 4. " Rahab1' is there a poetical name of Egypt,
and the passage has nothing to do with Rahab the harlot.
1 he
Benedictine Editor rightly disregards S. Jerome's suggestion, that
Kahabis, like Kyypt, a type of the Gentile Church.
o j£x. xxxii. 4.

5 a Tim. ii. 13.

7 Dcut. ix. an.

8 For "all time," the reading of the best MSS., the Benedic
tine text has *' all mankind."
9 The Benedictine has, " But if thou wilt I will set before
thce^ other examples also of our stat . ? Coinc on to the blessed
David.''

1 a Sam. xii.
a Bcned. "The king, the wearer of the purple.*
3 Bencd. "blinded. '

5 a Sam. xii. 13.

4 Heb. xi. 27.

LECTURE II.

i r

Lord.
Though thou hadst many enemies
because of thy righteousness, thy self-control
protected thee ; but now that thou hast surren
dered thy strongest armour, thine enemies are
risen up, and stand ready against thee.

12. Thus then did the Prophet comfort him,
but the blessed David, for all he heard it said,
The L ORD hathput away thy sin, did not cease
from repentance, king though he was, but put
on sackcloth instead of purple, and instead of
a golden throne, he sat, a king, in ashes on
the ground ; nay, not only sat in ashes, but
also had ashes for his food, even as he saith
himself, I have eaten ashes as it were bread'6.
His lustful eye he wasted away with tears,
saying, Every night will I wash my couch, and
water my bed with my tears ?. When his officers
besought him to eat bread he would not
listen.
He prolonged his fast unto seven
If a king thus made confession,
whole days.
oughtest not thou, a private person, to confess?
Again, after Absalom's insurrection, though
there were many roads for him to escape, he
chose to flee by the Mount of Olives, in
thought, as it were, invoking the Redeemer
who was to go up thence into the heavens 8.
And when Shimei cursed him bitterly, he said,
IM him alone, for he knew that " to him that
forgiveth it shall be forgiven 9."
13. Thou seest that it

is good to make
Thou seest that there is salva
confession.
tion for them that repent.
Solomon also fell :
but what saith he ? Afterwards I repented ">.
Ahab, too, the King of Samaria, became a
most wicked idolater, an outrageous man, the
murderer of the Prophets
a stranger to godli
ness, a coveter of other men's fields and vine
yards.
Yet when by Jezebel's means he had
slain Naboth, and the Prophet Elias came and
merely threatened him, he rent his garments,
and put on sackcloth. And what saith the
merciful God to Elias?
Hast thou seen how
Ahab is pricked in the heart before Me 2 1 as if
almost He would persuade the fiery zeal of the
Prophet to condescend to the penitent.
For
He saith, / will not bring the evil in his days.
And though after this forgiveness he was sure
not to depart from his wickedness, neverthe
less the forgiving God forgave him, not as
being ignorant of the future, but as granting
present
a forgiveness corresponding to

his

7 lb. vii. 7,

lint see Li^htfoot, Ciem. Rom. c. xiii.

■ Prov. xxiv. 32. Sept. Heb. "Set my heart."

* Ps. cii. 10.
8 a Sam. xvi. 10, II.
9 Ranch. (Agrapha, p.. r.7) nuoles various forms of this saying
from early u ritcrs, and rcuarcis it as a fragment of an extracanonical Gospel,
Tlte passage
it means, " I considered the
has no reference to repentance :
field of the slothful."
Hilary, l's. Hi. ; Ambrose, Apofoc;. t, Proflic'.a David, c iii. and other Fathers affirm the repentance of
Solomon.
Augustine (.". f'aiistuiit. Lib. xxii. c. S8) maintains
that Scripture says nothing ol his repentance or forgiveness. See
Dante, I'aratiiso, Canto X. 109.

* 1 I.iugs xviii. 4.

a lb. xxi- 20.

season of repentance.
For it is the part of a
righteous judge to give sentence according to
each case that has occurred.

14. Again, Jeroboam was standing at the
altar sacrificing to the idols : his hand became
withered, because he commanded the Prophet
who reproved him to be seized : but having
by experience learned the power of the man
before him, he says, Entreat the face of the
Lord thy God'3; and because of this saying his
hand was restored again.
If the Prophet
healed Jeroboam, is Christ not able to heal
and deliver thee from thy sins ?
Manasses
also was utterly wicked, who sawed Isaiah
asunder*, and was defiled with all kinds of
idolatries, and filled Jerusalem with innocent
blood* ; but having been led captive to Babylon
he used his experience of misfortune for a
healing course of repentance : for the Scripture
saith that Manasses humbled himself before the
Lord, andprayed, and the Lord heard him, and
brought him back to his kingdom.
If He who
sawed the Prophet asunder was saved by re
pentance, shalt not thou then, having done no
such great wickedness, be saved ?

15. Take heed lest without reason thou
Wouldst
mistrust the power of repentance.
thou know what
power repentance has ?
Wouldst thou know the strong weapon of
salvation, and learn what the force of confes
sion is ?
Hezekiah by means of confession
routed a hundred and fourscore and five
thousand of his enemies. A great thing verily
was this, but still small in comparison with
what remains to be told : the same king by
repentance obtained the recall of a divine
sentence which had already gone forth.
For
when he had fallen sick, Esaias said to him,
Set thine house in order; for thou shalt die, and
not live6.
What expectation remained, what
hope of recovery, when the Prophet said, for
thou shalt diet
Yet Hezekiah did not desist
from repentance; but remembering what is
written, When thou shalt turn and lament, then
shalt thou besavedT, he turned to the wall, and
from his bed lifting his mind to heaven (for
thickness of walls is no hindrance to prayers
sent up with devotion), he said, " Remember
me, O Lord, for it is sufficient for my healing
that Thou remember me.
Thou art not sub
ject to times, but art Thyself the giver of the
For our life depends not on a
law of life.

3 1 Kings xiii. 6.
4 Justin Martyr, Dialogue with Tryfho, I tao, charges the
Jews with having cut out a passage reierr...g to the death of
Theophylact commenting on Heb. xi 37, says: "They
Isaiah,
were sawn asunder, as Isaiah by Manasses : and they say that he
was sawn with a wooden saw, that his punishment might be the
more painful to him from being prolonged." Jerome on Is. i. 10,
says that he was slain because of his calling the Jews "princes of
Sodom and people of Gomorra," and because he said, " I saw the
Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up."
1 Is. xxx. 15.
6 3 Kings xx. 1.

5 a Chron. xxxiii. ia, 13.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

nativity, nor on a conjunction of stars, 'as some
idly talk ; but both of life and its duration.
Thou art Thyself the Lawgiver according to
Thy Will." And he, who could not hope to
live because of the prophetic sentence, had
fifteen years added to his life, and for the sign
the sun ran backward in his course
Well
then, for Ezekias' sake the sun turned back,
but for Christ the sun was eclipsed, not re
tracing his steps, but suffering eclipse 8, and
therefore shewing the difference between them,
I mean between Ezekias and Jesus.
The
former prevailed to the cancelling of God's
decree, and cannot Jesus grant remission of
sins ? Turn and bewail thyself, shut thy door,
and pray to be forgiven, pray that He may
remove from thee the burning flames.
For
confession has power to quench even fire,
power to tame even lions

16. But if thou disbelieve, consider what
befel Ananias and his companions. What
streams did they pour out 1 ? How many
vessels2 of water could quench the flame that
rose up forty-nine cubits high 3 ? Nay, but
where the flame mounted up a little * too high,
faith was there poured out as a river, and there
spake they the spell against all ills s : Righteous
art Thou, O Lord, in all the things that Thou
hast done to us : for we have sinned, and trans
gressed Thy law6. And their repentance quelled
filenames'. Ifthou believest notthatrepentance
is able to quench the fire of hell, learn it from
what happened in regard to Ananias8.
But
some keen. hearer will say, Those men God
that case : because they
rescued justly in
refused to commit idolatry, God gave them
that power. And since
this thought has
occurred, I come next to a different example
of penitence'.

17. What thinkest thou of Nabuchodonosor ?

8 Isaiah xxxviii. 8.
9 From this point the MSS. differ so widely that the Bene
dictine Editor gives two complete recensions of the whole Lecture.
The Codd. Coislin, Ottob. 2, and Grodec,' with the editions of
Prevot and Milles, forming as it were one family of MSS.t con
stitute the icceived text On the other hand the older Munich
Codex, with Codd. Roe and Casaubon, exhibit a recension of
the Lecture differing from the editions.
Reischl wishing to retain
the received text unaltered, though preferring the other in par
ticular passages, intended to append the other recension complete,
but having left hit work half finished, failed to do so. The chief
variations are given in the following notes.
* Roe and Casaubon (R. C.) add : " into the furnace of fire."
3 Song of the Three Children,
■ R. C. " What measure."
4 R. C. "Much."
v. 24.
5 R.C. "A great stream of repentance was poured forth, when
they said, For Thou art righteous," etc
■ Song of the Three Children, v. 4.
7 R. C. " Did then repentance quench the flames of the furnace,
and dost thoj disbelieve that it is able also to quench the fire
of hell?"
8 The Gospel only says, "There was darkness over all the
land." An eclipse of the sun was impossible at the time of the
Paschal full moon.
9 R. C " That the narrative is not appropriate to those who
are here present.
For it was because Ananias and his companions
refused to worship the idol, that God gave them that marvellous
power. Adapting myself, therefore, to such a hearer, and locking
to the profusion ui instances, I come next to a different example of
repentance."

Hast thou not heard out of the Scriptures that
he was bloodthirsty, fierce1, lion-like in dis
position ?
Hast thou not heard that he
brought out the bones of the kings from their
graves into the light 3 ? Hast thou not heard 3
that he carried
the people away captive ?
Hast thou not heard that he put out the eyes
of the king, after he had already seen his
children slain ♦ ? Hast thou not heard that he
brake in pieces * the Cherubim ?
I do not
mean the invisible 6 beings ;- away with such a
thought, O man 7,- but the sculptured images,
and the mercy-seat, in the midst of which God
The veil of the Sanc
spake with His voice 8.
tuary 9 he trampled under foot: the altar of
incense he took and carried away to an idolteniple 1 : all the offerings he took away : the
Temple he burned from the foundations2. Howgreat punishments did he deserve, for slaying
kings, for setting fire to the Sanctuary, foi
taking the people captive, for setting the
sacred vessels in the house of idols ?
Did he
not deserve ten thousand deaths?

18. Thou hast seen the greatness of his evil
deeds : come now to God's loving-kindness.
He was turned into a wild beast 3, he abode in
the wilderness, he was scourged, that he might
be saved. He had claws as a lion* ; for he was
a ravager of the Sanctuary. He had a lion's
mane : for he was a ravening and a roaring
lion. He ate grass like an ox : for a brute
beast he was, not knowing Him who had given
him the kingdom.
His body was wet from the
dew ; because after seeing the fire quenched by
the dew he believed not*. And what happened5?
After this, saith he, /, Nabuchodonosor, lifted up

R. C. add "and heavenly."

1 R.C. 11 most impious, and most fierce in temper."
3 " Knowest thou not . .
■ Jer. viii. i ; Baruch it 35.
4 a Kings xxv. 7.
S R. C. "carried off."
7 Omitted by R. C.
6 voijra.
f R. C. '* But those Which had been constructed in the Temple,
which were over the mercy-scat of the Ark."
Besides the two
Cherubim of solid gold which Moses placed on the two ends of the
Mercy-seat (Ex. xxxvii. 7 ff.), Solomon set " within the oracle "
two Cherubim of olive wood overlaid with gold, ten feet high,
with outstretched wings overshadowing the Ark (1 Kings vi. 2326 ; viii. 6, 7).
All these were either carried off or destroyed,
when Nebuchadnezzar took away "all the treasures of the house
of the Lord." and "cut in pieces all the vessels of gold which
Solomon, King of Israel, had made in the Temple of the Lord "
(a Kings xxiv. 13 : r Esdras i. 54 ; 2 Esdras x. 22). The Bene
dictine editor is concerned because Cyril has paid no attention
to the strange fiction in 2 Ma cabfe.-, ti. 4, that Jeremy the Prophet
"commanded the Tabernacle and the Ark to go with him
to
Mount Horeb, and there hid them, with the Altar of Incense,
in a hollow cave, to remain " unknown until the time that God
gathers His people again together."
9 The Greek word rendered "Sanctuary" is if dytuvviaj,
literally "the holiness."
1 a Chron. xxxvi. 7.
8 R. C. " The veil of the Sanctuary he tore down, he overturned
the altar, and took all the vessels and carried them away to an
idol temple. The Temple itself he burned."
3 R. C. _ Afterwards he was turned into a wild beast: "he
who was like a wild beast and most cruel in disposition; but
he was turned into a wild beast, not that he might perish, but that
by repentance he might be saved."

4 R. C " of birds." Sec Dan. iv. 33.
5 R. C. " after the midst of the furnace had become to Ananias
and his companions as the tinkling breath of rain, he saw and
believed not."
6 R. C. " But afterwards he came to his senses and repented,
as he says himself."

LECTURE II.

mine eyes unto heaven, and I blessed the Most
High, and to Him that liveth for ever I gave
praise and glory
When, therefore, he recog
nised the Most High8, and sent up these words
of thankfulness to God, and repented himself for
what he had done, and recognised his own
weakness, then God gave back to him the
honour of the kingdom.

19. What then s? When Nabuchodonosor,
after having done such deeds, had made con
fession, did God give him pardon and the
kingdom, and when thou repentest shall He

9 R. C.

7 Dan. iv. 34.
* R. C. " Anil after he hail been scourged many years, he gave
praise to Him that liveth for ever, and acknowledged Him that had
given him the kingdom, and recognised the King of kings. And
though he had often sinned it) deeds, on making confession only in
words, he received the benefit ol God's unspeakable loving kindness.
He who was of all men most wicked, by the Divine judgment and
loving-kindness ol God who chastised him, crowned himself again
with the royal diadem, and recovered his imperial throne."
If then there is present among you any Irom among the
Heathen who has ever spoken evil against Christians, or in times
of persecution plotted against the Holy Churches, let him take
Nabuchodonosor as an example of salvation :
let him confess in
like manner, that he may also find the like forgiveness.
If any
has been defiled by lust and passions, let him take up the repent
ance of the blessed David :
if any has denied tike Peter, let him
For He who to
die like him for the sake of the Lord Jesus.
his tears begrudged not the Apostleship, will not refuse thee
the gospel mysteries. And for women let Rahab be a pattern
onto salvation, and for men the manifold examples mentioned
of the men of old times.

not give thee the remission of sins, and the
kingdom of heaven, if thou live a worthy life ?
The Lord is loving unto man, and swift to
Let no man
pardon, but slow to punish.
therefore despair of his own salvation.
Peter,
the chiefest and foremost of the Apostles,
denied the Lord thrice before a little maid :
but he repented himself, and wept bitterly.
Now weeping shews the repentance of the
heart : and therefore he not only received
forgiveness for his denial, but also held his
Apostolic dignity unforfeited.

20. Having therefore, brethren, many ex
amples of those who have sinned and repented
and been saver], do ye also heartily make con
fession unto the Lord, that ye may both
receive the forgiveness of your former sins, and
be counted worthy of the heavenly gift, and
inherit the heavenly kingdom with all the
saints in Christ Jesus ; to Whom is the glory
for ever and ever. Amen \

• R.C. "And be ye all of good hope, having regard to the lovingkindness of God ; not that we may fall back into the same siu>,
but that having had the benefit of redemption, and lived in a
manner worthy of His grace, .we may be able to blot out the hand
writing that is against us by good works ; in the power of the
Only-begotten, the Son of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, with
whom be glory to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, both now and
ever, and unto all the ages of eternity. Amen."

LECTURE III.

On Baptism.

Romans vi.

3,

4.

Or know ye not thit all we who were baptized into ChristJesus were baptized into His death t

were buried therefore with Him by our baptism into death, &c.

1 . Rejoice, ye heavens, and let the earth beglad *,
for those who are to be sprinkled with hyssop,
and cleansed with the spiritual2 hyssop, the
power of Him to whom at His Passion drink
was offered on hyssop and a reeds. And while
the Heavenly Powers rejoice, let the souls that
are to be united to the spiritual Bridegroom
make themselves ready.
For the voice is heard
of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the
For this is no light matter,
way of the Lord «.
no ordinary and indiscriminate union accord
ing to the flesh s, but the All-searching Spirit's
election according to faith.
For the inter
marriages and contracts of the world are not
made altogether with judgment : but wherever
there is wealth or beauty, there the bridegroom
speedily approves : but here it is not beauty of
person, but the soul's clear conscience ; not
the condemned Mammon, but the wealth of the
soul in godliness.

2. Listen then, O ye children of righteous
ness, to John's exhortation when he says, Make
straight the way of the Lord.
Take away all
obstacles and stumbling-blocks, that ye may
walk straight onward to eternal life.
Make
ready the vessels6 of the soul, cleansed by un
feigned faith, for reception of the Holy Ghost.
Begin at once to wash your robes in repentance,
that when called to the bride-chamber ye may
be found clean.
For the Bridegroom invites
all without distinction, because His grace is
bounteous ; and the cry of loud-voiced heralds
assembles them all : but the same Bridegroom
afterwards
those who have come
in to the figurative marriage. O may none
of those whose names have now been en
rolled hear the words, Friend, hoiv earnest
thou in hither, not having a wedding gar-

separates

1 Ps. xcvi. 11.
2 The invisible or spiritual (foijrot) hys^np is the cleansing
power of the Holy Ghost in Baptism. Compare Ps. li. 7.
3 S Cyril here, and still more emphatically in xili. 39, dis
tinguishes the hyssop (John xix. so) Trom the reed (Matt, xxvii. 48),
implying that the sponge filled with vinegar was bound round
with hy*sop, and then hxed on a reed. Another opinion is that
See Dictionary of the Bible,
the reed itself was that of hyssop.
5 (Tu^arw.
'' Hyssop."
6 So in I 15, the soul is regarded as a vessel lor receiving grace.

4 Js. xl. 3.

But may you all hear, Well done, good
ment 1 1
and faithful servant ;
thou wast faithful over
a few things, I will set thee over many things :
enter thou into the joy of thy lords.

For now meanwhile thou standest outside
the door : but God grant that you all may say,
The King hath brought me into His chamber
Let my soul rejoice in the Lord : for He hath
clothed me with a garment of salvation, and
a robe of gladness : He hath crowned me with
and decked me with
a garland as a bridegroom
ornaments as a bride : that the soul of every one
of you may be found not having spot or wrinkle
or any such thing'1 ; I do not mean before you
have received the grace, for how could that be ?
is for remission of sins that ye have
since it
been called ; but that, when the grace is to be
given, yourconscience being found uncondemned
may concur with the grace.

3. This is in truth a serious matter, brethren,
and you must approach it with good heed. Each
one of you is about to be presented to God be
fore tens of thousands of the Angelic Hosts :
the Holy Ghost is about to seal 3 your souls : ye
are to be enrolled in the army of the Great
Therefore make you ready, and equip
King.
yourselves, by putting on I mean, not bright
apparel4,
with a good
conscience.
Regard not the Laver as simple
water, but rather regard the spiritual grace
For just as
that is given with the water.
the offerings brought to the heathen altars s,
though simple in their nature, become defiled
by the invocation of the idols 6, so contrariwise

but piety of soul

9 Cant. i. 4.

8 Matt. xxv. 12.
7 Matt. xxii. la.
1 Is. lxi. 10. Compare Cant. iii. 11 : Co forth, O ye daughters
of/.ion. ami behold King Solomon, with the crown wherewith his
mother hath crowned him in the day 0/ his espousals.
In the
psssage of Isaiah the bridegroom's crown is likened to the priestly
mitre.

3 See Index, "Seal,"
5 0u)Motc used of heathen altars only, in Septnagint and N.T.
6 Both here and in xix. 7, Cyril speaks of tilings offered to
idols just as S. Paul in 1 Cor, x. 20. The Benediction of the water
of Baptism is found in the Apostolic Constitutions, vii. 43 : *' Look
down from heaven, and .sanctity this water, and give it grace and
power, that so he that is to be baptized according to the command
ot Thy Christ, may be crucified with Him, and may die with Him,
and be buried with Him. and may rise with Him to the adoption
which is in Him, that he may be dead to sin and live to righteous
ness."

8 Eph. v. 7.
4 Index, ''White."

LECTURE III.

the simple water having received the invoca
tion of the Holy Ghost, and of Christ, and of
the Father, acquires a new power of holiness.

4. For since man is of twofold

nature,
soul and body, the purification also is two
fold, the one incorporeal for the incorporeal
part, and the other bodily for the body : the
water cleanses the body, and the Spirit seals
the soul ; that we may draw near unto God,
having onr heart sprinkled by the Spirit, and our
body ivashcd with pure water'.
When going
down, therefore, into the water, think not of the
bare element, but look for salvation by the
power of the Holy Ghost :
for without both
It
thou canst not possibly be made perfect 8.
is not I that say this, but the Lord Jesus
Christ, who has the power in this matter :
for He saith, Except a man be born anew (and
He adds the words) of water and of the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the kingdom of God*. Neither
doth he that is baptized with water, but not
found worthy of the Spirit, receive the grace in
perfection ; nor if a man be virtuous in his
deeds, but receive not the seal by water, shall
he enter into the kingdom of heaven. A bold
saying, but not mine, for it is Jesus who hath
declared it : and here is the proof of the.statement from Holy Scripture.
Cornelius was
a just man, who was honoured with a vision of
Angels, and had set up his prayers and almsdeeds as a good memorial 1 before God in
heaven.
was
poured out upon them that believed, and they
spake with other tongues, and prophesied : and
after the grace of the Spirit the Scripture saith
that Peter commanded them to be baptized in the
name of Jesus Christ* : in order that, the soul
having been born again by faith 3, the body
also might by the water partake of the grace.

Peter came, and the

Spirit

5. But if any one wishes to know why the
grace is given by water and not by a different
element, let him take up the Divine Scriptures
and he shall learn. For water is a grand thing,
and the noblest of the four visible elements of
the world.
Heaven is the dwelling-place of
Angels, but the heavens are from the waters4:
the earth is the place of men, but the earth is
from the waters: and before the whole six days'
formation of the things that were made, the
Spirit of God moved upon the face of the water*.
The water was the beginning of the world,

7 Heb. x. n.
8 Sec the note on " the twofold grace perfected by water and
the Spirit/' at the end of this Lecture.
1 anjAr} Sept. A pillar of stone, bearing an inscription, was
a common form of memorial among the Israelites and other ancient
natiuns. Sec Dictionary of the Bible, " Pillar."

2 Acts x. 48.
5 S. Cyril considers that Cornelius and his friends were regene
rated, as the Apostles were, apart from Baptism ; as Auyust.
Sirm. 269, n. 2, and Chrysost. in Act. Afiost. Horn. 25, seem to
da R. W. C.

9 John iii. 3.

4 Compare ix. 5.

5 Gen. i. a.

and Jordan the beginning of the Gospel tid
ings : for Israel deliverance from Pharaoh was
through the sea, and for the world deliverance
from sinjs by the washing ofwater with the word6
Where a covenant is made with any,
of God.
there is water also.
After the flood, a cove
nant was made with Noah : a covenant for
Israel from Mount Sinai, but with water, and
Elias is taken up,
scarlet wool, and hyssop''.
but not apart from water : for first he crosses
the Jordan, then in a chariot mounts the
heaven.
first washed,
for Aaron first washed,
then offers incense ;
then was made high-priest :
for how could
one who had not yet been purified by water
pray for the rest?
Also as a symbol of Bap
tism there was a laver set apart within the
Tabernacle.

The high-priest

is

6. Baptism is the end of the Old Testament,
For its author
and beginning of the New.
was John, than whom was none greater among
them that are born of womeil. The end he was
of the Prophets : for all the Prophets and the
law were untilJohn 8.- but of the Gospel history
For it saith, The begin
he was the first-fruit.
Gospel of Jesus Christ, &c. :
ning of the
John came baptizing in the wilderness 9.
You
may mention Elias the Tishbite who was taken
up into heaven, yet he is not greater than
John : Enoch was translated, but he is not
greater than John : Moses was a very great
lawgiver, and all the Prophets were admirable,
but not greater than John.
It is not I that
dare to compare Prophets with Prophets : but
their Master and ours, the Lord Jesus, declared
it : Among them that are bom of women there
hath not risen a greater than John '.- He saith
not " among them that are born ol virgins," but
of women 3. The comparison is between the
great servant and his fellow-servants : but the
pre-eminence and the grace of the Son is
beyond comparison with servants.
Seest thou
how great a man God chose as the first
minister of this grace?-a man possessing
nothing, and a lover of the desert, yet no
hater of mankind : who ate locusts, and winged
his soul for heaven 3: feeding upon honey, and
speaking things both sweeter and more salutary
than honey: clothed with a garment of camel's
hair, and shewing in himself the pattern of
the ascetic life ; who also was sanctified by
the Holy Ghost while yet he was carried in his
mother's womb. Jeremiah was sanctified, but
« Ephes. T. 26.
t Heb. ix. 19,
1 Matt. xi. ix.
9 Mark i. 1, 4.
a From the Clementine Recognitions, I. 54 and 60, we learn
that there were some who asserted that John was the Christ, and
not Jesus, inasmuch as Jesus Himself declared that John was
greater than all men. and all Prophets. The answer is there given,
that John was greater than all who are born of women, yet not
greater than the Son of Man.
3 The locust being winged suggests the idea of growing wings
for the soul.

Is. xl 31 : trrfpoeVuifffoumr »t atTOi.

• Matt. xi. 13.

i6

CATECHETICAL LECTURES

did not prophesy, in the womb*: John alone
while carried in the womb leaped for joy s, and
though he saw not with the eyes of flesh, knew
his Master by the Spirit: for since the grace
of Baptism was great, it required greatness in
its founder also.

7. This man was baptizing in Jordan, and
there went out unto him all Jenisalem 6, to enjoy
the fii st fruits of baptisms :
for in Jerusalem
But
is the prerogative of all things good.
learn, O ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, how they
that came out were baptized by him . confess
ing their sins, it is said ?.
First they shewed
their wounds, then he applied the remedies,
and to them that believed gave redemption
from eternal fire. And if thou wilt be con
vinced of this very point, that the baptism of
John is a redemption from the threat of .the
fire, hear how he says, O generation of vipers,
who hath warned you to flee jrom the wrath to
come*? Be not then henceforth a viper, but as
thou hast been formerly a viper's brood, put
off", saith he, the slough 9 of thy former sinful
life.
For every serpent creeps into a hole and
casts its old slough, and having rubbed off the
old skin, grows young again in body.
In like
manner enter thou also through the strait and
narrow gate1 : rub off thy former self by fasting,
and drive out that which is destroying thee.
Put off the old man with his doings a, and quote
that saying in the Canticles, / have put off my
coat, how shall Iput it on*1

But there is perhaps among you some hypo
crite, a iiian-pleaser, and one who makes a
pretence of piety, but believes not from the
heart ; having the hypocrisy of Simon Magus ;
one who has come hither not in order to
receive of the grace, but to spy out what is
given : let him also learn from John : And
now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees,
Every tree therefore that bringeth not forth good
fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire*.
The Judge is inexorable; put away thine,
hypocrisy.

8. V'hat then must you do ? And what are
Let him that hath
the fruits of repentance 1
two coats give to him that hath none*: the
teacher was worthy of credit, since he was also
the first to practise what he taught : he was
not ashamed to speak, for conscience. hindered
not his tongue : and he that haih meat, let
him do likewise.
Wouldst thou enjoy the grace
of the Holy Spirit, yet judgest the poor not

8 lb. Hi. 7.

5 Luke i. 44.

6 Matt. iii. 5.

* Ter. i. 5.
7 Matt. iii. 6.
9 The Greek word (virocTTa<m) is used by Polvbius (xxxiv. 0)
for the deposit of silver Iroin crushed ore, ana by Hippocrates for
any sediment or deposit
Here it means, as the context clearly
thews, the old skin cast by a snake.
1 Matt. viL 13, 14.
3 Cant. v. 3.
rising Irom bed.
4 Matt. iii. 10.

Con.pa'c ii. 5.
' Col. iii. 9.
1 u the Song, this saying is an excuse for not
S- Cyril applies it in a different way.

5 Luke iii. xi.

worthy of bodily food ?
Seekest thou the
great gifts, and impartest not of the small?
Though thou be a publican, or a fornicator,
have hope of salvation : the publicans and
the' harlots go into the kingdom of God before
you 6.
Paul also is witness, saying, Neither
fornicators, nor adulterers, nor the rest, shall
inherit the kingdom of God. And such were
some of you :
but ye were washed, but ye
were sanctified^. He said not, such are some of
you, but such were some ofyou.
Sin committed
in the state of ignorance is pardoned, but
persistent wickedness is condemned.

9. Thou hast as the glory of Baptism the
For
Son Himself, the Only-begotten of God.
why should I speak any more of man ? John
was great, but what is he to the Lord ?
His
was a loud-sounding voice, hut what in com
Very noble was the
parison with the Word?
the
herald, but what in comparison with
King ?
baptized with
Noble was he that
water, but what to Him that baptizeth with
the Holy Ghost and with fire 8 / The Saviour
baptized the Apostles with the Holy Ghost
and with fire, when suddenly there came a sound
from heaven as of the rushing of a mighty wind,
and it filled all the house where they were
sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven
tongues tike as offire: and it sat upon each one
of them, and they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost 9.

10. If any man receive not Baptism, he hath
not salvation ; except only Martyrs, who even
without the water receive the kingdom.
For
when the Saviour, in redeeming the world by
His Cross, was pierced in the side, He shed
forth blood and water ; that men, living in
times of peace, might be baptized in water,
and, in times of persecution, in
their own
blood.
For martyrdom also the Saviour is
wont to call a baptism, saying, Can ye drink
the cup which I drink, and be baptized with the
baptism that I am baptized withal And the
Martyrs confess, by icing made a spectacle unto
the world, and to Angels, and to men *; and thou
wilt soon confess :-but it is not yet the time
for thee to hear of this.

11. Jesus sanctified Baptism by being Him
self baptized.
If the Son of God was baptized,
what godly man is he that despiseth Baptism ?
But He was baptized not that He might
receive remission of sins, for He was sinless ;
but being sinless, He was baptized, that He
might give to them that are baptized a divine
and excellent grace.
For since the children are
partakers offlesh and blood, He also Himself
tikeivise partook of the same 3, that having been

6 Matt. xxi. 31.
9 Acts ii. a

7 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10,
1 Mark x. 38.
3 Heb. ii. 14.

8 Matt. iii. n.

■ 1 Cor. iv. 9.

LECTURE III.

made partakers of His presence in the flesh,
we might be made partakers also of His Divine
grace : thus Jesus was baptized, that thereby
we again by our participation might receive
both salvation and honour.
According to
Job. there was in tiie waters the dragon that
drawe.'h up Jordan into his mouth*.
Since,
therefore, it was necessary to break the heads of
the dragon in pieces 5, He went down and bound
the strong one in the waters, that we might
receive power to
tread upon serpents and
scorpions6.
The beast was great and terrible.
Aro fishing-vessel was able to carry one scale of
his tail 1 : destruction ran before him 8, ravaging
all that met him.
The Life encountered him,
that the mouth of Death might henceforth be
stopped, and all we that are saved might say, O
death, where is thy sling ? 0 grave, where is thy
victory ^ 1 The sting of death is drawn by
Baptism.

12. For thou goest down into the water,
bearing thy sins, but the invocation of grace *,
having sealed thy soul, suffercth thee not after
wards to be swallowed up by the terrible
dragon. Having gone down dead in sins, thou
comest up quickened in righteousness.
For if
thou hast been united with the likeness of the
Saviour's death 2, thou shalt also be deemed
worthy of His Resurrection.
For as Jesus
took upon Him the sins of the world, and died,
that by putting sin to death He might rise
again
in righteousness ; so thou by going
down into the water, and being in a manner
buried in the waters, as He was in the rock,
art raised again walking in newness of life \

13. Moreover, when thou hast been deemed
worthy of the grace, He then giveth thee
strength to wrestle against the adverse powers.
For as after His Baptism He was tempted forty
days (not that He • was unable to gain the
victory before, but because He wished to do
all things in due order and succession), so
thou likewise, though not daring before thy
baptism to wrestle with the adversaries, yet
after thou hast received the grace and art
henceforth confident in the armour 0) righteous
ness*, must then do battle, and preach the
Gospel,' if thou wilt.

14. Jesus Christ was the Son of God, yet
He preached not the Gospel before His Bap
tism.
If the Master Himself followed the right
time in due order, ought we, His servants, to

ob xl, 26. in the Sept. in place of xli.

6 Luke x. to.
5 Ps. lxxiv. T4.
4 Job xl. 93.
1 place ot xli. 7: Canst them fill his
skin with barbed irons, or his head with fish spears? (A.V. and
in v
R.V.)
~.V.)
8 Job xli. 13, Sept. but in R.V. xli. il : And terror danceth
Leforejiim.
3 Rom. vi. 5.
baptism."
' Compare III. 3, and see Index, " Baptism.'
nt rise again " (Roe Casauo.
LVtead of *'
3 Rom. vi. 4.
Mon.), the older Edition* have "might raise thee up," which
is less appropriate in this part of the sentence.

9 I Cor. xv. 55.

* a Cor. vi. 7.
VOL. VII.

venture out of order? From that time Jesus
began to preach s, when the Holy Spirit had de
scended upon Him in a bodily shape, like a dove6 ;
not that Jesus might see Him first, for He
knew Him even before He came in a bodily
shape, but that John, who was baptizing Him,
might behold Him.
For /, saith he, knew
Him not : but He that sent me to baptize with
ivate; , He said unto me, Upon whomsoever thou
shift see the Spirit descending and abiding on
Him, that is HeT.
If thou too hast unfeigned
piety, the Holy Ghost cometh down on thee
also, and a Father's voice sounds over thee
from on high-not, " This is My Son," but,
" This has now been made My son ; " for the
"is" belongs to Him alone, because In the
beginning iv.is the Word, and the Word was
with God, and the Word was God%. To Him
belongs the " is," since He is always the Son
of God : but to thee " has now been made :"
since thou hast not the sonship by nature, but
receivest it by adoption. He eternally "is;"
but thou receivest the grace by advancement.
15. Make ready then the vessel of thy soul,
that thou mayest become a son of God, and
an heir of God, and joint-heir with Christ 9; if,
indeed, thou art preparing thyself that thou
mayest receive; if thou art drawing nigh in
faith that thou mayest be made faithful ; if of
set purpose thou art putting off the old man.
For all things whatsoever thou hast done shall
be forgiven thee, whether it be fornication, or
adultery, or any other such form of licentious
What can be a greater sin than to
ness.
Yet even of this Baptism can
crucify Christ ?
purify.
For so spake Peter to the three thou
sand who came to him, to those who had
crucified the Lord, when they asked him, say
ing, Men and brethren, what shall we do' f
Thou hast made us
For the wound is great.
think of our fall, O Peter, by saying, Ye killed
What salve is there for so
the Prince of Life
great a wound ?
What cleansing for such
foulness? What is the salvation for such per
Repent, saith he, and be baptized every
dition ?
one ofyou in the name ofJesus Christ our Lord,
for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the
gift of the Holy Ghost*. O unspeakable
loving-kindness of God 1 They have no hope
of being saved, and yet they are thought worthy
of the Holy Ghost
Thou seest the power of
Baptism !
If any of you has crucified the
Christ by blasphemous words ; if any <jf you
in ignorance has denied Him before men; if
any by wicked works has caused the doctrine
to be blasphemed ; let him repent and be of
good hope, for the same grace is present even
now.

5 Matt. iv. 17.

9 Rom. viii. 17.

6 Luke iii. 9
1 Acts ii. 37.

7 John i. 33.

' lb. iii. 15.

• lb. i. t.
3 lb. it. 58.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

1 6. Be of good courage, O Jerusalem; the
Lord will take away all thine iniquities «.
The
Lord will wash away thefilth of His sons and
of His daughters by the Spirit ofjudgment, and
by the Spirit of burning s. He willsprinkle dean
water upon you, andye shall be cleansedfrom all
jour sin 6. Angels shall dance around you, and
say, Who is this that cometh up in tvhite array,
leaning upon her beloved 1 1 For the soul that
was formerly a slave has now adopted her
Master Himself as her kinsman : and He ac
cepting the unfeigned purpose will answer :
Behold, thou art fair, my love ; behold, thou art
fair : thy teeth are likeflocks of sheep new shorn,
(because of the confession of a good con
science: and further) which have all of them
twins 8 / because of the twofold grace, I mean
5 Is. iv. 4.

4 Zeph. iii. 14, 15.
7 Cant. viii. 5, Gr. &BcKfa&6v, "brother." "kinsman."
» lb. iv. i, a.

6 Ezek. xxxvi. 25.

that which is perfected of water and of the
Spirit °, or that which is announced by the Old
and by the New Testament. And God grant
that all of you when you have finished the
course of the fast, may remember what I say,
and bringing forth fruit in good works, may
stand blameless beside the Spiritual
Bride
groom, and obtain the remission of your sins
from God ; to whom with the Son and Holy
Spirit be the glory for ever.

Amen.

9 The Fathers sometimes speak as if Baptism was primarily the
Sacrament of remission of sins, and upon that came the gift of the
Spirit, which notwithstanding was but begun in Baptism and com
Via. Tertullian. de Baft. 1, 8, supr. i. 5
pleted in Confirmation.
Hence, as in the text. Baptism may be said to be made up of
fin.
two gifts, Water, which is Christ's blood, and the Spirit. There is
no real difference between this and the ordinary way of speaking
on the subject ;-Water, which conveys both gifts, is considered as
a type of one especially,-conveys both remission of sins through
Christ's blood and the grace of the Spirit,«but is the type of one,
viz. the blood of Christ, as the Oil in Confirmation is of the other
And again, remission of sins is a complete gift given at once, sanctification an increasing one. (R. W. C ) See Index, " Baptism."

LECTURE IV.

On the Ten' points of Doctrine.

Colossians ii. 8.
Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition oj
men, after the rudiments of the world, 6-v.

i. Vice mimics virtue, and the tares strive i God accept the works which are not perfected
For what profit is it,
to know well the doctrines concerning God,
and yet to be a vile fornicator? And again,
what profit is it, to be nobly temperate, and
an impious blasphemer ? A most precious
possession therefore is the knowledge of doc
trines : also there is need of a wakeful soul,
since there are many that make spoil through
philosophy and vain deceit6. The Greeks on
the one hand draw men away by their smooth
tongue, for honey droppethfrom a harlot's lips i :
whereas they of the Circumcision deceive those
who come to them by means of the Divine
Scriptures, which they miserably misinterpret
though studying them from childhood to old age 8,
and growing old in ignorance.
But the chil
dren of heretics, by their good words and
smooth tongue, deceive the hearts of the innocent ->,
disguising with the name of Christ as it were
with honey the poisoned arrows 10 of their im
pious doctrines : concerning all of whom to
gether the Lord saith, Take heed lest any
This is the reason for the
teaching of the Creed and for expositions
upon it

to be thought wheat, growing like the wheat 'with pious doctrines.
in appearance, but being detected by good
The devil also trans
judges from the taste.
figures himself into an angel oflight'* ; not that
he may reascend to where he was, for having
made his heart hard as an anvil*, he has
henceforth a will that cannot repent ; but in
order that he may envelope those who are
living an Angelic life in a mist of blindness,
and a pestilent condition of unbelief. Many
wolves are going about in sheeps' clothing *,
their clothing being that of sheep, not so their
claws and teeth : but clad in their soft skin,
and deceiving the innocent by their appear
ance, they shed upon them from their fangs
the destructive poison of ungodliness. We
have need therefore of divine grace, and of a
sober mind, and of eyes that see, lest from eat
ing tares as wheat we suffer harm from ignor
ance, and lest from taking the wolf to be
a sheep we become his prey, and from suppos
ing the destroying Devil to be a beneficent
Angel we be devoured : for, as the Scripture 1 man mislead you1.
saith, he goeth about as a roaring lion, seeking
7vhom he may devour*.
This is the cause of
the Church's admonitions, the cause of the
present instructions, and of the lessons which
are read.

2. For the method of godliness consists of
these two things, pious doctrines, and virtuous
practice : and neither are the doctrines accept
able to God apart from good works, nor does
1 The number "ten" is confirmed by Theodoret, who quotes
the article on Christ's " Birth of the Virgin" as from Cyril's fourth
Catechetical Lecture "On the ten Doctrines." The MSS. vary
between '* ten " and " eleven," and differ also in the special titles
and numeration of the separate Articles.
■
. iirrtiKev w<nr«p
SjttLty ayrjAaTos. Thtse statements concerning the Devil seem to
be directed against Oripen's opinion (De Principles I. 2), that the
Angels " who have been removed from their primal state of blessed*
The question is
ness have not been removed irrecoverably."
d scussed, and the opinions of several Fathers quoted, by Huet,
Origrniana, II. c. 25.
- Matt. vii. 15. The same text is applied to Heretics by
Ignatius, Philndeiph. ii., and by Irenaeus, L. I. c i. I 2.
S 1 Pet. v. 8.

* a Cor. xi. 14.
3 Job xli. 24, Sept. ; xli. 15: tj Kae&ia avrov .

3. But before delivering you over to the
Creed a, I think it is well to make use at present
of a short summary of necessary doctrines ;
that the multitude of things to be spoken, and
the long interval of the days of all this holy
Lent, may not cause forgetfulness in the mind
of the more simple among you ; but that,
having strewn some seeds now in a summary
way, we may not forget the same when after
wards more 'widely tilled.
But let those here
present whose habit of mind is niature, and

7 Prov. v. 3.

« Col. ii. 8.
8 Is. xlvi. 3. Sept* ireuocvSfitvot ex trcuo'.ov cut yijpwe.
9 Rom. xvi. 17.
-° Compare Ignatius, Trull, vi.
1 Matt, xxiv. 4.
» Compare Rom. vi. 17: "that form 0/ teaching whertunlo
ye were delivered." The instruction of Catechumens in the Arti
cles of the Faith was commonly called the "Traditio Symboli,"
or " Delivery of the Creed."

Cyril has ev-yAwrTias- in place of «w\oyt'ac.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

who have their senses already exercised to discern
good and coil*, endure patiently to listen to
things fitted rather for children, and to an in
troductory course, as it were, of milk : that at
the same time both those who have need of the
instruction may be benefited, and those who
have the knowledge may rekindle the remem
brance of things which they already know.

I. Of God.
4. First then let there be laid as a founda
tion in your soul the doctrine concerning God;
that God is One, alone unbegotten, without be
ginning, change, or variation'' ; neither begotten
of another, nor having another to succeed Him
in His life ; who neither began to live in time,
nor endeth ever : and that He is both good and
just ; that if ever thou hear a heretic say, that
there is one God who is just, and another who
is gooi s, thou mayest immediately remember,
and discern the poisoned arrow of heresy.
For
some have impiously dared to divide the One
God in their teaching : and some have said
that one is the Creator and Lord of the soul,
and another of the body6; a doctrine at once
absurd and impious.
For how can a man
become the one servant of two masters, when
our Lord says in the Gospels, No man can
serve two masters it There is then One Only
God, the Maker both of souls and bodies :
One the Creator of heaven and earth, the
Maker of Angels and Archangels :
of many
the Creator, but of One only the Father before
all ages,- of One only, His Only begotten
•Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, by Whom He
made alt things visible and invisible 8.

5. This Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is
not circumscribed in any place', nor is He less
than the heaven ; but the heavens are the works
of His fingers IO, and the whole earth is held in
His grasp " .• He is in all things and around all.
Think not that the sun is brighter than He ', or

3 Heb. v. 14.
4 Compare Hernia*, Mandat. i. Athan. Epist. de Decretis
Si:. Syn. xxii. : ourw xai to irptirrov xai ui/aAAot'curoi' avTOP
So Aristotle (Metaphys. XI. c iv. 13) de
ilvajL o-u0qo-eT<u.
scribes the First Cause as drraflec «ai di'aA.Votwroi'.
5 Irenaeus, I. c. xxvii. says that Cerdo taught that the God
of the Law and the Prophets was not the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ : for that He is known, hut the other unknown, and
the one is just, but the other good. Also III. c 25, S3 : "Marcion
himself, therefore?, by dividing Cod into two, and calling the one
good, and the other judicial, on both sides puts an end to Deity."
Compare Tertullian, c. Marcion. I. a, and 6; Origen, c. Cels.
iv. S4.8 This tenet was held by the Manichaeans and other heretics,
and is traced back to the Apostolic age by H'shop Pearson {Ex
position ofthe Creed, Art. i. p. 79, n"te c). Compare Athanasius
Ic. Apoltinarium, I. 21 ; [[.:.. Gentes, f 6 ', tie Incarnatione.
X a, in this scries, and Augustine (c Fanstvm, xx. 15, 21, and
xxi. 4).

7 Matt. vi. 24 ; Luke xvi. 12.
9 S. Auj. in t's. Ixxv. 6 : St tn aliquo loco e-set, non essct Deus.
Sermo 3J2 : Deus hahitando continet non eonlinetur.
Origen,
c. Cels. vii. 34 :
God is of too excellent a nature for any place :
He holds all things in His power, and is Himscll not confined by
anything whatever.' Compare the quotation from Sir I-aac New
10 Ps. viii. 3.
ton's Princtpia, in the note on Cat. vi. 8.

8 John i. 3 ; Col. i. 16.

11 Is. xl. 12.

1 See Cat. xv. 3, and note there.

equal to Him : for He who at first formed the
sun must needs be incomparably greater and
brighter. He foreknoweth the things that shall
be, and is mightier than all, knowing all things
and doing as He will ; not being subject to any
necessary sequence of events, nor to nativity,
nor chance, nor fate ; in all things perfect, and
equally possessing every absolute form2 of virtue,
neither diminishing nor increasing, but in mode
ever the same ; who hath
and conditions
prepared punishment for sinners, and a crown
for the righteous.

6. Seeing then that many have gone astray
in divers ways from the One God, some having
deified the sun, that when the sun sets they
may abide in the night season without God ;
others the moon, to have no God by day';
others the other parts of the world 4 ; others the
arts5; others their various kinds of food6; others
their pleasures i ; while some, mad after women,
have set up on high an image of a naked wo
man, and called it Aphrodite 8, and worshipped
their own lust irra visible form; and others daz
zled by the brightness of gold have deified it' and
the other kinds of matter;-whereas if one lay as
a first foundation in his heart the doctrine of the
unity10 of God, and trust to Him, he roots out
at once the whole crop 1 of the evils of idolatry,
and of the error of the heretics : lay thou, there
fore, this first doctrine of religion as a founda
tion in thy soul by faith.

Of Christ.
7. Believe also in the Son of God, One and
Only, our Lord Jesus Christ, Who was be-

» ioeav.

Cyril uses the word in the Platonic sense, as in the
next sentence fie adopts the formula, which Plato commonly uses
in describing the "idea :" del Kara rd avrd xai utravruc t\tiy,
Phaed. 78 c.
3 Job xxxi. 26, 27. The worship of Sun and Moon under
variovis names was almost universal.
4 Gaea or Tellus, the earth ; Zeus or Jupiter, the sky ; rivers,
fountains, Ate.
5 Music, Medicine. Hunting, War, Agriculture, Metallurgy,
*c. , represented by Apollo, Aesculapius, Diana, Mars, Ceres,
Vulcan.
6 Herodotus, Book II., describes the Egyptian worship of
various birds, fishes, and quadrupeds.
Leeks and onions also
were held sacred : Porrum et caepe ncfas violare, Juv. Sat. xv. 9.
Compare Clement of Alexandria, Protrrpt. c. ii. fi 39, Klotz.

7 Eros, Dionysus.
8 Clement of Alexandria {Protrept. c. iv. § 53, Kloti) states
that the courtesan Phryne was taken as a model for Aphrodite.
" Praxiteles when fashioning the_ statue of Aphroi'-ite of Cnidus
made it like the form of Cratine his paramour." Ibid.

9 Plums.
10 t^? p.wap\iaie tov Otov.

See note on the title of Cat. VI.
Praxeas made use of the term "Monarchy" to exclude the Son
Tertullian in his treatise
(and the Spirit) from the Godhead.
against Praxeas maintains the true doctrine that the Son is no
obstacle to the " Monarchy," because He is of the substance of
the Father, does nothing without the Father's will, and has re
ceived all power irom the Father, to Whom He will in the end
deliver up the kinguoin. In this sense Dionysius, Hishnpof Rome,
speaks of the Divine Monarchy as "that most sacred doctrine of
the Church of God." Compare Athanas. de Decretis, Nic. Syi.
In Orat. iv. c. Arian. p. 606
c. vi. g 3. and Dr. Newman's note.
(617), Athanasius derives the term from dpv>5. in the sense of
"beginning:" ovtws uia dpyi; tfednrro? (cat ov Svo dpvat, itOiv
xvpi'iuc xai fxovapxia ioriv.
Sec the full discussion of Monarchianism in Athanasius, p. xxiil. ft", in this series, and Newman's
Introduction to Athan. Or. iv.
1 For diopdv (Bened.) many MSS. read QBopiv, " corruption."

LECTURE IV.

For the throne at God's right hand He re-

gotten God of God, begotten Life of Life, be- of reason, the Word who heareth the Father,
gotten Light of Light1, Who is in all things like 3
and Himself speaketh. And on these points,
to Him that begat, Who received not His be
should God permit, we will speak more at
ing in time, but was before all ages eternally
large in due season ; for we do not forget our
and incomprehensibly begotten of the Father :
present purpose to give a summary intro
The Wisdom and the Power of God, and His
duction to the Faith.
Righteousness personally subsisting « : Who sitteth on the right hand of the Father before all
ages.

Concerning His Birth of the Virgin.
9. Believe then that this Only-begotten Son
ceived not, as some have thought, because of of God for our sins came down from heaven
His patient endurance, being crowned as it uPon earth> and took uPon, Hlm TM» humtan
were by God after His Passion ; but through- niture ot llke passions3 with us, and was beout His being- a being by eternal genera- g°tten ot" the Ho[y
and of the Holy
tion 5- He holds His royal dignity, and shares Ghost. and was made Man» not ln seeming
and mere show 3, but in truth ; nor yet by pas
the Father's seat, being God and Wisdom and
sing through the Virgin as through a channel « ;
Power, as hath been said ; reigning together
but was of her made truly flesh, [and truly
with the Father, and creating all things for the
nourished with milk s], and did truly eat as
Father, yet lacking nothing in the dignity of
For if the
we do, and truly drink as we do.
Godhead, and knowing Him that hath be
Incarnation was a phantom, salvation
is a
gotten Him, even as He is known of Him
phantom also.
The Christ was of two natures,
that hath begotten ; and to speak briefly, re
Man in what was seen, but God in what was
member thou what is written in the Gospels,
not seen ; as Man truly eating like us, for He
that none knoweth the Son but the Fatltet , neither
had the like feeling of the flesh with us ; but
knoweth any the Father save the Son 6.
as God feeding the five thousand from five
loaves ; as Man truly dying, but as God
raising him that had been dead four days ;
truly sleeping in the ship as Man, and walking
upon the waters as God.

Further, do thou neither separate 1 the
Son from the Father, nor by making a con
fusion
but
believe in a Son-Fatherhood 8 ;
believe that of One God there is One Onlybegotten Son, who is before all ages God the
Word ; not the uttered' word diffused into the
air, nor to be likened to impersonal words 1 ;
but the Word the Son, Maker of all who partake

8.

.

Cf. xi 10 ; Athan. c. Afollinar. I. 20, ai.

9 Compare xi. 4, 9, 18.
3 Top omoiov Kara irapra t<Z ywiitWT*. On the meaning and
history of this phrase, proposed by the Semi-Ai i.ins at the Council
of Ariminum as a substitute lor bp.ooucriop, see Athari. de Syn. \ 8,
ft- .

,
4 *pvirocrraTc-e.
5 The MSS. vary much, but 1 have followed the Benedictine
6 Matt. xi. 27; John x. 15 ; xvii. 25.
text.
7 This was a point earnestly maintained by trie orthodox Bi
shops at Nicxa, that the Son begotten of the substance of the
Father is ever inseparably 111 the Father.
Athan. de Decretis
Syn. c. 30 ; Tertullian c. Marc. IV. c. 6. Cf. Ignat. ad Trait, vi.
(Long Recension) : top >i«p yap Xpicrrbp dAAoTpicjviat top Harpcs.
8 uioiraTooia. A term of derision applied to the doctrine of
Sabellius. Compare Atl an is. Ex/csitio Eidri, c. 2: ''neither
See Index,
do we imagine a Son-Fauier, as the Sahelli.ius."
"YioiraTwp.
9 Aoyof trpo^optKos, the term used by Paul of Samosatn, implied
that the Word was impersonal, being conceived as a particular
activity of God.
Sec Dorncr, Perspn of Chiitt, Div. 1. vol. ii.
p. 436 (English Tr.): and compare Athanasius, J-.xfpsttio J-idei,
c. 1 ; vibp ex too llarpbc di a mc.s xat dijiwc yeyei'i »nt« pop, Aoyop
or ov wpoQoptKov, ovx tpc-idtfeTOp.
Cardinal Newman {.Athan.
c. Ariancs, I. 7, note) observes that some Christian writers of the
2nd century "seem to speak of the Divine generation as taking
place immediately before the creation ol the world, that is. as
if not eternal, though at the same time they teach that our Lord
existed before that generation.
In other words they seem to teach
thai He was the Word from etcmity, and oceanic the Son at the
beginning of all things ; some of them expressly consider ng Hiin,
first as the Abyoc «'p5ia0rroe, or Reason, in the Father, or (as may
be speciously represented) a mere attribute; next, as the Aoyos
1 ..in .\. or Word. *
■
The terms Aoyos- (riiaff«Tos, or 'word conceived in the mind,'
and Abyoc rrpocijpixbs, or ' word expressed ' (tmiuum, or froiaihiiml, were in use among the Gnostics {Iren. II. c. 12, $5).
As applied to the Son both terms, though sometimes used in
a right sense, were condemned as inadequate. Compare xi. 10.
c. 8:
ffoAiy oi Aeyovrcc tec-pop bVop-a elpat vtov, apotiffiop ii xai afvrro-

Aihan. c. Arianas Orat. iv.

1 apviroerraroif Aovoic.
)P itlfU TOP viiiV TOW (fCOV, K.r.A.

Of the Cross

iot He was truly crucified for our sins.
For if thou wouldest deny it, the place refutes
thee visibly, this blessed Goigotha6, in which
we are now assembled for the sake of Him
who was here crucified ; and the whole world
has since been filled with pieces of the wood of
the Cross ?.
But He was crucified not for sins
of His own, but that we might be delivertxl
from our sins. And though as Man He was
at that time despised oj men, and was buffeted,
yet He was acknowledged by the Creation as
God : for when the sun saw his Lord dis
honoured, he grew dim and trembled, not
enduring the sight.

3 buoic-rrapq. Compare Acts xiv. 15 ; Jas. v. 17.
3 On the origin of tnc Docetic heresy, see vi. 14.
4 Valentino* the Gnostic taught that God produced a Son of
an animal nature who
passed through Mary just as water through
a tube, and that on him the Saviour descended at his Baptism."
Irenacus, 1. vii. 2.
5 The words which the Benedictine Editor introduces in
brackets are fo ind in Theodoret, and adc>ptcd by recent Editors,
with Codd. M.A.

6 Eusebius, Life o/Constantine, iii. 28.
7 The discovery of the "Tme Cross" is related with many
marvellous particulars by Socrates, Eccies. Hist. i. 17 ; and S020inen, E.H. ii. 1. A portion was said to liave been left by Helena
at Jerusalem, enclosed in a silver case ; and another portion sent
,o Constantinople, where Constanlinc privately enclosed it in his
Eusebius, Life pj
own statue, to be a safeguard to the city.
Constaiitine. iii. 25-30, gives a long account of the discovery
of the Holy Sepulc.ire, but makes 110 mention of the Cross.
Cyril
Cf. Gre^.
seems to have been the first to record it, 35 years after.
Nyss. Baft. Christi(p. 519X

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

Of His Burial.

11. He was truly laid as Man in a tomb
of rock ; but rocks were rent asunder by terror
because of Him.
He went down into the
regions beneath the earth, that thence also
He might redeem the righteous8.
For, tell
me, couldst thou wish the
living only to
enjoy His grace, and that, though most of
them are unholy ; and not wish .those who
from Adam had for a long while been im
prisoned to have now gained their liberty?
with loud
Esaias the Prophet proclaimed
voice
concerning Him ;
so many things
wouldst thou not wish that the King should
go down and redeem His herald ?
David was
there, and Samuel, and all the Prophets 9, John
himself also, who by his messengers said, Art
thou He that should come, or look we for
Wouldst thou not wish that He
anotherTM 1
should descend and redeem such as these 1

•

Of the Resurrection.

12. But He who descended into the regions
beneath the earth came up again ; and Jesus,
who was buried, truly rose again the third
day. And if the Jews ever worry thee, meet
them at once by asking thus : Did Jonah
come forth from the whale on the third
day, and hath not Christ then risen from the
earth on the third day 1
Is a dead man raised
to life on touching the bones of Elisha, and is
it not much easier for the Maker ofrnankind to be raised by the power of the Father?
Well then, He truly rose, and after He had
risen was seen again of the disciples : and
twelve disciples were witnesses of His Resur
rection, who bare witness not in pleasing words,
but contended even unto torture and death
What then,
fdr the truth of the Resurrection.
shall every word be established at the mouth oj
two or three witnesses *, according to the Scrip
ture, and, though twelve bear witness to the
Resurrection of Christ, art thou still incredu
lous in regard to His Resurrection ?

Concerning the Ascension.
13. But when Jesus had finished His course
of patient endurance, and had redeemed man
kind from their sins, He ascended again into
the heavens, a cloud receiving Him up : and
as He went up Angels were beside Him, and
Apostles were beholding.
But if any man
disbelieves the words which 1 speak, let him
believe the actual power of the things now
All kings when they die have their
seen.

8 Compare xiv. 18, 19. on the Descent into Hades,
v The same 01d_ Testament saints are named in xiv. 19, as
1 Dcut. xix. 15.

redeemed by Christ in Hades.

to Matt. xi. 3.

power extinguished with their life : but Christ
crucified is worshipped by the whole world.
We proclaim The Crucified, and the devils
tremble now. Many have been crucified at
various times ; but of what other who was
crucified did the invocation ever drive the
devils away ?

14. Let us, therefore, not be ashamed of
the Cross of Christ ; but though another hide
it, do thou openly seal it upon thy forehead,
that the devils may behold the royal sign and
flee trembling far away a.
Make then this sign
at eating and drinking, at sitting, at lying
down, at rising up, at speaking, at walking :
For He who was
in a word, at every act3.
here crucified is in heaven above.
If after
being crucified and buried He had remained
in the tomb, we should have had cause to be
ashamed ; but, in fact, He who was crucified
on Golgotha here, has ascended into heaven
from the Mount of Olives on the East.
For
after having gone down hence into Hades, and
come up again to us, He ascended again from
us into heaven, His Father addressing Him,
and saying, Sit Thou on My right hand, until
I make Thine enemies Thyfootstool *

Of Judgment to come.

15. This Jesus Christ who is gone up shall
come again, not from earth but from heaven :
and I say, " not from earth," because there
are many Antichrists to come at this time
from earth.
For already, as thou hast seen,
many have begun to say, I am the Christ's .• and
the abomination of desolation6 is yet to come,
assuming to himself the false title of Christ.
But look thou for the true Christ, the Onlybegotten Son of God, coming henceforth no
more from earth, but from heaven, appearing to
all more bright than any lightning and bril
liancy of light, with angel guards attended,
that He may judge both quick and dead,
and reign in a heavenly, eternal kingdom,
which shall have no end.
For on this point
also, I pray thee, make thyself sure, since there
are many who say that Christ's Kingdom
hath an end

3 Justin M. Dialogue with Tryjtho, 247 C : We call Him
Helper and Redeemer, the power of whose Name even demons
do fear; and at this day, when exorcised in the name of Jesus
Christ, crucified under Pontius Pilate, Governor of Juila^i, they
are overcome.
3 Tertllllian, dt CoronA,*} : At every forward step and movement, at every going in and out, when we put on our clothes and
shoes, when we bathe, when we sit at table, when we light the
lamps, on couch, on seat, in all the ordinary actions of daily life,
If for these, and other such
we trace upon the forehead the Sign.
rules, you insist upon having positive Scripture injunction, you
Tradition will be held forth to you as the ori
will find none.
ginator of them, custom as their strengthened and faith as their
observer.

* Ps. ex. x.
6 Malt. xxiv. 15. Compare Cat. xv. 9, 15.
7 Compare xv. 27. where the followers of Marcellus of Ancyra

S Matt. xxiv. 5.

are indicated as holding this opinion.

LECTURE IV.

Of the Holy Ghost.

16. Believe thou also in the Holy Ghost,
and hold the same opinion concerning Him,
which thou hast received to hold concerning the
Father and the Son, and follow not those who
teach blasphemous things of Him 8.
But learn
thou that this Holy Spirit is One, indivisible,
of manifold power ; having many operations,
yet not Himself divided ; Who knoweth the
mysteries, Who searcheth all things, even the deep
things of God* : Who descended upon the Lord
Jesus Christ in form of a dove ; Who wrought
in the Law and in the Prophets ; Who now
also at the season of Baptism sealeth thy soul ;
of Whose holiness
every intellectual
also
nature hath need : against Whom if any dare
to blaspheme, he hath no forgiveness, neither in
this world, nor in that which is to come'' : " Who
with the Father and the Son together3" is
honoured with the glory of the Godhead : of
Whom also thrones, and dominions, princi
palities, and pcnvers have need 3.
For there is
One God, the Father of Christ; and One
Lord Jesus Christ, the Only-begotten Son of
the Only God ; and One Holy Ghost, the
sanctifier and deifier of alH, Who spake in the
Law and in the Prophets, in the Old and in
the New Testament.

17. Have thou ever in thy mind this seals,
which for the present has been lightly touched
in my discourse, by way of summary, but shall
be stated, should the Lord permit, to the best
of my power with the proof from the Scriptures.
For concerning the divine and holy mysteries
• of the Faith, not even a casual statement must
be delivered without the Holy Scriptures ;
nor must we be drawn aside by mere plausi
bility and artifices of speech.
Even to me,
who tell thee these things, give not absolute
credence, unless thou receive the proof of the
things which I announce from the Divine
Scriptures. For this salvation which we believe
depends not on ingenious reasoning 6, but on
demonstration of the Holy Scriptures.

Of the Soul.
18. Next to the knowledge of this vener
able and glorious and all-holy Faith, learn

1 Matt. xiL 33.

Creed of Constantinople, a.d. 381.

8 In xvi. 6-10, Cyril gives a long list of heresies concerning
the Holy Ghost.
9 1 Cor. ii. 10.
2 This clause is not in the Creed of Nicsea, but is added in the
3 Col. i. 16.
* Dtoxovov is omitted in Codd. Roe, Ca*aubont and A.
5 The Benedictine Editor argues from Cat. 1. 5, " that thou
maye*t by faith seal up the things that are spoken ;" and xxiii- 18 :
"sealing up the Prayer by the Amen," that Cyril means by " this,
seal " the firm belief of Christian doctrine. Compare John iii. 33.
But Milles understands by the "seal" the Creed itself, which
agrees better with the following context.
6 ? rwriput yap ovrq Trrjf irt'trrcfeK ifuStv, which might be ren
dered, "this our salvation by faith," or, with Milles,
this safely
of our Faith." For the rendering in the text, compare Heb. iii. 1 :
•avugfa njr opoAoytas rjuitv. On evpctriAoyta, see Polybius xviii.
2>, I 3 : Sta rsf rrpos aAAijAovf fi>pcmAoyt'af.

further what thou thyself art : that as man thou
art of a two-fold nature, consisting of soul and
body ; and that, as was said a short time ago,
the same God is the Creator both of soul and
body'. Know also that thou hast a soul selfgoverned, the noblest work of God, made
after the image of its Creator 8 : immortal be
cause of God that gives it immortality; a living
being, rational, imperishable, because of Him
that bestowed these gifts : having free power
to do what it willeth 9. For it is not according
to thy nativity that thou sinnest, nor is it by
the power of chance that thou committest
fornication, nor, as some idly talk, do the
conjunctions of the stars compel thee to give
thyself to wantonness
Why dost thou shrink
from confessing thine own evil deeds, and
ascribe the blame to the innocent stars ? Give
for of
no more heed, pray, to astrologers ;
these the divine Scripture saith, Let the stargazers of the heaven stand up and save thee,
and what follows : Behold, they all shall he
consumed as stubble on the fire, and shall not
deliver their soulfrom the flame '.

19. And learn this also, that the soul, before
it came into this world, had committed no sin 3,
but having come in sinless, we now sin of our
free-will.
Listen not, I pray thee, to any one
perversely interpreting the words, But if I do
that which I would not* : but remember Him
who saith, If ye be willing, and hearken unto
Me, ye shall eat the good things of the land:
but if ye be not willing, neither hearken unto
Me, the sword shall devour you, &"c. 5 : and
again, As ye presentedyour members as servants
to uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity, even
so now present your members as servants to
righteousness unto sanctiftcation6. Remember
also the Scripture, which saith, Even as they
did not like to retain God in their knowledge 1 :
and, That which may be known of God is mani-

7 ir. 4.
8 In the Clementine Homily xvi. 16, the soul having come forth
from God, clothed with His breath, is said to be of the same sub
stance, and yet not God- In Tertull. c. Marcion II. c. 9, the soul
is the afflatus (irvoij not vvtvua) of God, i.e the image of the
Spirit, and inferior to it, though possessing the true lineaments
ot divinity, immortality, freedom, its own mastery over itself.
*
9 Tertull. c. Marc, II. 6: It was proper that he who is the
image and likeness of God should be formed with a free will, and
a mastery of himself, so that this very thing, namely freedom
of will and self-command, might be reckoned as the image and
likeness of God in him.
1 Compare Aug. dt Civ. Dei. v. 1, where he says that the
astrologers (Mathematici) say, not merely such or such a position
of Mars signifies that a man will be a murderer, but makes him
a murderer.

See Diet, of Christian Antiq., " Astrology."
3 Is. xlvii. 13.
3 "The Orphic poets were under the impression that the soul
is suffering the punishment of sin, and that the body is an ei ■
closure or prison in which the soul is incarcerated and kept
(trw£cTcu) as the name o-w/ia implies, until the penalty is paid."
Plato, Cratyl. 400. Clement of Alexandria 'Strom. HI- iii. 17),
after referring to this passage of Plato, quotes Philolaus the Pytha
gorean, as saying : " The ancient theologians and soothsayers also
testify that the soul has been chained to the body for a kind of
4 Rom. vii. 16.
punishment, and is buried in it as in a tomb."
7 Rom. i. a8.
6 Rom. vL 19.

5 Is. i. 19, 20.

*

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

fest in thc/u8; and again, their eyes they have
closed v.
Also remember how God again accuseth them, and saith, Yet I planted thee
a fruitful vine, wholly true: how art thou
turned to bitterness, thou the strange vine 1 f

20. The soul is immortal, and all souls are
alike both of men and women ; for only the
members of the body are distinguished1. There
is not a class of souls sinning by nature, and
a class of souls practising righteousness by
natures: but both act from choice, the sub
stance of their souls being of one kind only,
and alike in all.
I know, however, that I am
talking much, and that the time is already
long : but what is more precious than salva
tion ?
Art thou not willing to take trouble in
getting provisions for the way against the
heretics ? And wilt thou not learn the byepaths of the road, lest from ignorance thou
fall down a precipice?
If thy teachers think
it no small gain for thee to learn these things,
shouldest not thou the learner gladly receive
the multitude of things told thee ?

21. The soul is self-governed: and though
the devil can suggest, he has not the power to
compel against the will. He pictures to thee
the thought of fornication :
if thou wilt, thou
acceptest it ;
if thou wilt not, thou rejectest.
For if thou wert a fornicator by necessity, then
If thou
for what cause did God prepare hell ?
wert a doer of righteousness by nature and
not by will, wherefore did God prepare crowns
of ineffable glory ? The sheep is gentle, but
never was it crowned for its gentleness : since
its gentle quality belongs to it not from choice
but by nature.

Of the Body.

22. Thou hast learned, beloved, the nature
of the soul, as far as there is time at present :
now do thy best to receive the doctrine of the
body also.
Suffer none of those who say that
this body is no work of God « : for they who
believe that the body is independent of God,
and that the soul dwells in it as in a strange
vessel, readily abuse it to fornication 5. And
yet what fault have they found in this wonderlul body? For what is lacking in comeliness?

8 Rom. i. 19.
« Jer. ii. st.
9 Matt. xiii. xs.
a Apelles, tne heretic, attributed :he difference of sex to the
soul, which exiting before the body impressed its sex upon it.
fL'ertuil. On :ht Soul, c. xxxvi.
3 IreiMjeus I. vii. ± ; " They (the Valentinians) conceive of three
kinds of men, spiritual, material, and animal. ...There three natures
are no longer found in one person, but constitute various kinds ot
. And again subdividing the animal souls themselves, they
men.
say that some are by nature good, and others by nature evil."
Orifren on Romans, Lib. VIII. | 10 : "I know not how those who
come frjir. the School of Valentinus and Unsilides .
. suppose
that there are souls of one nature which are always safe and never
perish, and others which always perish, and are never saved."
* See iv. 18.
s On the impure practices of the Manichees, see vi. 33, 34.

.

.

And what in its structure is not full of skill ?
Ought they not to have observed the luminous
construction of the eyes? And how the ears
being set obliquely receive the sound unhin
dered ?
And. how the smell is able to distin
guish scents, and to perceive exhalations?
And how the tongue ministers to two purposes,
the sense of taste, and the power of speech ?
How the lungs placed out of sight are un
ceasing in their respiration of the air? Who
imparted the incessant pulsation of the heart?
Who made the distribution into so many veins
and arteries? Who skilfully knitted together
the bones with the sinews? Who assigned
a part of the food to our substance, and
separated a part for decent secretion, and hid
away the unseemly members in more seemly
places? Who when the human race must
have died out, rendered it by a simple inter
course perpetual ?

23. Tell me not that the body is a cause of
sin 6. For if the body is a cause of sin, why
does not a dead body sin ?
Put a sword in
the
right hand of one just dead, and no
Let beauties of every
murder takes place.
kind pass before a youth just dead, and no
impure desire
Because the
arises. Why ?
body sins not of itself, but the soul through
the body. The body is an instrument, and, as
it were, a garment and robe of the soul : and if
by this latter it be given over to fornication, it
becomes defiled: but if it dwell with a holy
soul, it becomes a temple of the Holy Ghost.
It is not 1 that say this, but the Apostle Paul
hath said, Know ye not, that your bodies are the
temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you '/ Be
tender, therefore, of thy body as being a
temple of the Holy Ghost.
Pollute not thy
flesh in fornication : defile not this thy fairest
robe : and if ever thou hast defiled it, now
cleanse it by repentance : get thyself washed,
while time permits.

24. And to the doctrine of chastity let the
first to give heed be the order of Solitaries 8 and
of Virgins, who maintain the angelic life in
the world ; and let the rest of the Church's
For you, brethren, a
people follow them.
great crown is laid up : barter not away a great
listen to the
dignity for a petty pleasure :
Apostle speaking : Lest there be any fornicator
or profane person, as Esau, who for one mess of

6 Fortunatus, the Manichce. in August. Disput, ii. 20, centra
Fortunat. is represented as saying. What we assert is this, that
the soul is compelled to sin by a substance of contrary nature.

7 1 Cor. vi. 19.
8 jtoi-d^oFTey. Compare xii. 33 ; xvi. 22. The origin of Monasticism is usually traced to the time of the Decian persecution, the
middle of the third century.
Previously "there were no monks,
but only ascetics in tfie Church ; from that time to the reign of
Constaminc, Monachism was confined to the anchorets living in
private cells in the wilderness : but when Pacliomius had erected
monasteries in Egypt, other countries presently followed the ex
. . Hilarion, who was scholar to Anionius, was the. first
ample. .
monk that ever lived in Palestine or Syria." Bingham, Vll. i. 4.

LECTURE IV.

2S

meat sold his own birthright*.
Enrolled hence
forth in the Angelic books for ihy profession
of chastity, see that thou be not blotted out
again for thy practice of fornication.

the

25. Nor again, on

other hand, in
maintaining thy chastity be thou puffed up
against those who walk in the humbler path of
matrimony.
For as the Apostle saith, Let
marriage be had in honour among all, and let the
bed be undefi/ed1. Thou too who retainest tliy
chastity, wast thou not begotten of those who
had married ?
Because thou hast a posses
sion of gold, do not on that account reprobate
the silver.
But let those also be of good
cheer, who being married use marriage law
fully ; who make a marriage according to
God's ordinance, and not of wantonness for
the sake of unbounded license ; who recog
nise seasons of abstinence, that they may give
themselves unto prayer*; who in our assem
blies bring clean bodies as
well as clean
garments into the Church ; who have en
tered upon matrimony for the procreation of
children, but not for indulgence.

reprobate

second marriage 3 :

26. Let those also who marry but once
those who have consented
not
to a
for though con
tinence is a noble and admirable thing, yet it
is also permissible to enter upon a second
marriage, that the weak may not fall into
fornication.
For it is goodfor them, saith the
Apostle, if they abide even as I. But if they
have not continency, let them marry : for it is
better to marry than to burn ■♦.
But let all the
other practices be banished afar, fornication,
adultery, and every kind of licentiousness : and
let tne body be kept pure for the Lord, that
the Lord also may have respect unto the body.
And let the body be nourished with food, that
it may live, and serve without hindrance ; not,
however, that it may be given up to luxuries.

t

Tois eVAotc.

■ r Cor. vii. 5.

9 Heb. xii. 16.
1 Heb. xtii. 4.
3 The condemnation 01 a second marriage, which the Bene
dictine Editor and others import into this parage, is not to be
rove bvrtptf ya/i*? trvtLw*pitv*x0tyTat neither means
found in it.
''qui ad secundas nuptias ultro se dejcceie," nor even "who
have tnvolvcd themselves" (R.W.C.), but simply "who have
consented to."-or, "consented together in- a second mar
riage, ' without any intimation of censure.
See V. 9; VI. 13;
Kcclus. XXV.
;
ur^ir. (,i<;.< p<^1 * rut
yvtrrt xai «i n*> iavroli
1;
a Mace. ix. 37; Enseb. H-E. ix. 9, 7: apefiKcucuf xai avp.fxtrpaK crvpir<pt$Vr0o.»TO avToif ;
Zeno, ap. Diog. Laert. vii. 18 ;
evrb avtivtpi$*p*(rl)tu
o~vjirfpt6opof. Polyb. IV. 35, | 7, and II. 17, i iz. The gentleriess with which Cyril here speaks of second marriages is in
striking contrast with the passionate vehemence 01 Tertullian in
the treatise dt Afonognmra. and elsewhere. Aug. de Hartsibus.
cc a6. 38, reckons tne condemnation of second marriage among
the heretical doctrines of the Montanists and Cithan.
In the
treatise de Bono Viduitatis, c. 6, he argues that a second marriage
is not to be condemned, but is less honourable than widowhood,
and severely rebukes the heretical teaching on this point of
Tertullian, the Montanists, and the Novatians. Dt Bono ConjugtUi, c. at : Sacramemum nuptiarum ti mporis DOfttri sic ad
unum vimm et unam uxorcm reuactuni est, lit Ecc'esise dispen>
satorem non l.ceat ordinare nisi unius uxuris vimm. On the
practice of the Church at various times see Bingham, IV. v.
1-4 ; Suicer, Tktiaur. Aiyopta.

Diog. Liert. vii.

13 :

* x Cor. vii. 8, 9.

Concerning Meats.

For some deal

27. And concerning food let these be your
ordinances, since in regard to meats also many
stumble.
indifferently with
things offered to idols', while others discipline
themselves, but condemn those that eat : and
in different ways men's souls are defiled in the
matter of meats, from ignorance of the useful
For we
reasons for eating and not eating.
fast by abstaining from wine and flesh, not
because we abhor them as abominations, but
because we look for our reward ; that having
sensible, we may enjoy a
scorned
things
and that
feast ;
spiritual and intellectual
having now smun in tears we may reap in joy 6
in the world to come.
Despise not therefore
them that eat, and because of the weakness of
their bodies partake of food : nor yet blame
those who use a little wine for their stomach's
sake and their often infirmities t : and neither
condemn the men as sinners, nor abhor the flesh
as strange food ; for the Apostle knows some of
this sort, when he says : forbidding to marry,
and commanding to abstain from meats, which
God created to be received with thanksgiving by
In abstaining then from
them that believe*.
these
not as from things
things,
abominable », else thou hast no reward : but
as being good things disregard them for the
sake of the better spiritual things set before
thee.

abstain

28. Guard thy soul safely, lest at any time
thou eat of things offered to idols : for con
cerning meats of this kind, not only I at
this time, but ere now Apostles also, and James
the bishop of this Church, have had earnest
care : and the Apostles and Elders write a
Catholic epistle to all the Gentiles, that they
should abstain first from things offered to idols,
and then from blood also and from things
For many men being of savage
strangled^.
nature, and living
like dogs, both lap up
blood3, in imitation of the manner of the

7 t Tim. v. 33.
sects of Gnostics, and the

5 The Nicolaitans (Apocal. ii. 14, 20) ; and the Valentmuurs,
of whom Irenaius (I I. xiv. 5), says that they derived their opinion
as to the indifference of meats from the Cynics. See also Irenscui
I. vi. 3 ; and xxvi. 3.
8 1 Tim. iv. 3.
6 Ps. cxxvi. 5.
Manicbees,
9 The various
considered certain meats and drinks, as flc-h and wine, to
Vid. Iren. Har. i. 28. Clem. Pad. ii. 3. p. 186.
be polluting.
August. Har. 46, vid.
Epiph. llarr. xlvi. 3, xlvii. 1, &c, &c.
Canon. Apost. 43. "If any Bishop, &c, abstain Irom marriage,
flesh, and wine, not for discipline :oi' acricij ju ) but as abhorring
them, forgetting that they are all very good, &c, and speaking
blasphemy against the creation, let him amend or be deposed," dec.
R. W. C.
1 Acts xv. 30. 39. The prohibition of blood and things stran
gled has continued to the present day in the Eastern Church,
though already disregarded by the Latins in the time of S. Augus.
tine (c. Faustum. xxxii. 13).
2 Tertullian (Apo/o^-oiictts, c. 0) speaks of those " who at the
gladiator shows, for the cure of epilepsy, quaff with greedy thirst
the blood of criminals slain in the arena," and of others "who
make meals on the flesh of wild beasts at the place of combat : "
and contrasts the habits of Christians, who abstain tram things
strangled, to avoid pollution by the blood.

,

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

fiercest beasts, and greedily devour things
strangled.
of
Christ, in eating observe to eat with rever
ence. And so enough concerning meats.

But do thou,

servant

the

Of Apparel.
29. But let thine apparel be plain, not for
adornment, but for necessary covering: not
to minister to thy vanity, but to keep thee
warm in winter, and to hide the unseem
liness of the body :
lest under pretence of
hiding the unseemliness, thou fall into another
kind of unseemliness by thy extravagant dress.

Of the Resurrection.

dead, to

30. Be tender,

be judged with

I beseech thee, of this
body, and understand that thou wilt be raised
from the
this
body.
But if there steal into thy mind any
thought of unbelief, as though the thing were
impossible, judge of the things unseen by what
happens to thyself.
For tell me ; a hundred
years ago or more, think where wast thou
thyself: and from what a most minute and
mean substance thou art come to so great
a stature, and so much dignity of beauty 3.
What then?
Cannot He who brought the
non-existent into being, raise up again that
which already exists and has decayed * ? He
who raises the corn, which is sown for our
sakes, as year by year it dies, - will He
have difficulty in raising us up, for whose
sakes
raised 5 ?
Seest thou how the trees stand now for many
months without ' either fruit or leaves: but
when the winter is past they spring up whole
into life again as if from the dead6: shall not
we much rather and more easily return to
life? The rod of Moses was transformed
by the will of God into the unfamiliar nature
of a serpent : and cannot a man, who has
fallen
himself
death, be restored
again ?

that corn also

has been

into

to

31. Heed not those who say that this body
is not raised ; for it is raised : and Esaias is
witness, when he says : The dead shall arise,
and they that are in the tombs shall a70<ihei :
and according to Daniel, Many of them that
sleep in the dust of the earth shall arise, some to
everlasting life, and some to everlasting shame 8.
But though to rise again is common to all
men, yet the resurrection is not alike to all :
for the bodies received by us all are eternal,
but not like badies by all : for the just receive
them, that through eternity they may join

3 xvm. 9.
4 Compare xviii. 6, 9 ; Athenagoras, On the Resurrection 0/
the Dead, c. 3.
5 XVIII. 6. John xii. 24 ; 1 Cor. xv. 36.
7 Is. xxvi. 19.

8 Dan. xii. 2.

« XVIII. 7.

the Choirs of Angels ; but the sinners, that
they may endure for ever the torment of their
sins.

Of the Laver.

32. For this cause the Lord, preventing us
according to His loving-kindness, has granted
repentance at Baptism s>, in order that we may
cast off the chief-nay rather the whole burden
of our sins, and having received the seal
by the Holy Ghost, may be made heirs of
eternal life.
But as we have spoken suffi
ciently concerning the Laver the day before
yesterday, let us now return to the remaining
subjects ol our introductory teaching.

Of the Divine Scriptures.
33. Now these the divinely-inspired Scrip
tures of both the Old and the New Tes
For the God of the two
tament teach us.
Testaments is One, Who in
the Old Tes
tament foretold the Christ Who appeared in
the New ; Who by the Law and the Prophets
led us to Christ's school. For beforefaith came,
we were kept in ward under the law, and, l/ie
law hath been our tutor to bring us un/o
Christ
And if ever thou hear any of the
heretics speaking evil of the Law or the
Prophets, answer in the sound of the Saviour's
voice, saying, Jesus came not to destroy the
Law, but to fulfil it*.
Learn also diligently,
and from the Church, what are the books of
the Old Testament, and what those of the
New.
And, pray, read none of the apocry
phal writings 3 : for why dost thou, who knowest
not those which are acknowledged among all,
trouble thyself in vain about those which are
disputed ?
Read the Divine Scriptures, the
twenty-two books of the Old Testament, these
that have been translated by the Seventy-two
Interpreters4.

9 Gr. AovrpoO fLtTavotav. Other readings are Kvrpov pitraurotaf,
"redemption by repentance," and \ovrp6v fierarot'ac ''a laver
(baptism) of repentance."
1 Gal. iii. ^4. The naiSavwyos is described by Clement of
Alexandria (Paedag. i. 7) as one who both conducts a boy to
school, and helps to teach him,- an usher: "under-master"
(Wicliff> _
' Matt. v. 17.
3 rur aTTQKpv&itv. The sense in which Cyril uses this term
may be learned from Rufinus {Expositio Symbolic § 38), who
distinguishes three classes of books: (1) The Canonical Books
oi the OKI and New Testaments, which alone are to be used
in proof of doctrine: (2) Ecclesiastical, which may be read in
Churches, including Wisdom, Ecclesi.tsticus, Tobit, Juditfi. and
the Books of the Maccabees, in the Old Testament, and The.
Shepherd o( Hennas, and The Two Ways in the New Test uncut.
(3! The other writings they called " Apocryphal,'' which they
would not have read in Churches. The distinction is useful,
though the second class is not complete.
4 The original source of this account of the Septuagint version
is a letter purporting to have been written by Aristeas, or ArisUeus, a confidential minister of Ptolemy Philauclphus, to his
brother Philocrates. Though the letter is not regarded as genuine
its statements are in part admitted to be true, being confirmed
by a fragment, preserved by kalsehius {Pnrparatio Evangelica,
ix. 6), of a work of Aristobulus. a Jewish philosopher who wrote in
the reign of Ptolemy Philometor, 181 -146,
Upon these
testimonies it is generally admitted that "the whole Law," i.e. the
Pentateuch was translated into Greek at Alexandria in the reign

B.C.

LECTURE IV.

adulterated, being given

34. For after the death of Alexander, the
king of the Macedonians, and the division of
his kingdom into four principalities, into Baby
lonia, and Macedonia, and Asia, and Egypt,
one of those who reigned over Egypt, Ptolemy
Philadelphia, being a king very fond of learn
ing, while collecting the books that were in
every place, heard from Demetrius Phalereus,
tiie curator of his library, of the Divine Scrip
tures of the Law and the Prophets, and judged
it much nobler, not to get the books from the
possessors by force against
their will, but
rather to propitiate them by gifts and friend
ship ; and knowing that what is extorted is
unwillingly,
often
while that which is willingly supplied is freeiy
given with all sincerity, he sent to Eleazar, who
was then High Priest, a great many gilts for the
Temple here at Jerusalem, and caused him to
send him six interpreters from each of the
twelve tribes of Israel for the translations.
Then, further, to make experiment whether
the books were Divine or not, he took precau
tion that those who had been sent should
not combine among themselves, by assign
ing to each
of the interpreters who had
come his separate chamber in the island called
Pharos, which lies over against Alexandria,
and committed to each the whole Scriptures to
translate. And when they had fulfilled the
task in seventy-two days, he brought together
all their translations, which they had made in
different chambers without sending them one
to another, and found that they agreed not
For the
only in the sense but even in words.
process was no word-craft, nor contrivance of
human devices :
but the translation of the
Divine Scriptures, spoken by the Holy Ghost,
was of the Holy Ghost accomplished.

35. Of these read the two and twenty books,
but have nothing to do with the apocryphal
Study earnestly these only which we
writings.
read openly in the Church.
Far wiser and
more pious than thyself were the Apostles, and
the bishops of old time, the presidents of the

either of Ptolemy Soter (323-285, B.c), or of bis son Ptolemy
Philadelphia (285-247, B.C.), under the direction of Demetrius
Phalereus, curator of the King s library.
5 Up to this point Cyril's account is based upon the statements
of the Pseudo-Aristeas. The fabulous incidents which follow,
concerning the separate cells, the completion of the whole version
by each translator, the miraculous agreement in the very words,
proving a Divine inspiration, are found in Philo Judaius, Life 0/
Moses, II. 7.
Josephus, Antiquities, XII. c. ii. 3- 14, following
the letter of Aristeas, gives long descriptions of the magnificent
presents sent by Philadelphus to Jerusalem, and of his splendid
hospitality to the translators, but makes no allusion to the separate
cells or miraculous agreement. On the contrary he represents
the 72 interpreters as meeting together for consultation, agreeing
on the text to be adopted, and completing their joint labours in
The slightest comparison of the Version with the
72 days.
original Hebrew must convince any reasonable person that the idea
of divine inspiration or supernatural assistance, borrowed by
Justin Martyr, Irena:us, and other Fathers, apparently I rom Philo,
is a mere invention of the imagination, disproved by the lacts.
Compare the article "Septuagint" in Murray's Dictionary of the
Bible.

Church who handed down these
books.
Being therefore a child of the Church, trench6
thou not upon its statutes. And of the Old
Testament, as we have said, study the two
and twenty books, which, if thou art desirous
of learning, strive to remember by name, as
For of the Law the books of
I recite them.
Moses are the first
five, Genesis, Exodus,
Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy. And next,
Joshua the son of Nave?, and the book of
Judges, including Ruth, counted as seventh.
And of the other historical books, the first
and second books of the Kings8 are among the
Hebrews one book ; also the third and fourth
one book. And in like manner, the first and
second of Chronicles are with them one
book ; and the first and second of Eschas are
Esther is the twelfth book ; and
counted one.
these are the Historical writings.
But those
which are written in verses are five, Job, and
the book of Psalms, and Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs, which is the
seventeenth book. And after these come the five
Prophetic books : of the Twelve Prophets one
book, of Isaiah one, of Jeremiah one, including
Baruch and Lamentations and the Epistle';
then Ezekiel, and the Book of Daniel, the
twenty-second of the Old Testament.

36. Then of the New Testament there are
the four Gospels only, for the rest have false
titles1 and are mischievous. The Manichasans
also wrote a Gospel according to Thomas,
which being tinctured with the fragrance of
the evangelic title corrupts the souls of the
simple sort. Receive also the Acts of the Twelve
Apostles ; and in addition to these the seven

0 The rendering "trench not" (R.W.C.) agrees well with the
etymology of the verb (irapaxapaenrw). Us more usual significa
tion seems to be " countcrleil," "forge." The sense required
here, apart from any metaphor, is " transgress" (Heurtley).
7 The name "Nun " is represented by " Nave " in the Septua
gint, which Cyril used.
a The two books of Samuel.
9 The Epistle of Jeremy, which now appears in the Apocrypha
as the last chapter of Baruch. On the number and arrangement
of the Books of the Old and New Testaments the student should
consult an interesting Essay by Professor Sanday (Stndia Biblica,
vol. iii.), who traces the introduction of a fixed order to the time
when papyrus rolls were superseded by codices, in which the
sheets of ski.i were folded and bound together, as in printed books.
This change had commenced belore the Diocletian persecution,
A. D. 303, when among the sacred books taken from the Christians
codices were much more numerous than rolls. On the contents
of the Jewish Canon, see Dictionary of the Bible, "Canon."
B. F.W. " Josepbus enumerates 20 books 'which arejustly believed
to be divine.'" One ot the earliest attempts by a Christian to
ascertain correctly the number and order of the Books of the O.T.
was made by Alclito, Bishop of Sardis, who travelled for this
purpose to Palestine, in the latter part of the 2nd Century.
His
list is as follows:-"Of Moses five (books); Genesis, Exodus,
Numbers, Leviticus. Deuteronomy, Jesus son of Nave, Judges,
Ruth, four Books of Kings, two of Chronicles, Psalms of David,
Solomon's Proverbs, whicn is also called Wisdom, Ecclcsiastes,
Song of Songs. Job, Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, the Twelve
(Eusebius, //./.'. 111.
in one Book, Daniel, Ezekiel, Esdras."
Cyril's List agrees witti that of
cap. to, note 1, in this series.)
Athanasius {Festal Epistle, 373 A. D.), except that Job is placed
by Ath. alter Canticles instead 01 before Psalms.
For an account of the many Apocryphal
Gospels, see the article by Lipsius in the " Dictionary ojChristian
Biography," Smith and Wace, and the English translations in
Clark's Allte-Nicene Library.

1 Gr. ^ev5eirtypa^>a.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

Catholic Epistles of James, Peter, John, and
Jude ; and as a seal upon them all, and the
last work of the disciples, the fourteen Epistles
But let all the rest be put aside in
of Paul
a secondary rank. And whatever books are
not read in Churches, these read not even by
thyself, as thou hast heard me say.
Thus
much of these subjects.

the

37. But shun thou every diabolical opera
tion, and believe not the apostate Serpent,
whose transformation from a good nature
was of his own free choice : who can overpersuade
willing, but can compel no
one.
Also give heed neither to observa
tions of the stars nor auguries, nor omens,
nor to the fabulous divinations of the Greeks 3.
Witchcraft, and enchantment, and the wicked
practices of necromancy, admit not even to
a hearing.
From every kind of intemper
ance stand aloof, giving thyself neither to
• Cyril includes in this list all the books which we receive,
except the Apocalypse. See Bishop Westcott's Article, " Canon,"
in the Dictionary ofthe Bible, and Origen's Catalogue in Euscb.
Hist. vi. 25 (Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, vol. i.).
3 Compare xix. 8, where all such acts of divination arc said to
be service of the devil.

gluttony nor licentiousness, rising superior to
all covetousness and usury.
Neither venture
thyself at heathen assemblies for public spec
sicknesses ;
tacles, nor ever use amulets in
shun also all the vulgarity of tavern-haunting.
Fall not away either into the sect of the
Samaritans, or into Judaism : for Jesus Christ
henceforth hath ransomed thee,
btand aloof
from all observance of Sabbaths «, and from
calling any indifferent meats common or un
clean.
But especially abhor all the assem
blies of wicked heretics ; and in every way
make thine own soul safe, by fastings, prayers,
almsgivings, and reading the oracles of God ;
that having lived the rest of thy life in the
flesh in soberness and godly doctrine, thou
mayest enjoy the one salvation which flows
from Baptism ; and thus enrolled in the armies
of heaven by God and the Father, mayest also
be deemed worthy of the heavenly crowns, in
Christ Jesus our Lord, to Whom be the glory
Amen.
for ever and ever.

4 Compare Gal. iv. to, " Ye observe days."

LECTURE V.

Of Faith.

Hebrews xi. i, a.

Nowfaith is the substance of things hopedfor, the evidence of things not seen.
For by it the elders obtained a good report.

1. How great a dignity the Lord bestows on
you in transferring you from the order of Cate
chumens to that of the Faithful, the Apostle
Paul shews, when he affirms, God is faithful,
by Whom ye were called into the fellowship of
His Son Jesus Christ1. For since God is called
in
Faithful, thou also
title
this
receivest a great
For as God is
dignity.
called Good, and Just, and Almighty, and
Maker of the Universe, so is He also called
Faithful. Consider therefore to what a dignity
thou art rising, seeing thou art to become
partaker of a title of God 3.

receiving

not that

2. Here then it

is further required, that
each of you be found faithful in his con
for a faithful man it
science :
is hard to
find*:
shouldest shew thy
thou
conscience to me, for thou art not to be
judged of man's judgment* ; but that thou
shew the sincerity of thy faith to God, who
tricth the reins and hearts*, and knoweth the
thoughts of men 6. A great thing is a faithful
man, being richest' of all rich men.
For to
the faithful man belongs the whole world of
wealth i. in that he disdains and tramples on it.
For they who in appearance are rich, and have
many possessions, are poof in soul : since the
more they gather, the more they pine with
longing for what is
But the
faithful man, most strange paradox, in poverty
is rich : for knowing that we need only to have
food and raiment, and being therewith content*,
he has trodden riches under foot.

still lacking.

3. Nor is it only among us, who bear the
name of Christ, that the dignity of faith is
great » : but likewise all things that are accom-

1 1 Cor. i. 9.

• See Procatechesis 6. and Index, Faithful.
3 Prov. xx. 6.
* 1 Cor. iv. 3. See Index, Confession.
5 Ps. vii. 9,
* Ps. xciv. 11.
7 Tin. sentence is a spurious addition to the text of the Septuaglnt, variously placed after Prov. xvii. 4, and xvii. 6. The thought
n there completed by the antithesis^ but to tktfaithless not even
an ebol. The origin of the interpolation is unknown.

8 1 Tim. vi. 8.
9 It was a common objection of Pagan philosophers that the
Christian religion was not founded upon reason but only on faith.
Cyril's answer that faith is necessary in the ordinary affairs

plished in the world, even by those who are
aliens' from the. Church, are accomplished by
faith.

stranger's

By faith the laws of marriage yoke together
those who have lived as strangers : and because
of the faith in marriage contracts a stranger is
made partner of a
person and
possessions.
By faith husbandry also is sus
tained, for he who believes not that he shall
receive a harvest endures not the toils. By
faith sea-faring men, trusting to the thinnest
plank, exchange that most solid element, the
land, for the restless motion of the waves,
committing themselves to uncertain hopes, and
carrying with them a faith more sure than any
anchor.
therefore most of men's
affairs are held together : and not among us
only has there been this belief, but also, as I
have said, among those who are without
For if they receive not the Scriptures, but
bring forward certain doctrines of their own,
even these they accept by faith.

By faith

4. The lesson also which was read to-day
invites you to the true faith, by setting before
you the way in which you also must please God :
for it afFrms that withoutfaith it is impossible to
For when will a man resolve to
please Him 2.
serve God, unless he believes
that He is
a giver of reward f When will a young woman
choose a virgin life, or a young man live
soberly, if they believe- not that for chastity
there is a crown thatJadeth not away 3 ? Faith is
an eye that enlightens every conscience, and

of life ts the same which Origen had employed against Celsus
(I. ti) :
11 Why should it not be more reasonable, since all human
affairs are dependent upon faith, to believe God rather than men?
For who takes a voyage, or marries, or begets children, or casts
seeds into the ground, without believing that better things will
result, although the contrary might and sometimes does happen? '
See also Arnooius, adoersus Gentes, II. 8 ; and Hooker's allusion
to the scornful reproach of Julian the Apostate, "The highest
point of your wisdom is believe" {Eccles. Pol. V. Ixiii. i.).
1 By " aliens from the Church," and " those who are without,"
S. Cyril here means Pagans : so Tertullian, tie Idololatria, c. xiv.
But the latter term is applied to a Catechumen in Procatechesis,
c. 12, and was also a common description of heretics : see Ter
tullian, de Baptism; c xr.

9 Heb. xi. 6.

3 I Pet. v. 4.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

imparts understanding; for the Prophet saith,
And ifye believe not, ye shall not understand *.

Faith stoppeih the mouths of lions

as in
Daniel's case : for the Scripture saith concern
ing him, that Daniel was brought up out of the
den, and no manner of hurt wasfound upon him,
Is there any
because he believed in his God6.
thing more fearful than the devil ?
Yet even
against him we have no other shield than faith i,
an impalpable buckler against an unseen foe.
For he sends forth divers arrrows, and shoots
down in the dark night* those that watch not ;
but, since the enemy is unseen, we have faith
as our strong armour, according to the saying
of the Apostle. In all things taking the shield of\
faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the
fiery darts of the wicked one 9. A fiery dart of
desire of base indulgence is often cast forth
from the devil : but faith, suggesting a picture
of the judgment, cools down the mind, and
quenches the dart.

5. There is much to tell of faith, and the
whole day would not be time sufficient for
us to describe it fully.
At present let us be
content with Abraham only, as one of the
examples from the Old Testament, seeing that
we have been made his sons through faith.
He was justified not only by works, but also
by faith 1 : for though he did many things well,
yet he was never called the friend of God 2,
Moreover, his every
except when he believed.
work was performed in faith.
Through faith
he left his parents ; left country, and place, and
home through faith 3.
In like manner, there
fore, as he was justified be thou justified also.
In his body he was already dead in regard to
offspring, and Sarah his wife was now old, and
there was no hope left of having children.
God promises
old man a child, and
Abraham without being weakened in faith,
though he considered his own body now as good
as dead*, heeded not the weakness of his body,
but the power of Him who promised, because
he counted Him faithful who hadpromised s, and
so beyond all expectation gained the child
from bodies as it were already dead. And
when, alter he had gained his son, he was com-

the

* Is. vii.9,accordingtotheSeptuagint. Rut A.V. and R.V. both
render : Ifye will not believe, surely ye shall tuft be established.
5 Heh. xi. 34.
7 I Pet. v. 9 : Whom resist, stedfast in thefaith.
8 Ps. xi. a, that they may shoot in darkness at the upright
The Hebrew word ^rs^. signifyintr deep dark

in heart (R.V .)

6 Dan. vi. 33.

ness ot the night preced:

...

a 1
» Eph. vi. 16.
■ James ii. ai. Casanbon omitted pivw, which is found in
every MS., thus making the meaning to be, " He was justified
not l.y works but by faith," which directly contradicts the state
ment of S. James, and is inconsistent with the following context in
S. Cyril.

t.
a James ii. 23 ; a Chron. xx. 7 ; Is. xli. 8; Gen. xv. 6.
5 Heb. xi. 11, «.
3 Heb. xi. 8-10.

m
« Rom. iv. 19.

i_. 1.

V t.

r.

*

.

manded to offer him up, although he had
heard the word, /// Isaac shall thy seed be called6,
he proceeded to offer up his son, his only son, to
God, believing that God is able to raise up even
from the dead'. And having bound his son, and
laid him on the wood, he did in purpose offer
him, but by the goodness of God in delivering
to him a lamb instead of his child, he received
Being faithful in these things,
his son alive.
he was sealed for righteousness, and received
circumcision as a seal of thefaith which he had
while he 7c as in uncircumeision 8, having received
a promise that he should be thefaUier of many
nations 9.

6. Let us see, then, how Abraham is the
father of many nations1.
Of Jews he is con
fessedly the father, through succession accord
ing to the flesh.
But if we hold to the suc
cession according to the flesh, we shall be
compelled to say that the oracle was false.
For according to the flesh he is no longer
father of us all : but the example of his faith
makes us all sons of Abraham. How? and
in what manner?
With men it is incredible
that one should rise from the dead ; as in like
manner it is incredible also that there should
be offspring from aged persons as good as
dead.
But when Christ is preached as having
been crucified on the tree, and as having died
By the like
and risen again, we believe it.
ness therefore of our faith we are adopted into
the sonship of'Abrahan}. And then, following
upon our faith, we receive like him the spiritual
seal, being circumcised by the Holy Spirit
through Baptism, not in the foreskin of the
body, but in the heart, according to Jeremiah,
saying, Andye shall be circumcised unto God in
the foreskin of your heart2 ; and according to
the Apostle, in
the circumcision of Christ,
having been buried with Him in baptism, and
the rest 3.

7. This faith if we keep we shall be free
from condemnation, and shall be adorned with
all kinds of virtues.
For so great is the
strength of faith, as even to buoy men up in
Peter was a man like
walking on the sea.
ourselves, made up of flesh and blood, and
living upon like food.
But when Jesus said,
Come*, he believed, and walked upon the
waters, and found his faith safer upon the
waters than any ground ; and his heavy body
was upheld by the buoyancy of his
faith.
But though he had safe
footing over the
water as long as he believed, yet when he
doubted, at once he began to sink : for as

6 Gen. xxi. la ; xxii. a.
8 Rom. iv. 11.
2 Jer. iv. 4 : Circumcise yourselves to the Lord, andtake away
theforeskins ofyour heart. The Septuagint agrees closely with
the Hebrew, but Cyril quotes freely from memory.
* Matt. xiv. 29.

1 Rom. iv. 17, 18.

3 Col. ii. xi, la.

9 Gen. xvii. 5.

7 Heb. xi. 19.

LECTURE V.

his faith gradually relaxed, his body also was
drawn down with it.
And when He saw
his distress, Jesus who remedies the distresses
of our souls, said, O thou of little faith, where
fore aidst thou doublet And being nerved again
by Him who grasped his right hand, he had
no sooner recovered his faith, than, led by the
hand of the Master, he resumed the same
walking upon the waters : for this the Gospel
indirectly mentioned, saying, when they were
gone up into the ship 6.
For it says not that
Peter swam across and went up, but gives us
to understand that, after returning the same
distance that he went to meet Jesus, he went
up again into the ship.

8. Vea, so much power hath faith, that not
the believer only is saved, but some have been
saved by others
The paralytic
believing.
in Capernaum was not a believer, but they
believed who brought him, and let him down
through the tiles ^ :
for the sick man's soul
shared the sickness of his body. And think
not that I accuse him without cause :
the
Gospel itself says, when Jesus saw, not his
faith, but theirfaith. He saith to the sick of the
palsy, Arise 8 / The bearers believed, and the
sick of the palsy enjoyed the blessing of the
cure.

9. Wouldest thou see yet more surely that
Lazarus
some are saved by others' faith ?
died ' : one day had passed, and a second, and
a third ; his sinews 1 were decayed, and cor
ruption was preying already upon his body.
How could one four days dead believe, and
entreat the Redeemer on his own behalf?
But what the dead man lacked was supplied
by his true sisters.
For when the Lord was
come, the sister fell down before Him, and
when He said, Where have ye laid him 'I and
she had made answer, Lord, by this lime he
stinketh ; for he hath been four days dead, the
Lord said, If thou believe, thou shall see the
glory of God ; as much as saying, Supply thou
the dead man's lack of faith : and the sisters'
faith had so much power, that it recalled the
dead from the
Have then
men by believing, the one on behalf of the
other, been able to raise 3 the dead, and shalt
not thou, if thou believe sincerely on thine
own behalf, be much rather profited ? Nay,
even if thou be faithless, or of little faith, the
Lord is loving unto man ; He condescends
to thee on thy repentance : only on thy part
say with honest mind, Lord, I believe, help thou
But if thou thinkest that thou
mine unbelief*.

gates of helL

6 lb. 3a.

8 Matt. ix. 2, 6.

5 Mark xiv. 31.
7 Mark ii. 4. #
1 mpc "Sinews" is the original meaning, the application
to " nerves," as distinct organs of sensation, being later.
7 For apfLOT^fai, retained by the Benedictine Editor and
Reischl, read apoango-at, with Roe, Casaubon, and Atcxandride*.
3 Mark ix. 34.

9 John xi. 14-44.

really art faithful, but hast not yet the fulness
of faith, thou too hast need to say like the
Apostles, Lord, increase our faith*: for some
part thou hast of thyself, but the greater part
thou receivest from Him.

10. For the name of Faith is in the form of
speech s one, but has two distinct senses.
For
there is one kind of faith, the dogmatic, in
volving an assent of the soul on some particular
point : and it is profitable to the soul, as the
Lord saith : He that heareth My words, and
believeth Him that sent Me, hath everlasting life,
and corneth not into judgment 6 .■ and again, He
that believeth in tlie Son is not judged, but hath
passedfrom death unto lifei. Oh the great lovingkindness of God !
righteous were
many years in pleasing Him : but what they
succeeded in gaining by many years of wellpleasing 8, this Jesus now bestows on thee in
a single hour.
For if thou shalt believe that
Jesus Christ is Lord, and that God raised Him
from the dead, thou shalt be saved, and shalt
be transported
into Paradise by Him who
brought in thither the robber. And doubt not
whether it
is possible ; for He who on this
sacred Golgotha saved the robber after one
single hour of belief, the same shall save thee
also on thy believing 9.

For the

11. But there is a second kind of faith,
which is bestowed by Christ as a gift of grace.
For to one is given through the Spirit the word
of wisdom, and to another the word of know
ledge according to the same Spirit ; to another
failh, by the same Spirit, and to another gifts
This faith then which is given of
of healing1.
grace from the Spirit is not merely doctrinal,
but also worketh things above man's power.
For whosoever hath this faith, shall say to
this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place,
For whenever any one
and it shall remove*.
shall say this in faith, believing that it corneth
to pass, and shall not doubt in his heart,
then receiveth he the grace.

And of this faith it is said, If ye have faith
For just as the
as a grain of mustard seed*.
grain of mustard seed is small in size, but
fiery in its operation, and though sown in a
small space has a circle of great branches,
and when grown up is able even to shelter
so, likewise, faith in the swiftest
the fowls * ;
the
moment works the greatest

effects in

4 Luke xvii. 5.
5 Kara ttjv irpotTJfyopiay. Compare Aristotle, Categories, V. 30 :
r<j> ay?\aari rijs trptxnryopias.
Cyril's description of faith as two.
fold, and of dogmatic faith as an assent (crvycaratfea'ts) of the soul
to something as credible, seems to be derived from Clement of
Alexandria, Strom. II. c. 19. Compare by all means Pearson
on the Creed, Art. I. and his Notes a, b, c

and the earlier editions have epevirqa-rwc, "searching.''

6 John v. 24.
8 evopeor^aewc, Bened. and Reischl, with best MSS.
9 Luke xxiii. 43 ; the argument is used again in Cat. xiii. 31.
» Mark xi. 23.
>

7 lb. iii. 18 ; v. 24.

3 Matt. xvii. 90.

1 Cor. xii. 8, 9.

Milles

4 Matt. xiii. 32.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

soul.
For, when enlightened by faith, the soul
hath visions of God, and as far as is possible
beholds God, and ranges round the bounds of
the universe, and before the end of this world
already beholds the Judgment, and the payment
of the promised rewards. Have thou therefore
that faith in Him which cometh from thine own
self, that thou mayest also receive from Him
that faith which worketh things above man

T2. But in learning the Faith and in profess
ing it, acquire and keep that only, which is
now delivered6 to thee by the Church, and
which has been built up strongly out of all the
Scriptures. For since all cannot read the Scrip
tures, some being hindered as to the knowledge
of them by want of learning, and others by
a want of leisure, in order that the soul may
not perish from ignorance, we comprise the
whole doctrine of the Faith in a few lines.
This summary I wish you both to commit to
memory when I recite it
and to rehearse
it with all diligence among yourselves, not
writing it out on paper8, but engraving it by
the memory upon your hearts, taking care
while you rehearse it that no Catechumen
chance to overhear the things which have
been delivered to you.
I wish you also to
keep this as a provision 1 through the whole
course of your life, and beside this to receive
no other, neither if we ourselves should change
and contradict our present teaching, nor if an

5 S. Chrysostom (Horn. xxix.

in x Cor. xii. 9, 10) in like
manner distinguishes dogmatic faith from the faith which is " the
mother of miracles." The former S. Cyril calls our own, not
meaning that God's help is not needed for it, but because, as he
has shewn in I 10, it consists in the mind's assent, and voluntary
approval of the doctrines set before it : but the latter is a pure
Compare
gift of g^race working in man without his own help.
Apostolic Constitutions, VIII. c. 1.
6 This Lecture was to be immediately followed by a first reci
tation of the Creed. See Index, Creed.
7 in avrfjt r^s Ac'feais. ''in ipsa lectione" (Milles): " ipsis
verbis" (Bened.) : " in the very phrase " (R. W. C). See below,
note 4.
8 Compare S. August. Serm. ccxii., 14 At the delivery of the
Creed," and Index, Creed.
9 Compare Aeschylus, Prometheus V. 789 :
If* iyypafov av
Ixm'jfLoaiv SiArotc QptvStv.
1 ifyo&tov, Viaticum, i.e. provision for a journey, and here for
the journey through this life.
It is applied metaphorically by
other Fathers (a) in this general sense, to the reading of Holy
Scripture, Prayer, and Baptism, and (b)in a special sense to the
Holy Eucharist when administered to the sick and dying, as
a preparation for departure to the life after death.
Council of
Nicaea (A.O. 325). Canon.xiii. "With respect to the dying, the
old rule of the Church should continue to be observed, which
forbids that any one who is on the point of death should be
deprived of the last and most necessary viaticum (c^ootoiO."

adverse angel, transformedinto an angeloflight*,
should wish to lead you astray.
For though
we or an angel from heaven preach to you any
other gospel than that ye have received, let him
be to you anathema 3.
So for the present listen
while I simply say the Creed *, and commit it
to memory ; but at the proper season expect
the confirmation out of Holy Scripture of each
For the articles of the
part of the contents.
Faith were not composed as seemed good to
men ; but the most important points collected
out of all the Scripture make up one complete
teaching of the Faith. And just as the mus
tard seed in one small grain contains many
branches, so also this Faith has embraced in
few words all the knowledge of godliness in
the Old and New Testaments.
Take heed
then, brethren, and hold fast the traditions*
which ye now receive, and write them on the
table ofyour heart 6.

13. Guard them with reverence, lest per
chance the enemy despoil any who have
grown slack ; or lest some heretic pervert any
of the truths delivered to you.
For faith is
like putting money into the bank 7, even as
we have now done ; but from you God requires
the accounts of the deposit. I charge you, as
the Apostle saith, before God, who quickeneth
all things, and Christ Jesus, wlio before Pontius
Pilate witnessed the good confession, that ye keep
this faith which is committed to you, witlwut
spot, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ9. A treasure of life has now been com
mitted to thee, and the Master demandeth the
deposit at His appearing, which in His own
times He shall shew, Who is the blessed and only
Potentate, the -King of kings, and Lord of lords ;
Who only hath immortality, dwelling in light
which no man can opproach unto ; Whom no
To Whom be
man hath seen nor can see.
glo/y, honour, and power* for ever and ever.
Amen.

S Gal. i. 8, 9.
(Bened. Reischl. with best M3S-).

■ a Cor. xi. 14.
4 iw avr^T Ttjs Alfroc.
ravnpT t^c Ac'frwf, '"this my recitation," (Milles).
5 a Thess. ii. 15. Compare Cat. xxiii. 23.
6 Prov. vii. 3. Note p, above.
7 Matt. xxv. 27 ; Luke xix. 23.
» 1 Tim. v. ai ; vi. 13, 14.

" Be thou a good banker."

See note on Catech. vi. 36 :
• 1 Tim. vi. 15, 16.

LECTURE VI.

Concerning the Unity of God1. On the Article, I Believe in One

God.

Also concerning Heresies.

Isaiah xlv. 16, 17. (Sept.)

Sanctify yourselves unto Me, 0 islands.

Israel is saved by the Lord with an everlasting

salvation ; they shall not be ashamed^ neither shall they be confoundedfor ever, cW.

1. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
fesus Christ*. Blessed also be His Only-begot
For with the thought of God let
ten Son 3.
the thought of Father at once be joined, that
the ascription of glory to the Father and the
Son may be made indivisible
For the Father
hath not one glory, and the Son another, but
one and the same, since He is the Father's
Only-begotten Son ; and when the Father is
glorified, the Son also shares the glory with
Him, because the glory of the Son flows from
His Father's honour : and again, when the Son
is glorified, the Father of so great a bless
ing is highly honoured.

2. Now though the mind is most rapid in its
thoughts, yet the tongue needs words, and a
long recital of intermediary speech.
For the
eye embraces at once a multitude of the

1 Htpl QcoO Moyapxutf. The word fiovapxta, as used by Plato
IPolit. 201 c), Aristotle {Polit. III. xtv. n. «l5o* novapxias
PootAtKijO* Philo Judseus {de Circumcisione, % 2 ; de Monarchia,
Titul.), means "hole government."
Compare Tertullian (adv.
Praxean. c. Hi.): "If I have gained any knowledge of either
language, I am sure that Mopapxia has no other meaning than
Athanasius {de Decretis Niceena
'single and individual rule.'"
SynodU I 26) has preserved part of an Epistle of Dionysius, Bishop
01 Rome (259;-269, A.D.), against the Sabellians: "It will be
natural for me now to speak against those who divide, and cut into
pieces, and destroy that most sacred doctrine of the Church of God,
the Monarchia, making it, as it were, three powers and divided'
hypostases, and three Godheads ; " {ibid.) : " It is the doctrine of the
presumptuous Marcton to sever and divide the Monarchia into
three origin* (apv<i«)-" We see here the sense which SlovapxCa.
had acquired in Christian Theology : it meant the " Unity ofGod,"
as the one principle and origin of' all things.
" Bv the Monarchy
is meant the doctrine that the Second and Third Persons in the
Ever-blessed Trinity are ever to be referred in our thoughts to the
First, as the Fountain of Godhead" (Newman, Athanas. de Decrctis Nic. Syn. % 26, note h).
Justin Martyr (Euseb. HE. IV.
18), and Irenauis {ibid. V. 20), had each written a treatise irtpi
Mon-apxta?. On the history of Monarchianism see, in this Scries,
Aih-inaMus, Prolegomena, p. xxiii. sqq.
3 This clause is omitted in some MSS. Various loims of the
Doxology were adopted in Cyril's time by various panics in the
Church. Thus Theodoret {Hist. Eccles. II.
c. 19) relates that
Ixontius, Bishop of Antioch, a.d. 3*8-357, observing that the
Clergy and the Congregation were divided into two parlies, the
one using the form '"and to the Sun, and to the Holy Ghost," the
other •* through the Son, in the Holy Ghost," used to repeat the
Doxology Mlently. so that those who were near could hear only
"world without end."
The form which was regarded as the most orthodox, and adopted
in the Liturgies, ran thus : " Glory to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to the ages of the ages,"
Sec Suicer*s Thesaurus, AofoAoyto.

2 2 Cor. i. 3.

VOL. VII.

'starry quire;' but when any one wishes to
describe them one by one, which is the Morn
which, the Evening-star, and
ing-star, and
which each one of them, he has need of many
words.
In like manner again the mind in the
briefest moment compasses earth and sea and
all the bounds of the universe ; but what it
conceives in an instant, it uses many words to
Yet forcible as is the example I
describe4.
have mentioned, still it is after all weak and
inadequate.
For of God we speak not all we
ought (for that is known to Him only), but so
much as the capacity of human nature has
received, and so much as our weakness can
bear.
not what God is
but candidly confess that we have not exact
knowledge concerning Him.
For in what
concerns God to confess our ignorance is
Therefore magnify the
the best knowledge5.
Lord with me, and let us exalt His Name
together 6,-all of us in common, for one alone is
powerless ; nay rather, even if we be all united
together, we shall yet not do it as we ought
I mean not you only who are here present,
but even if all the nurslings of the whole
Church throughout the world, both that which
now is and that which shall be, should meet
together, they would not be able worthily to
sing the praises of their Shepherd.

For we explain

3. A great and honourable man was Abra-

4 Irenaius II. xxviii. 4 : " But since God is all mind, all reason,
all active Spirit, all lig_ht, and always exists as one and the same,
such conditions and divisions (of operation) cannot fittingly be as
cribed to Him. For our tongue, as being made of flesh, is not
able to minister to the rapidity of man's sense, because that is
of a spiritual nature ; for which reason our speech is restrained
[sujfoca/ur] within us, and is not at once expressed as it has bejn
conceived in the mind, but is uttered by successive efforts, just as
the tongue is able to serve it."
5 Tertullian, Apologeticus, f 17: ''That which is infinite ia
known only to itself.
This it is which gives some notion of God,
while yet beyond all our conceptions-our very incapacity of tully
gra>ping Him affords us the idea of what He reaily is. He is
presented to our minds in His transcendent greatness, as at once
known and unknown." Cf. Phil. Jud. de Monarch. I 4 ; Hooker,
Eccles. Pol. I. ii. 3 : "Whom although to know be life, and joy
to make mention of His name; yet our soundest knowledge is to
know that we know Him not as He is, neither can know Him."

6 Ps. xxxiv. 3.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

ham, but only great in comparison with men ;
and when he came before God, then speaking
the truth candidly he saith, / am earth and
ashesi. He did not say ' earth' and then
cease, lest he should call himself by the name
of that great element ; but he added ' and
ashes,' that he might represent his perishable
Is there anything, he saith,
and frail nature.
smaller or lighter than ashes?
For take, saith
he, the comparison of ashes to a house, of
a house to a city, a city to a province, a pro
vince to the Roman Empire, and the Roman
Empire to the whole earth and all its bounds,
and the whole earth to the heaven in which it
is embosomed ;- the earth, which bears the
same proportion to the heaven as the centre
to the whole circumference of a wheel, for the
earth is no more than this in comparison with
the heaven 8 :
first
heaven which is seen is less than the second,
and the second than the third, for so far
Scripture has named them, not that they are
only so many, but because it was expedient
for us to know so many only. And when in
thought thou hast surveyed all the heavens,
not yet will even the heavens be able to
praise God as He is, nay, not if they should
resound with a voice louder than thunder.
But if these great vaults of the heavens can
not worthily sing God's praise, when shall
' earth and ashes,' the smallest and least of
things existing, be able to send up a worthy
hymn of praise to God, or worthily to speak
of God, that sitleth upon the circle of the earth,
and holdeth the inhabitants thereof as grass
hoppers 9.

consider then that this

4. If any man attempt to speak of God, let
him first describe the bounds of the earth.
Thou dwellest on the earth, and the limit of
this earth which is thy dwelling thou knowest
not : how then shalt thou be able to form
a worthy thought of its Creator? Thou beholdest the stars, but their Maker thou beholdest not: count these which are visible,
and then describe Him who is invisible, Who
tdleth the number of the stars, and calleth
them all by their names '.
Violent rains lately
came pouring down upon us, and nearly
destroyed us : number the drops in this city
alone : nay, I say not in the city, but number
the drops on thine own house for one single
hour, if thou canst :
but thou canst not.
Learn then thine own weakness ; learn from
this instance the mightiness of God : for He

hath numbered the drops of rain », which have
been poured down on all the earth, not only
now but in all time. The sun is a work of
God, which, great though it be, is but a spot
first
in comparison with the whole heaven ;
gaze stedfastly upon the sun, and then curiously
scan the Lord of the sun.
Seek not the things
that are too deep for thee, neither search out the
things that are above thy strength : what is com
manded thee, think thereupon K

5. But some one will say, If the Divine
substance is incomprehensible, why then dost
thou discourse of these things?
So then,
because I cannot drink up all the river, am
I not even to take in moderation what is
expedient for me ?
Because with eyes so
constituted as mine I cannot take in all the
sun, am I not even to look upon him enough
to satisfy my wants ? Or again, because I
have entered into a great garden, and cannot
eat all the supply of fruits, wouldst thou have
me go away altogether hungry?
I praise and
glorify Him that made us ; for it is a divine
command which saith, Let every breath praise
I am attempting now to glorify
the Lord*.
the Lord, but not to describe Him, know
ing nevertheless that I
fall short of
glorifying Him worthily, yet deeming it a work
of piety even to attempt it at all. For the Lord
Jesus encouragcth my weakness, by saying,
No man hath seat God at any time s.

shall

it
6. What then, some man will say, is
not written, The little ones' Angels do always
behold theface ofMy Father which is in heaven 6 1
Yes, but the Angels see God not as He is, but
For it
as far as they themselves are capable.
is Jesus Himself who saith, Not that any man
hath seen the Father, save He which is of God,
He hath seen the Father ?. The Angels therefore
behold as much as they can bear, and Arch
angels as much as they are able ; and Thrones
and Dominions more than the former, but yet
less than His worthiness :
for with the Son
the Holy Ghost alone can rightly behold Him :
for He searcheth all things, and knowcth even the
deepthingsofGods: as indeed the Only-begotten
Son also, with the Holy Ghost, knoweth the
Father fully : For neither, saith He, knoioelh
any man the Father, save the Son, and he to
whom the Son will reveal Him
For He
fully beholdeth, and, according as each can
bear, revealeth God through the Spirit : since
the Only-begotten Son together with the Holy
Ghost is a partaker of the Father's Godheaa.

7 Gen. xviii. 27.
8 The opinion of Aristarchus of Samos, as stated by Archimedes
(Arenarius. p. 320, Oxon), was that the sphere of the fixed stars
was so large, that it bore to the earth's orbit the same proportion
as a sphere to its centre, or more correctly (as Archimedes ex
plains) the same proportion as the earth's orbit round the sun to
the earth itself. Compare Cat. xv. 24.

v Is. si: 23.

" Ps. cxlviL 4.

He draiveth vf> t/te drc/s 0/water.

■ Job xxxvi. 27 : aptBiLTjrai St avrif (rrayoytt vcrov.
3 Kcclus. ill. 21, 22.
5 John i. 18. They are the Evangelist's own words.
6 Alatt. xviii. to.
9 Matt. xi. 27.

7 John vi. 46.

* Ps. cl. 6.

8 1 Cor. ii. CO.

R.V. For

LECTURE VI.

He, who 1 was begotten knoweth Him who
begat; and He Who begat knoweth Him who
is begotten.
Since Angels then are ignorant
(for. to each according to his own capacity
doth the Only-begotten reveal Him through
the Holy Ghost, as we have said), let no
man be ashamed to confess his ignorance.
I am speaking now, as all do on occasion :
but how we speak, we cannot tell: how then
can I declare Him who hath given us speech ?
I who have a soul, and cannot tell
its distinc
tive properties, how shall I be able to de
scribe its Giver?

7. For devotion it suffices us simply to
know that we have a God ; a God who is
One, a living2, an ever-living God ; always
like unto Himself 3; who has no Father, none
mightier than Himself, no successor to thrust
Him out from His kingdom : Who in name
is manifold, in power infinite, in substance
uniform
For though He is called Good,
and Just, and Almighty and Sabaoth s, He
is not on that account diverse and various ;
but being one and the same, He sends forth
countless operations of His Godhead, not
exceeding here and deficient there, but being
in all things like unto Himself.
Not great
in loving-kindness only, and little in wisdom,
but with wisdom and loving-kindness in
equal power : not seeing in part, and in part
devoid of sight ; but being all eye, and all
ear, and all mind6: not like us perceiving in
part and in part not knowing ;
for such a
statement were blasphemous, and unworthy
of the Divine substance. He foreknoweth
the things ihat be ; He is Holy, and Almighty,
and excelleth all in goodness, and majesty,
and wisdom: of Whom we can declare neither
beginning, nor form, nor shape.
For ye have
neither heard His voice at any time, nor seen
His shape
Wherefore
saith Holy Scripture.
Moses saith also to the Israelites : And take
ye good heed to your own souls, for ye saw no
For if it is wholly impossible to
similitude*.

2 Gr. opra, del ovto.

1 The Benedictine and earlier printed texts read 6 yevn)9t\t
[inaOws irpo tup xporwf aitovtetv] : but the words in brackets arc
not found in the best MSS. The false grammar betrays a spurious
insertion, which also interrupts the sense. On the meaning of the
phrase 6 v.n i,!iu, dxudwt, see note on vii. 5 : ov trdfct iraryp
ytvofttyot.
3 Iren. II- xiii. 3 : " He is altogether like and equal to Him
self ; since He is all sense, and all spirit, and all feeling, and all
thought, and all reason, and all hearing, and alt ear, and all eye,
and all light, and all a fount of everv good,-even as the religious
and pious are wout to speak of God. '
« MrMitt). A Platonic word. Ptucdo, 80 B '. Tt2 uiv 9ti<o Kai
dfapdrip Kai yorjrtp Kai juoi'Ovtiti xai dSiaAvTu xai del uitravrtuc
urd ra avrd i\0VTi cat/rip o/ioiOTaTOP cirat >^iv\^v. See Index,
''Hypostasis."
5 iren. II. xxxv. 3: " If any object that in the Hebrew lan
guage different expressions occur, such as Sabaoth, F.loc, Adonai,
and all other such terms, striving tn prove trom these that there
are different powers and Gods, let them learn that all expressions
of this kind are titles and announcements 01 one and the same
Being."
* See the passages cf Irerceus quoted above, jl 2 note 4, and % 7
Bote 3.

8 Dcut. iv. 15.

7 John v. 37.

imagine His likeness, how shall thought come
near His substance ?

8. There have been many imaginations by
Some
many persons, and all have failed.
have thought that God is fire ; Others that He
is, as it were, a man with wings, because of a
true text ill understood, Thou shalt hide me
under the shadow of Thy wings 9.
They forgot
that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Only-begotten,
speaks in like manner concerning Himself to
Jerusalem, How often would I have gathered
thy children together, even as a hen doth gather
her chickens under her wings, and ye would
not *°. For whereas God's protecting power was
conceived as wings, they failing to understand
this sank down to the level of things human,
and supposed that the Unsearchable exists in
the likeness of man. Some again dared to say
that He has seven eyes, because it is written,
seven eyes of the Lord looking upon the whole
earth
For if He has but seven eyes surround
ing Him in part, His seeing is therefore partial
and not perfect : but to say this of God is
blasphemous ; for we must believe that God
perfect, according to our
is
Saviour's word, which saith, Your Father in
heaven is perfect 2 : perfect in sight, perfect in
power, perfect in greatness, perfect in fore
knowledge, perfect
in goodness, perfect in
justice, perfect in loving-kindness : not circum
scribed in any space, but the Creator of all
space, existing in all, and circumscribed by
none 3. Heaven is His throne, but higher is He
that sitteth thereon : and earth is His footstool*,
but His power reacheth unto things under the
earth.

all things

in

9. One He is, everywhere present, beholding
all things, perceiving all things, creating all
things through Christ : For all things were
made by Him, and ivithout Him was not
anything made5. A fountain of every good,
abundant and unfailing, a river of blessings, an
eternal light of never-failing splendour, an
insuperable power condescending to our in
firmities : whose very Name we dare not hear6.
Wilt thou find a footstep of the Lord 1 saith
Job, or hast thou attained unto the least tilings
which the Almighty hath made 1 i
\ f the least of
His works are incomprehensible, shall He be

10 Matt, xxiii. 37.
2 Matt. v. 48.

9 Ps. xvii. 8.
« Zecll. iv. 10.
3 Philo Judajus {Leg. AlUg. I. 14, p. sa). Oeov yap ovS* h
otip-irac xdtrfioc aftop dp
yuiptov Kai evSiatrriua, eiret auios
eauru rr/x-os.
So Sir Isaac Newton, at the end of the Principia,
asserts t"at God by His eternal and infinite existence constitutes
Time and Space : " Non est duratio vel spatium, scd durat et
adest, et cxistendo semper ct ubique spatium et durationem constituit."
6 The sacred name (TTir"P) was not pronounced, but Adonai
was substituted.
7 Job xi. 7(R.V.): Canst thou by searching Jinri out God *
Canst thou Jind out the Almighty unto perfectioni Cyril seems
the least,' not as '' the utmost."
to have understood rd ecxara as

* Is. lxvi. 1.

5 John i. 3.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

comprehended who made them all ? Eye hath
not seen, and ear hath not heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man, the things which
If
God hath prepared for them that love Hint 8.
the
things wnich God hath prepared are
incomprehensible to our thoughts, how can we
comprehend with our mind Himself who hath
prepared them ? O the depth of the riches, and
rt'isdom, and kiiotvledge of God 1 Hou' un
searchable are His judgments, and His ways
past finding out 9 1 saith the Apostle.
If His
judgments and His ways are incomprehensible,
can He Himself be comprehended?

true God is

io. God then being thus great, and yet
greater, (for even were I to change my whole
substance into tongue, I could not speak His
excellence : nay more, not even if all Angels
should assemble, could they ever speak His
worth), God being therefore so great in good
ness and majesty, man hath yet dared to say to
a stone that he hath graven, Thou art my God '°l
O monstrous blindness, that from majesty
so great came down so low 1 The tree which
was planted by God, and nourished by the
rain, and afterwards burnt and turned into
ashes by the fire,-this is addressed as God,
and the
But the
wickedness of idolatry grew yet more prodigal,
and cat, and dog, and wolf" were worshipped
instead of God : the man-eating lion 2 also was
worshipped instead of God, the most loving
friend of man. The snake and the serpent 3,
counterfeit
of
Paradise, were worshipped, and He who
planted Paradise was despised. And I am
ashamed to say, and yet do say it, even onions*
were worshipped among some. Wine was given
to make glad the heart of man s .• and Dionysus
(Bacchus) was worshipped instead of God.
God made corn by saying, Let the earth bring
forth grass, yielding seed after his kind and after
his likeness 6, that bread may strengthen man's
hearf : why then was Demeter (Ceres) wor-

of him who thrust us out

despised.

8 x Cor. ii. 9.
»° Is. xliv. 17.
9 Rom xi. 33.
1 The cat was sacred to the goddess Pashl, called by the
,
Greeks Bul.astis, and identified by Herodotus (ii. 137) with Ar
temis or Diana.
Cat* were embalmed after death, and their
mummies are found at various places, but especially at Bubastis
{Hercd.ii 67).
" Tl.e Dogs are interred in the cities to which they belong,
in sacred burial-places" {Herod, ii. 67), but chiefly at Cynopolis
(" City of Dogs") where the dog-headed deity Anubis was wor
shipped.
Mummies of wolves are found in chambers excavated in the
rocks at Lycopolis, where Osiris was worshipped under the symbol
of a wolf.
■ The lion was held sacred at T.eontopolis (Strabo, xvii. p. 812).
3 " In the neighbourhood .>f Thebes there are sacred serpents
perfectly barmlesB to man. These they bury in the temple of
Zeus, the god to whom they are sacred " {Herod, ii. 74.)
At Epidaurus in Argolis the serpent was held sacred as the
Clement of Alexandria {Exhort, c. ii.)
symbol of Aeseutapius.
gives a fuller list of animals worshipped by various nations. Com
pare also Clement. Recogn. V. ao.

4 Juvenal Sat. xv. 7.
llii
Oppitla tota cancin ven^-intur, nemo Dianam.
Possum et caepe nefas \io'are ct frangere morsu.
7 Ps. civ. 15.

aeluros, hie piscem fluminis, illic

5 Ps. civ. 15.

6 Gen. i. xi.

shipped ? Fire cometh forth from striking stones
together even to this day : how then was
Hephaestus (Vulcan) the creator of fire ?

11. Whence came the polytheistic error of
the Greeks8? God has no body: whence then
the adulteries alleged among those who are by
them called gods ?
I say nothing of the trans
formations of Zeus into a swan : I am ashamed
to speak of his transformations into a bull : for
bellowings are unworthy of a god. The god
of the Greeks has been found an adulterer, yet
are they not ashamed : for if he is an adul
terer let him not be called a god They tell
also
of deaths °, and falls ", and thunder
Seest thou from how
strokes 2 of their gods.
great a height and how low they have fallen ?
Was it without reason then that the Son of
or was it
God came down from heaven ?
that He might heal so
great a wound ?
Was it without reason that the Son came?
or was it in order that the Father might
be acknowledged ? Thou hast learned what
to come down
moved the
Only-begotten
from the throne at God's right hand.
The
Father was despised, the Son must needs
correct
for He THROUGH
WHOM ALL THINGS WERE MADE
must bring them all as offerings to the Lord
of all. The wound must be healed : for what
could be worse than this disease, that a stone
should be worshipped instead of God ?

error:

the

Of Heresies.

12. And not among the heathen only did
for many of
the devil make these assaults ;
those who are falsely called Christians, and
wrongfully addressed by the sweet name of
Christ, have ere now impiously dared to
banish God from His own creation.
I mean
the brood of heretics, those most ungodly men

The Cretans fashioned."

1 The early Creeds of the Eastern Churches, like that which
Eusebius of Caesarca proposed at Nica:a, expressly declare the
unity of God, in opposition both to the heathen Polytheism, and to
the various heresies which introduced two or more Gods.
See
below in this Lecture, || xa-18 ; and compare Athan. {contra
Gentes, I 6, sqq.).
9 Clement of Alexandria {Exhort, cap. ii. f 37), quotes a pas
sage irom a hymn of Callimachus, implying the death of Zeus:
*' For even thy tomb, O king,
Adonis, or "Thatnmux yearly wounded,'* was said to live and
die in alternate years.
x By the word "falls** (otron-Tweic) Cyril evidently refers to
the story of Hephaestus, or Vulcan, to which Milion alludes
{Paradise Lost, I. 740):-
" Men call'd him Mulciber, and how he fell
From heaven they fabled, thrown by an^'ry Jove
Sheer o'er the crystal battlements : from worn
To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
A summer's day.'*

• The "thunder-strokes" refer to "Titan heaven's first-bom.
CC Virgil,

With his enormous brood " {Par, Lost, I. 510).
Aen. vi. 580 :-

" Hie genus antiquum Terrae, Titania pubes,
Fulmine dejecti fundo volvuntur in imo."
Vidi et crudeles dantem Salmonea poenas,
Dum flammas Juvi-. et sonitus imitatur Olympi."
Clem. Alex. {Exhort. II. ( 37): -" Aesculaoius lies struck with
Cf. Virg. Aen. viL 770 «.

lightning in the regions of Cynosuris."

Ibid. t>. 58?:-

LECTURE VI.

of evil name, pretending to be friends of
Christ but utterly hating Him.
For he who
blasphemes the Father of the Christ is an
These men have dared to
enemy of the Son.
speak of two Godheads, one good and one
eviU! O monstrous blindness !
If a Godhead,
then assuredly good.
But if not good, why
called a Godhead? For if goodness is an attri
bute of God ; if loving-kindness, beneficence,
almighty power, are proper to God, then of
two things one, either in calling Him God let
the name and operation be united ; or if they
would rob Him of His operations, let them
not give Him the bare name.

13. Heretics have dared to say that there
are two Gods, and of good and evil two
sources, and these unbegotten.
It both are
unbegotten it is certain that they are also
equal, and both mighty.
How then doth
light destroy the darkness? And dc
the
they ever exist together, or are they separ
Together they cannot be ; for what
ated ?
fellowship hath light with darkness ?
saith
the Apostle.
But if they are far from each
other, it is certain that they hold also each his
own place ; and if they hold their own separate
places, we are certainly in the realm of one
God, and certainly worship one God.
For
thus we must conclude, even if we assent
their folly, that we must worship one
to
Let us examine also what they say
God.
of the good God.
Hath He power or no
If He hath power, how did evil arise
power?
And how doth the evil
against His will?
For
substance intrude, if He be not willing ?
if He knows but cannot hinder it, they charge
Him with want of power ; but if He has the
power, yet hinders not, they accuse Him of
treachery.
At
one time they say that the Evil One hath no
communion with the good God in the creation
of the world , but at another time they say
that he hath the fourth part only.
Also they
say that the good God is the Father of Christ ,
but. Christ they call this sun.
If, therefore,
according to them, the world was made by the
Evil One, and the sun is in the world, how is
the Son of the Good an unwilling slave in the
kingdom of the Evil ? We bennre ourselves
in speaking of these things, but we do it lest
any of those present should from ignorance
fall into the mire of the heretics.
I know
that I have defiled my own mouth and the

Mark too their want of sense.

3 The theory of two Gods, one good and the other evil, was
held by Ccrdo, and Marcion (Hippolytus, Re/ut. omnium Hat:
VII. tip. 17 : Ircnaus, III. xxv. 3, quoted 111 note on Cat. iv. 4).
The Manichecs aUo held that the Creator of the world was distiiiu from the Supreme God (Alexander Lycup. tU Manictutoruin
SinUnlh's, cap. iii.).
Cyril's description applies especially to the '
* a Cor. vt. 14.
heresy of Manes. See I 36, note 3, at the end of this Lecture ;
also Cat. xi. ai. and Cat. xv. 3.

yet it

is expedient.
ears of my listeners :
For it
is much better to hear absurdities
charged against others, than to fall into them
far better that thou know
from ignorance :
the mire and hate it, than unawares fall into it.
For the godless system of the heresies is a
road with many branches, and whenever a man
has strayed from the one straight way, then he
falls down precipices again and again.

14. The inventor of all heresy was Simon
Magus s : that Simon, who in the Acts of the
Apostles thought to purchase with money the
unsaleable grace of the Spirit, and heard the
words. Thou hast neither part nor lot in this
matter 6, and the rest : concerning whom also it
is written, They went outfrom us, but they were
not of us; for if they had been of us, they would
have remained with us 7.
This man, after he
had been cast out by the Apostles, came to
Rome, and gaining over one Helena a harlot8,
was the first that dared with blasphemous
mouth to say that it was himself who appeared
on Mount Sinai as the Father, and afterwards
appeared among the Jews, not in real flesh
but in seeming0, as Christ Jesus, and afterwards
as the Holy Spirit whom Christ promised to
send as the Paraclete IO, And he so deceived
the City of Rome that Claudius set up his
statue, and wrote beneath it, in the language
of the Romans, " Simoni Deo Sancto," which
being interpreted signifies, " To Simon the
Holy God '."

7 1 John ii. 19.

all kinds of heresies derive their origin."

5 So Irenaeus(I. xxiii. a) says that "from this Simon of Samaria
6 Acts viii, 18-21.
8 Irenceus (I. xxiii. 2): " Having purchased from Tyre, a city
of Phoenicia, a certain harlot named Helena, he used to carry her
about with him, declaring that this woman was the lirst conception
of his mind, the mother of all, by whom in the beginning he
conceived in his mind the creation of Angels and Archangels."
9 Cf. Epiphan. {Hares, p. 55, B) : " He said that he was the
Son, and had not really suffered, but only in appearance (SoKTjfr*.)."
10 Irenaeus (I. xxiii. 1): "He taught that it was himself who
appeared among the Jews as the Sou, and descended in Samaria
as the Father, but came to other nations as the Holy Spirit.''
Cyril here departs from his authority by substituting Mount
Sinai for Samaria, and thereby fall* into error.
Simon had fjrst
appeared in S.imaria, being a native of GUton : moreover in claim
ing to be the Father he meant 10 set himself far above the interior
Deity who had given the I>aw on Sinai, saying that he was " the
highest of all Powers, that U the Father who is over all."
1 "Justin Martyr in his first Apology, addressed to Antoninus
Pius, writes thus (c. 26): 'There was one Simon a Samaritan,
of the village called Gttton, who in the reign of Claudius Ca^ar,
and in your royal city of Rome, did mighty feats 01 magic by the
art of daemons working in him. He was considered a ^ud, and
as a god was honoured among you with a statue, which statue
was set up in the river Tiber between the two bridges, and hears
this inscription in Latin :
Simoni Deo Sancto ;
which is,
To Simm the holy God.
"The substance of this story is repeated by Irenzus {adv.
Hot. I. xxiii. 1), and by Tcrtuilian 'ApoL c. 13), who reproaches
the Romans for installing Simon Magus in their Pantheon, and
giving him a statue and the title ' Holy God.'
" In a.d. 1574, a stone, which had formed the base of a statu:,
was dug up on the site described by Justin, the Island in the Tiucr,
bearing an inscription-' Semoni Sanco Deo Fidio Sacrum, \*c.'
Hence it has been supposed that Justin mistook a statue of the
See the
Sabine God, ' Semo bancus,' for one of Simon M;igus.
notes in Otto's Justin Martyr, and Stieren's Irenaeus.
" On the other hand Tillemont {Memoircs, t..ii. p. 482) maintains
that Justin in an Apology addressed to the emperor and written
in Rome itself cannot reasonably be supposed to have fallen into

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

15. As the delusion was extending, Peter
and Paul, a noble pair, chief rulers of the
Church, arrived and set the error right* ; and
when the supposed god Simon wished to shew
himself off, they straightway shewed him as a
corpse.
For Simon promised to rise aloft to
heaven, and came riding in a daemons' chariot
on the air; but the servants of God fell on
their knees, and having shewn that agreement
of which Jesus spake, that If two of you shall
agree concerning anything that they shall ask,
it shall be done unto them 3, they launched the
weapon of their concord in prayer against
Magus, and struck him down to the earth.
And marvellous though it was, yet no marvel.
For Peter was there, who carrieth the keys of
heaven * : and nothing wonderful, for Paul was
there 5, who was caught up to the third heaven,
and into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words,
which it is not lauful for a man to utter6.
These brought the supposed God down from
the sky to earth, thence to be taken down to
the regions below the earth.
In this man first
the serpent of wickedness appeared ; but when
one head had been cut off, the root of wicked
ness was found again with many heads.

16. For Cerinthus7 made havoc ofthe Church,
and Menander8, and Carpocrates', Ebionites1
also, and Marcion a, that mouthpiece of ungod
different
For he who proclaimed
liness.
gods, one the Good, the other the Just,
contradicts the Son when He says, O righteous

so manifest an error. Whichever view we take ofJustin's accuracy
concerning the inscription and the statue, there is nothing im
probable in his statement that Simon Magus was at Rome in the
reign of Claudius." (Extracted by permission from the Speaker's
Commentary. Introduction to the Epistle to tlte Romans, p. 4 )
2 "Justin says not one word about St. Peter's alleged visit
to Rome, and his encounter with Simon Magus." Hut " Eusebius
in his Ecclesiastical History (c. A.D. 325), quotes Justin Martyr's
story about Simon Magus (E.H. ii. c. 13), and then, without re
ferring to any •authority, goes on to assert (c. 14) that 'immedi
ately in the same reign of Claudius divine Providence led Peter the
great Apostle to Rome to encounter this great destroyer of life,'
and that he thus brought the light of the Gospel from the East to
the West ' (ibidem).
Eusebius probably borrowed this story " from the strange fictions
of the Clementine Recognitions and Homilies, and Apostolic Con.
stittttions."
See Recogn. III. 63-65; Horn. I. 15; III. 58;
Cyril's account of Simon's death
Apost. Constit. VI. 7, 8, 9.
is taken from the same untrustworthy sources.

3 Matt, xviii. rg.
This
5 It is certain that S. Paul was not at Rome at this time.
story of Simon Magus and his ' fiery car' is told, with variations,
by Arnobius (adv. Gentes, II. 12), and in Apost. Constit. VI. 9.

6 2 Cor. xii. 2, 4.
7 Cerinthus taught that the world was not made by the supreme
God, but by a separate Power ignorant of Him. See lrenxus,
Heer. I. xxvi., Euseb. E.H'. iii. 28, with the notes in this Scries.
8 Menanderis first mentioned by Justin M. (Apolog. I. cap. 26):
" Menander, also a Samaritan, of the town Capparetara, a disciple
of Simon, and inspiied by devils, we know to have deceived many
while he was in Antioch by his magical art. He persuaded those
who adhered to him that they should never die."
Irenasus
(I. xxiii. 5) adds that Menander announced himself as the Saviour
sent by the Invisibles, and taught that the world was created by
Angels.
9 Carpocrates, a Platonic philosopher, who taught at Alexandria
(135 A.D circ). held that the world and all things in it were made
by Angels far inferior to the unbegotten (unknown) Father (Iron.
I. xxv. 1 ; Tertullian, Adv. Ha:r. cap. 3).
1 lrenxus, 1. 26 : " Those who are called Ebionites agree that
the world was made by God ; but their opinions with respect
to the Lord are like those of Cerinthus and Carpocrates."

See also Tertullian (de Animd, cap. 50.)

4 lb. xvi. 19.

3 On Marcion, see note 5, on Cat. iv. 4.

Father*. And he who says again that the
Father is one, and the maker of the world
another, opposes the Son when He says, If
then God so clothes the grass of the field which
to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into thefurnace
of fire 4 ; and, Who maketh His sun to rise on
the evil and on the good, and sendcth rain on the
just and on the unjust*. Here again is a second
inventor of more mischief,
Marcion.
For being confuted by the testimonies from
the Old Testament which are quoted in the
New, he was the first who dared to cut those
testimonies out6, and leave the preaching of
die word of faith without witness, thus effacing
the true God : and sought to undermine the
Church's faith, as if there were no heralds
of it.

this

17. He again was succeeded by another,
Basilides, of evil name, and dangerous cha
racter, a preacher of impurities7. The contest
of wickedness was aided also by Valentinus8, a
preacher of thirty gods. The Greeks tell of but
few: and the man who was called -but more
truly was not-a Christian extended the delu
sion to full thirty. He says, too, that Bythus the
Abyss (for it became him as being an abyss of
wickedness to begin his teaching from the
Abyss) begat Silence, and of Silence begat
the Word.
This Bythus was worse than the
Zeus of the Greeks, who was united to his
sister : for Silence was said to be the child of
Dost thou see the absurdity invested
Bythus.
with a show of Christianity ?
Wait a little,
and thou wilt be shocked at his impiety ; for
he asserts that of this Bythus were begotten
eight Aeons ; and of them, ten ; and of them,
But whence
other twelve, male and female.
See their silli
is the proof of these things?
Whence hast
ness from their fabrications.
Because,
thou the proof of the thirty Aeons ?
saith he, it is written, that Jesus was baptized,

5 Matt. v. 45.

3 John xvii. 25.
* Luke xii. 28.
* Marcion accepted only St. Luke's Gospel, and mutilated that
(Tertullian, Adv. Marcion. iv. 2). He thus got rid of the tesiimony ot the Apostks and eye-witnesses, Matthew and John, and
represented the Law and the Gospel as contradictory revelations
of two different Gods. For this Cyril calls him ' a second inventor
of mischief.' Simon Magus (g 14) being the first.
7 Basilides was earlier than Marcion, being the founder of
a Gnostic sect at Alexandria in the reign of Hadrian (a.d. 117138).
His doctrines are described by Irenaeus (I. xxvii. 3-7),
and very fully by Hippolytus \Refut. omn. Hoyr. VII. 2- 15).
The charge of teaching licentiousness attaches rather to the later
followers of Basilides than to himself or his son Isidorus (Clem.
Alex. Stromal. III. cap. 1).
Basilides wrote a Commentary on
the Gospel in 24 books (Exefeticx), of which the 23rd is quoted
by Clement of Alexandria (S:romat. IV. cap. 12), and against
which Agrippa Castor wrote a refutation.
Origen (Horn. i. in
Lucam.) says that Basilides wrote a Gospel bearing his own
See Routh. Rell. Sacr. I. p. 85 ; V. p. 106 : Westcott,
name.
History oj Canon of N. T. :v. f 3.
8 "The doctrines of Valentinus arc described fully hy Irenasus
(I. cap. i.), from whom S. Cyril takes this account.
Valentinus,
and Basilides, and Bardesanes, and Harmonius, and those of their
company admit Christ's conception and birth of the Virgin, but
say that God the Word received no addition from the Virgin, but
made a sort of passage through her, as through a tube, and made
use of a phantom in appearing to men." (Theodoret, Epist. 145.)

LECTURE VI.

being thirty years old 9.
But even if He was
baptized when thirty years old, what sort of
demonstration is this from the thirty years ?
Are there then five gods, because He brake
five loaves among five thousand ? Or because
he had twelve Disciples, must there also be
twelve gods ?

18. And even this is still little compared with
the impieties which follow. For the last of the
deities being, as he dares to speak, both male
and female, this, he says, is Wisdom
What
impiety! F'or the Wisdom of God1 is Christ His
Only-begotten Son : and he by his doctrine de
graded the Wisdom of God into a female ele
ment, and one of thirty, and the last fabrication.
He also says that Wisdom attempted to behold
the first God, and not bearing His brightness
fell from heaven, and was cast out of her thirtieth
place. Then she groaned, and of her groans
begat the Devil 3, and as she wept over her fall
made of her tears the sea.
Mark the impiety.
For of Wisdom how is the Devil begotten, and
of prudence wickedness, or of light darkness?
He says too that the Devil begat others, some
the world : and that the
of whom created
Christ came down in order to make mankind
revolt from the Maker of the world.

19. But hear whom they say Christ Jesus to
be, that thou mayest detest them yet more.
For they say that after Wisdom had been cast
down, in order that the number of the thirty
might not be incomplete, the nine and twenty
Aeons contributed each a little
part, and
formed the Christ ♦ : and they say that He also
Can anything be
is both male and female5.
more impious
Anything more
wretched?
I am describing their delusion to
thee, in order that thou mayest hate them the
more
Shun, therefore, their impiety, and do
not even give greeting to 6 a man of this kind,

this?

than

» Luke in. 23.
• 1 Cor. i. 34.
1 Irenzeus I. ii. 2.
3 Irerucus, 1. c, and Hippolytus, who gives an elaborate ac
count of the doctrines of V.dentinus (L. VI. capp. xvi. -xxxii.),
both represent Sophia. " Wisdom," as giving birth not to Satan,
but to a shapeless abortion, which was the origin of matter.
According to Irerueus (I. iv. 2), Achamoth, the enlhymesis of
Sophia, gave birth to the Demiurge, and " from her tears all that
isofa liqui.l nature was formed."
In Tertullian's Treatise against the Valeutintans chap, xxii.,
Achamoth is said as by Cyril to have given birth to Satan : but
in chap, xxiii. Satan seems to be identified (or interchanged) with
the Llcmiurge.
* Hie account in Irenaeus (I. ii. 6) is rather different: "The
whole Pleroma of the Aeons, with one design and desire, and with
the concurrence of the Christ and the Holy Spirit, their Father
also setting the seal of His approval on their conduct, brought
together whatever each one had in himself of the greatest beauty
and preciousncss ; and uniting all these contributions so as skil
fully to blend the whole, they produced, to the honour and glory of
Bythus, a being of most perfect beauty, the very star of the
rleroma, and its perfect Irujt, namely Jesus."
lertullian, Against the I'aUntinians* chap. 12, gives a sar
castic description of this strange doctrine, deriving his facts
(chap. 5) from Justin, Miltiadcs, "Irenxus, that very exact
inquirer into all doctrines," and Proculus.
5 This statement does not agree wilh Irenxus (I. viL 1), who
<*ys that the Valcntinians represented the Saviour, that is Jesus,
as becoming the bridegroom of Achamoth or Sophia.
6 a John io, 11 : " Neither bid him God speed" (A.V.) : "give
tun no greeting "(R.V).

lest thou have fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness i : neither make curious in
quiries, nor be willing to enter into conversa
tion with them.

20. Hate all heretics, but especially him
who is rightly named after mania 8, who arose
not long ago in the reign of Probus 9.
For the
delusion began full- seventy years ago1, and
there are men still living who saw him with
their very eyes.
But hate him not for this,
that he lived a short time ago ; but because of
his impious doctrines hate thou the worker
of wickedness, the receptacle of all filth, who
gathered up the mire of every heresy3.
For
aspiring to become pre-eminent among wicked
men, he took the doctrines of all, and having
combined them into one heresy filled with blas
phemies and all iniquity, he makes havoc of
the Church, or rather of those outside the
Church, roaming about like a lion and devour
Heed not their fair speech, nor their
ing.
they are serpents,
supposed humility :
a generation of vipers'*.
Judas too said Hail!
Master*, even while he was betraying Him.
Heed not their kisses, but beware of their
venom.

for

21. Now, lest I seem to accuse him without
reason, let me make a digression to tell who
this Manes is, and in part what he teaches : for
all time would fail to describe adequately the
whole of his foul teaching.
But for help in
time if needs, store up in thy memory what I
have said to former hearers, and will repeat to
those now present, that they who know not
may learn, and they who know may be
reminded.
Manes is not of Christian origin,
God forbid ! nor was he like Simon cast out of
the Church, neither himself nor the teachers
who were before him.
For he steals other
men's wickedness, and makes their wickedness
his own : but how and in what manner thou
must hear.

22. There was in Egypt one Scythianus6, a

7 Fplies, v. ii.
8 EuseUtis in his brief notice of the Manichean heresy {Hist.
Eccits. vii. 31) plays, like S. Cyril, upon the name Manes as well
suited to a madman.
9 Marcus Aurelius Probus, Emperor A.D. 276-282. from being
an obscure Illyrian soldier came to be universally esteemed the
best and noblest of the Roman Emperors.
1 Routh {R. S. V. p. 12J comes to the conclusion that the
famous disputation between Manes and Arche'atls took place
Accordingly these Lec
between July and December. A.D. 277.
tures, being^ " full 70 years" later, could not have been delivered
before the Spring of A.D. 348.
a Leo the Great {Serm. xv. cap. 4) speaks of the madness of
the later Munichecs as including all errors and impieties: "all
profanity of Paganism, all blindness of the carnal Jews, the illicit
secrets of the magic art, the sacrilege and blasphemy of all
heresies, flowed together in that sect as into a sort of cess pool
of all filth." Leo summoned those whom they called the "elect."
both men and women, before an assembly of Ilishops and Pres
byters, and obtained from these witnesses a full account of the
exccrablepractices of the sect, in which, as he declares, " their law
is lyinp, their religion the devil, their sacrifice obscenity."
3 Matt. iii. 7.
4 lb. xxvi. 49.
6 Cyril takes his account of Manes from the " Acta Archelai
et Manetis Disputationis," of which Routh has edited the Latin

S Heu. iv. 16.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

Saracen? by birth, having nothing in common
either with Judaism or with Christianity. This
man, who dwelt at Alexandria and imitated
the life of Aristotle 8, composed four books °,
one called a Gospel which had not the acts of
Christ, but the mere name only, and one other
ailed the book of Chapters, and a third of
Mysteries, and a fourth, which they circulate
now, the Treasure
This man had a disciple,
But when Scythianus
Terebinthus by name.
purposed to come into Judaea, and make havoc
of the land, the Lord smote him with a deadly
disease, and stayed the pestilence

to

'23. But Terebinthus, his disciple in this
wicked error, inherited his money and books
and heresy 3, and came to Palestine, and be
coming known and condemned in Judaea « he
resolved
pass into Persia : but lest he
should be recognised there also by his name,
he changed it and called himself Buddas s.
However, he found adversaries there also in
the priests of Mithras6 : and being confuted in
the discussion of many arguments and con
troversies, and at last hard pressed, he took
Then having
refuge with a certain widow.
gone up on the housetop, and summoned the
daemons of the air, whom the Manichees to
this day invoke over their abominable cere
mony of the fig?, he was smitten of God, and
cast down from the housetop, and expired :
and so the second beast was cut off.

24. The books, however, which were the
records of his impiety, remained ; and both
these and his money the widow irfherited.
And having rleither kinsman nor any other

translation, together with the Fragments of the Greek preserved
by Cyril in this Lecture and by Epiphanius.
There is an English
translation of the whole in Clark's "Ante-Nicene Christian Li
brary."
7 The Saracens are mentioned by both Pliny and Ptolemy.
See Diet, ofCreek and Roman Geography.
8 There is no mention of Aristotle in the Acta Arctulai, but
Scythianus is stated (cap. li.) to have founded the sect in the
lime of the Apostles, and to have derived his duality of Gods
from Pythagoras, and to have learned the wisdom of the Egyp
tians.
9 These four books are stated by Archelaus {Acta, cap. lii.),
to have been written for Manes by his disciple Terebinthus.
1 In allusion to this name the history of the Disputation is
called (Acta, cap. i.) " The true Treasure."
a The true reading of this sentence, rrpoaipovutvov rhv 2kv-
$tav6i>, instead ot roc irpdcipn/xei'oi'
has been restored by
Clcopas from the MS. in the Archiepiscopal library at Jerusalem.
This reading agrees with the statement in Acta Archel. cap. li. :
"Scythianus thought of making an excursion into Judaea, with
the purpose of meeting all those who had a reputation there as
teachers; but it came to pass that he suddenly departed this life,
without having been able to make any progress."
3 This statement agrees with the reading of the Vatican MS.
of the Acta Arckelai, *' omnibus quascunque ejus lucrum congregalis."
4 In the Acta there is no mention of Palestine, but only that
he " set out for Babylonia, a province which is now held by the
Persians."
5 Clem. Alex. (Strom. \. 15): " Some also of the Indians obey
the precepts of Uoutta, aud honour him as a god for his extra
ordinary sanctity."
6 C(. Acta Arch. cap. lii.: *'A certain Parcus, however,
a prophet, and Labdacus, son of Mithras, charged him with
faUehood." On the names Parcus and I-abdacus, see Dit .'. Ckr.
Bio/rr., *' Barcabbas," and on the Magian worship of the Sun-god
Mithras, see Ra.Oiusou (Herodot. Vol. I. p. 426).

7 Sec below, | 3>

in

the

son

thinking

educated as a

his will, that through

friend, she determined to buy with the money
a boy named Cubricus 8 : him she adopted
and
learning
of the Persians, and thus sharpened an evil
weapon against mankind.
So Cubricus, the
vile slave, grew up in the midst of philo
sophers, and on the death of the widow
inherited both the books and the money.
Then, lest the name of slavery might be a
reproach, instead of Cubricus he called him
self Manes, which in the language of the
Persians signifies discourse'. For as he thought
himself something of a disputant, he surnamed
himself Manes, as it were an excellent master
But though he contrived for
of discourse.
himself an honourable title according to the
language of the Persians, yet the providence of
God caused him to become a self-accuser even
against
to
honour himself in Persia, he might proclaim
himself among the Greeks by name a maniac.
25. He dared too to say that he was the
Paraclete, though it
is written, But whoso
ever shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost,
He committed blas
hath no forgiveness'1.
phemy therefore by saying that he was the
Holy Ghost :
let him that communicates
with those heretics see with whom he is en
rolling himself.
The slave shook the world,
since by three things the earth is shaken, ami
the fourth it cannot bear,-if a slave become a
king2. Having come into public he now began
to promise things above man's power.
The
son of the King of the Persians was sick, and
a multitude of physicians were in attendance :
but Manes promised, as if he were a godly
man, to cure him by prayer.
With the de
parture of the physicians, the life of the child
departed: and the man's impiety was detected.
So the would-be philosopher was a prisoner,
being cast into prison not for reproving the
king in the cause of truth, not for destroying
the idols, but for promising to save and lying,
or rather, if the truth must be told, for com
mitting murder.
For the child who might
have been saved by medical treatment, was
murdered by this man's driving away the
physicians, and killing him by want of treat
ment

26. Now as there are very many wicked
things which I tell thee of him, remember first
his blasphemy, secondly his slavery (not that
slavery is a disgrace, but that his pretending
to be free-born, when he was a slave, was
wicked), thirdly, the falsehood of his promise,
fourthly, the murder of the child, and fifthly,

• Cf. Acta Arch. cap. liii. "A boy about Mven years old,
named Corbicius."
9 See a different account in Did. Chr. Biojrr., " Manes."
« Mark iii. 39.

• Prov. xxx. ai, 12.

LECTURE VI.

the disgrace of the imprisonment. And there
was not only the disgrace of the prison, but
also the flight from prison. For he who called
himself the Paraclete -and champion of the
truth, ran away : he was no successor of Jesus,
who readily went to the Croas, but this man
was the reverse, a runaway.
Moreover, the
King of the Persians ordered the keepers of
the prison to be executed : so Manes was the
cause of the child's death through his vain
boasting, and of the gaolers' death through his
flight.
Ought then he, who shared the guilt
of murder, to be worshipped ? Ought he not
to have followed the example of Jesus, and
said, If yt seek Me, let these go their way*!
Ought he not to have said, like Jonas, Take
me, and cast me into the sea : for this storm is
because of me* 1

27. He escapes from the prison, and comes
into Mesopotamia: but there Bishop Archelaus,
a shield of righteousness, encounters him ■>
:
and having accused him before philosophers as
judges, and having assembled an audience
of Gentiles, lest if Christians gave judgment,
the judges might be thought to shew favour,-
Tell us what thou preachest, said Archelaus
to Manes. And he, whose mouth was as an
open sepulchre6, began first with blasphemy
against the Maker of all things,saying, The God
of the Old Testament is the author of evils,
as He says of Himself, I am a consumingfiret.
* But the wise Archelaus undermined his blas
phemous argument by saying, " If the God of
the Old Testament, as thou sayest, calls Him
self a fire, whose Son is He who saith, I came
to sendfire on the earth i? If thou findcst fault
with Him who saith, The Lord killeth, and
maketh alive why dost thou honour Peter, who
raised up Tabitha, but struck Sapphira dead ?
If again thou findest fault, because He pre
pared fire, wherefore dost thou not find fault
with Him who saith, Depart from Me into
everlastingfire1 f If thou findest fault with Him
who saith, / am God tlmt make peace, and create
evil2, explain how Jesus saith, / came not to
send peace but a sword*.
Since both speak
alike, of two things one, either both are good,
because of their agreement, or if Jesus is
blameless in so speaking, why blamest thou
Him that saith the like in the Old Testa
ment ? "

28. Then Manes answers him : " And what

* Jonah l. n.

3 John xviii. 8.
5 The account of the discussion in this and the two following
chapters is not now found in the Latin Version of the " Dis
putation," but it regarded by Dr. Routh as having been derived
by Cyril from some different copies of the Greek. The last para
graph of I 29, "These mysteries, etc.," is evidently a caution
addressed to the hearers by Cyril himself (Routh, KeU. Sac. V.
■99X« Ps. t. 9.

7 Deut. ir. 14.
» Matt. xxv. 41.

• Luke mi. 49.
' la. xlv. 7.

9 1 Sam. ii. 6.
3 Matt. x. 34.

sort of God causes blindness ?
For it is Paul
who saith, In whom the God of this world hath
blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest
the light of the Gospel should shine utifo them
But Archelaus made a good retort, saying,
" Read a little before : But if our Gospel is
veiled, it is veiled in them that are perishing s.
Seest thou that in them that are perishing it
is veiled? For it is not rights gii>e the things
which are holy unto the dogs6.
Again, Is it
only the God of the Old Testament that hath
blinded the minds of them that believe not?
Hath not Jesus Himself said, For this cause
speak I unto them in parables, that seeing
they may not see i? Was it from hating them
that He wished them not to see? Or because
of their unworthiness, since their eyes they had
closed*. For where there is wilful wickedness,
there is also a withholding of grace: for to him
that hath shall be given; but from him that
hath not shall be taken even that which he
seemeth to have

the

blind

29. " But if some are right in their interpre
tation, we must say as follows 1 (for it
is no
unworthy expression)-If indeed He blinded
the thoughts of them that believe not, he
blinded them for a good purpose, that they
might look with new sight on what is good.
For he said not, He blinded their soul, but,
the thoughts of them that believe not 2. And the
meaning is something of this kind :
' Blind the
lewd thoughts of the lewd, and the man is
saved :
grasping and ' rapacious
thought of the robber, and the man is saved.'
But wilt thou not understand it* thus? Then
there is yet another interpretation. The sun
also blinds those whose sight is dim : and they
whose eyes are diseased are hurt by the light
and blinded.
Not that the sun's nature is to
blind, but that the substance of the eyes is
incapable of seeing.
like manner un
believers being diseased in their heart cannot
look upon the radiance of the Godhead.
Nor
hath he said, 'He hath blinded their thoughts,
that they should not hear the Gospel : ' but,
that the light of the glory of the Gospel of our
Lordflsus Christ should not shine unto them.
For to hear the Gospel is permitted to all : but
the glory of the Gospel is reserved for Christ's

In

5 3 Cor. iv.

9 lb. xxv. 29 : Luke viii. 18.

4 a Cor. iv. 4, roijpara, M thoughts."
6 Matt. vii. 6.
7 Mart.xiii.13. Both A.V. and R.V. follow the better reading:
"because seeing they see not, &c."
* Matt. xiii. 15.
(
* Instead of the reading ol the Benedictine and earlier editions,
et 8e 6«i jcai wf nwt efiryovvrcu touto ••vetr, the MSS. Roe and
Casaubon combine 5ei xat «*c into the one word oucatuit, which is
Something, however, is stilt wanted
probably the right reading.
to complete the construction, and Petrus Siculus (fire. A.D. 870)
who quotes the passage in his History 0/the Manichees, boldly
cunjectures ear* xai ovrtu? eiiretv. A simpler emendation would
which DOth
be «t Or GUCOLuK TIVIS (Yrjyou'l'Tm , 6et TOVTO ttl7t(V
completes the construction and explains the reading 8ft xai «c.

3 rowiara, a Cor. iv. 4.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

true children only.
Therefore the Lord spake
in parables to those who could not hears : but
to the Disciples he explained the parables in
private4 : for the brightness of the glory is for
those who have been enlightened, the blinding
for them that believe not."
These mysteries,
which the Church now explains to thee who
art passing out of the class of Catechumens, it
For
is not the custom to explain to heathen.
to a heathen we do not explain the mysteries
concerning Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, nor
before Catechumens do we speak plainly of
the mysteries : but many things we often speak
in a veiled wav, that the believers who know
may understand, and they who know not may
get no hurt 5.

30. By such and many other arguments the
serpent was overthrown : thus did Archelaus
wrestle with Manes and threw him.
Again,
he who had fled from prison flees from this
place also : and having run • away from his
an! agonist, he comes to a very poor village,
like the serpent in Paradise when he left Adam
and came to Eve.
But the good shepherd
Archelaus taking forethought for his sheep,
when he heard of his flight, straightway hast
ened with all speed in search of the wolf.
And when Manes suddenly saw his adversary,
he rushed out and fled :
it was however his
For the officers of the King of
last flight.
Persia searched everywhere, and caught the
fugitive : and the sentence, which he ought to
have received in the presence of Archelaus,
is passed upon him by the king's officers. This
Manes, whom his own disciples worship, is ar
rested and brought before the king. The king
reproached him with his falsehood and his flight :
poured scorn upon his
condition,
avenged the murder of his child, and con
demned him also for the murder of the
gaolers : he commands him to be flayed after
the
And while the rest
of his body was given over for food of wild
beasts, his skin, the receptacle of his vile
mind, was hung up before the gates like a
sack6. He that called himself the Paraclete
and professed to know the future, knew* not his
own flight and capture.

fashion.

Persian

slavish

disciples,
31. This man has had three
Thomas, and Baddas, and Hermas.
Let none
read the Gospel according to Thomas 1 : for it is
the work not of one of the twelve Apostles, but

4 Mark iv. 34.

3 Matt. xiii. 13.
5 Sec the note at the end of the Prucatechesis.
6 Disput. | 55. Compare the account of Manes in Socrates,
Ecclcs. Hist. I. 22, in this series.
7 The Gospel of Thomas, an account of the Childhood ofJesus,
is extant in three forms, two in Gieek and one in Latin : these are
all translated in Clark's Ante-Niccne Library.
The work is
wrongly attributed by Cyril to a disciple of Manes, being men
tioned long before by Hippolytus(AV_/>/ra//0w ofalt Hertsie^ V. 2)
and by Origen {Horn, u in Lncani) : " There is extant also the
Gospel according to Thomas."

of one of the three wicked disciples of Manes.
Let none associate with the soul-destroying
Manicheans, who by decoctions of chaff coun
terfeit the sad look of fasting, who speak evil
of the Creator of meats, and greedily devour
the daintiest, who teach that the man who
plucks up this or that herb is changed into it
For if he who crops herbs or any vegetable is
changed into the same, into how many will
husbandmen and the tribe of gardeners be
changed 8? The gardener, as we see, has used
his sickle against so many : into which then is
he
are
rdiculous, and fraught with their own con
The same man, being
demnation and shame !
the shepherd of a flock, both sacrifices a sheep
and kills a wolf.
is he
changed ? Many men both net fishes and
lirne birds : into which then are they trans
formed ?

Into what then

changed ?

doctrines

Verily

their

32. Let those children of sloth, the Mani
cheans, make answer; who without labouring
themselves eat up the labourers' fruits : who
welcome with smiling faces those who bring
them their food, and return curses instead of
blessings.
For when a simple person brings
them anything, "Stand outside a while," saith
he, "and I will bless thee." Then having
taken the bread into his hands (as those who
have repented and left them have confessed),
" I did not make thee," says the Manichee to
the bread : and sends up curses against the '
Most High ; and curses him that made it, and
If thou hatest the
so eats what was made
smiling
food, why didst thou
countenance on him that brought it to thee ?
If thou art thankful to the bringer, why dost
thou utter thy blasphemy to God, who created
and made it ?
So again he says, " I sowed
thee not : may he be sown who sowed thee !
I reaped thee not with a sickle : may he be
reaped who reaped thee !
I baked thee not
with fire : may he be baked who baked thee ! "
A fine return for the kindness !

look

with

33. These are great faults, but still small in
Their Baptism I

comparison with the rest.
dare not describe before men and women
I dare not say what they distribute to their
wretched communicants 3. . . . Truly we pollute

8 In the Disputation, I 9, Turbo describes these transforma
tions :
11 Reapers must be transformed into hay, or beans, or
barley, or corn, or vegetables, that they may be reaped and CUL
Again if any one cats bread, he must become bread, and be eaten.
If one kills
If one kills a chicken, he will be a chicken himself.
a mouse, he also will be a mouse."
9 See Turbo's confession, Disput. J 9 : " And when they are
going to eat bread, they first pray, speaking thus to the bread :
' I neither reaped thee, nor ground thee, nor kneaded thee, nor
cast thee into the oven : but another did these things, and brought
thee to me, and I am not to blame for eating thee.' And when he
has said this to himself, he says to the Catechumen, ' I have
prayed for thee,' and so he goes away."
1 On the rites of Baptism and Eucharist employed by the
Manichces, see Diet. Chr. biogr., Manicheans.
3 The original runs : Ov toA/m* circir, tin <M0aTTovTcc riir

LECTURE VI.

our mouth in speaking of these things.
Are
the heathen more detestable than these ? Are
the Samaritans more wretched ?
Are Jews
more impious ? Are fornicators more impure 3?
But the Manichee sets these offerings in the
midst of the altar as he considers it +. And
dost thou, O man, receive instruction from
such a mouth ? On meeting this man dost thou
greet him at all with a kiss ? To Fay nothing
of his other impiety, dost thou not flee from
the defilement, and from men worse than pro
fligates, more detestable than any prostitute ?
34. Of these things the Church admonishes
and teaches thee, and touches mire, that thou
mayest
not be bemired : she tells of the
wounds, that thou mayest not be wounded.
But for thee it
is enough merely to know
them : abstain from learning by experience.
God thunders, and we all tremble ; and they
God lightens, and we all bow
blaspheme.
earth ; and they have their
down to
blasphemous
heavens 5.
sayings about the
These things are written in the books of the
Manichees.
These tilings we ourselves have
read, because we could not believe those who
told of them : yes, for the sake of your salvation
we have closely inquired into their perdition.

the

35. But may the Lord deliver us from such
delusion : and may there be given to you a
hatred against the serpent, that as they lie in
wait for the heel, so you may trample on their
head.
What
agreement can there be between our state
and theirs ?
What communion hath light with
darkness6 1 What hath the majesty of the
Church to do with the abomination of the

Remember ye what

say.

* oC if./i .s

Miano/itv aAijeVc to trrdua K.r.A.

iTyaoa, SiSoaai tois uflAioic. Sti (rvra^ffnv Si aovov 6i}\ovaQta.
aroptc yap Ta iy Ton ivinrvtaaaoLi ivdvueitrdtuiriy, Kai yvyatKts ra
fr a^Vropots.
3 O fliv yap vopyrviras, vpbs piav itpay S iiridvuiav TfAei T17V
wpa£tf KEiTaytputrKtup Si rrjs irpa£cwc a>s uiayfaif olSt AourpoO
rwiStoutvot, Kai yiyuo-xei ttjs irpafeut to uvtrapoy.
'O Si Majavaioc 6v<Tnumjpiov pitrav, 0$ youi^et, Tt8ri<rt raura, Kai uiaivei
»a. rb aroaa Kai ttjv y\i*Tray. irapa TOtovrov tnoaartK, ivSpwirt
K.f.A.
1. The Manichees boasted of their superiority to
the Pagans in not worshipping God with attars, temples, images,
Yet
victims, or incense (August, contra Faustum XX. cap. 15).
they used the names, as Augustine affirms [i.e. cap. 18): " Never
theless 1 wish you would tell me why you call all those things
which you approve in your own case by these names, temple, altar,
■acririce."
vAwcrtroc.
Iifo~ovc Acyct wfpi TOv irarpbc avroC, 'Darts Toy ijAtOf avrov
WTc'AArt cirt otKatovc Kai aStKovc, Kai |3 >, \>i t'-i jroyifpovc Kai
•yavoiic. Kfvctrot Afyovo'ti', im ot vrroi if (pwrucijf p.artac yiwrrai, Kai toA/iwo"i Acyetp, OTt <o~Tt* Tte napStyoi iv ovpayu rvticijv'
arri ytavitrKov tvetoovs, Kai Kara Thy tiuc KauijAuy rj Avkwv Kaipbv,
rove rqi aivxpat imOvaias Katpovc i\9ir, Kai Kara ri)v tov xciuwybt Katpoi', aaytotSiti avrov twirp*xtltf 7ll irap&Vvoi, Kai ri^y uiy
favytiv $ao~i, top Si etriTprj* tr, flra iwtTpi\ovra ISpovy, airb
it Ttuy iSpuraty aoTOv ftpat Toy vtroy. Taura y«'ypairr«4 iy Toic
rue Uavi^aiw p\0Atotf" ravra i)a*is aviyvwatv, K.T.A.

5 KaKttrot wrpt ovpavatv rac ov(r$ijpov«

cjgovtri

• t Cor. vi. 14.

Manichees ? Here is order, here is discipline
here is majesty, here is purity: here even to look
upon a woman to lust after herB is condem
nation. Here is marriage with sanctity », here
stedfast continence, here virginity in honour
like unto the Angels : here partaking of food
with thanksgiving, here gratitude to the Creator
of the world.
Here the Father of Christ is
worshipped ■ here are taught fear and trem
bling before Him who sends the rain : here we
ascribe glory to Him who makes the thunder
and the lightning.

36. Make thou thy fold with the sheep : flee
from the wolves : depart not from the Church.
Hate those also who have ever been suspected
in such matters : and unless in time thou
perceive their repentance, do not rashly trust
thyself among them. The truth of the Unity
of God has been delivered to thee :
learn
Be an
to distinguish the pastures of doctrine.
approved banker', holding fast that which is
good, abstainingfrom every form of evil*. Or if
thou hast ever been such as they, recognise
and hate thy delusion.
For there is a way of
salvation, if thou reject the vomit, if thou from
thy heart detest it, if thou depart from them,
not with thy hps only, but with thy soul also :
if thou worship the Father of Christ, the God
of the Law and the Prophets, if thou acknow
ledge the Good and the Just to be one and the
same God J. And may He preserve you all,
guarding you from falling or stumbling, stablished in the Faith, in Christ Jesus our Lord,
Amen.
to Whom be glory for ever and ever.

See note on Introductory Lect. I 4.

7 Cr. eiricrnifii).
« Matt. v. 28.
9 o-tuyoTaro* is the reading of the chief MSS. But the printed
editions have trtayorqros. comparing it with such phrases as trroua
a0«oritros (vi. 15). and uerdvota nje 7&tr>]ptac (xiv. 17).
1 This saying is quoted three times in the Clementine Homilies
Sec Horn. II. | 51 ; III. { 50; XVIII.
as spoken by our Lord.
§20: "Every man who wishes to be saved must become, as the
Teacher said, a judge of the books written to try us. For thus He
spake : Btcomt experienced bankers. Now the need of bankers
arises irom the circumstance that the spurious is mixed up with
the genuine."
On the same saying, quoted as Scripture in the Apostolic Con
stitutions (II. H 36), Coteleritis suggests that in oral tradition,
or in some Apocr>phal book, the proverb was said to come from
the Old Testament, and was added by some transcriber as a gloss
in the margin oi Matt, xxv. 27, or Luke xix. 23.
Diotnsius of
Alexandria, Epist. VII., speaks of " the Aposlolic word, which
thus urges all who are endowed with greater virtue, ' He ye skillul
money-changers,' " reicrring apparently as here to 1 Thess. v. 21,
23, "try all things, &c." (Sec Euseb. £.//. VII. ch. 6 in this
series: Suicer. 'J Aesaurus, 1'pant^iTijs : and Rcsch. (Afta/ha,
PP- "33-239 )
a 1 Thess. v. at, 22.
3 Compare f 13 ol this Lecture, where Cyril seems to refer
especially to the heresy of Manes, as described' in the DuAMt*tiw
Archelai, cap. 6: "If you are desirous of being instructed in the
faith of Manes, hear it briefly from me. That man worships two
gods, unbegotten, self-originate, eternal, opposed one to the other.
The one he represents as good, and the other as evil, naming th.
one Light, and the other Darkness."

LECTURE VII.

The Father.

Ephesians iii. 14, 15.

For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father, .

.

. of whom allfatherhood in heaven and

earth is named, 6rc.

1. Of God as the sole Principle we have
said enough to you yesterday1 : by "enough"
I mean, not what is worthy of the subject, (for
to reach that is utterly impossible to mortal
nature), but as much as was granted to our
infirmity.
I traversed also the bye-paths of
the manifold error of the godless heretics :
but now let us shake off their foul and soulpoisoning doctrine, and remembering what
relates to them, not to our own hurt, but to
our greater detestation of them, let us come
bick to ourselves, and receive the saving doc
trines of the true Faith, connecting the dignity
of Fatherhood with that of the Unity, and be
lieving in One God the Father : for we must
not only believe in one God ; but this also let
us devoutly receive, that He is the Father
of the Only-begotten, our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. For thus shall we raise our thoughts
higher than the Jews', who admit indeed by
their doctrines that there is One God, (for
what if they often denied even this by their
idolatries ?) ; but that He is also the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, they admit not ; being
of a contrary mind to their own Prophets, who
in the Divine Scriptures affirm, The Lord said
unto me, Thou art My Son, this day have 1 be
gotten thee*. And to this day they rage, and
gather themselves together against the Lord,
and against His Anointed*, thinking that it is
possible to be made friends of the Father
apart from devotion towards the Son, being ig
norant that no man cometh unto the Father but
by s the Son, who saith, / am the Door, and
/ am the Way6. He therefore that refuseth
the Way which leadeth to the Father, and he
that denieth the Door, how shall he be deemed

1 See Lecture VI. j, and 5.
' "In Athanasius, Qiuestio i. eui Antiochum, torn. II. p. 331,
Monarchia is opposed to Polytheism :
' It we worship One God, it
is manifest that we agree with the Jews in believing in a Mon
archia : but if we worship three gods, it is evident that we follow
the Greeks by introducing Polytheism, instead of piously wor
shipping One Only God.' " (Suicer, Thesaurus, MoyapWa.)
* lb. x. 9.

5 John xiv. 6.

3 Ps. ii. 7.

4 lb. ii. 2.

worthy of entrance unto God? They contra
dict also what is written in the eighty-eighth
Psalm, He shall call Me, Thou art my Father,
my God, and the helper of my salvation. And
L will make him my first-born, high among the
kings of the earth ?.
For if they should insist
that these things are said of David or Solomon
or any of their successors, let them shew how
the throne of him, who is in their judgment
described in the prophecy, is as the days of
heaven, and as the sun before God, and as the
moon established for ever8. And how is it also
that they are not abashed at that which is
written. From the womb before the morning-star
have I begotten thee 9; also this, He shall endure
with the sun, and before the moon, from genera
tion to generation
To refer these passages to
a man is a proof of utter and extreme insen
sibility.

3. Let the Jews, however, since they so
will, suffer their usual disorder of unbelief, both
But let us
in these and the like statements.
adopt the godly doctrine of our Faith, worship
ping one God the Father of the Christ, (for to
deprive Him, who grants to all the gilt of gene
ration, of the like dignity would be impious) :
and let us believe in One God the Father,
in order that, before we touch upon our teach
ing concerning Christ, the faith concerning the
Only-begotten may be implanted in the soul
of the hearers, without being at all interrupted
by the intervening doctrines concerning the
Father.

4. For the name of the Father, with the
very utterance of the
suggests the
thought of the Son : as in like manner one
who names the Son thinks straightway of the
Father also". For if a Father, He is certainly

title,

8 vv. 29. 36, 37.

7 Ps. lxxxix. 26, 27.
9 Ps. ex. 3: " Krom the womb of the morning thou bast the
dew of thy youth" (R.V.).
3 Compare Athanasius (de Senttntia Dionysii, i 17): 11 Each
of the names I have mentioned is inseparable and indivisible from
I spoke of the Father, and before bringing in the
that next to it.

1 Ps. lxxii. 5.

LECTURE VII.

the Father of a Son ; and if a Son, certainly
the Son of a Father.
Lest therefore from our
speaking thus, in One God, the Father Al
mighty, Maker of heaven and earth, and
of all things visible and invisible, and from
our then adding this also, and in One Lord
Jesus Christ, any one should irreverently sup
pose that the Only-begotten is second in rank
to heaven and earth,-for this reason before
naming them we named God the Father,
that in thinking of the Father we might at the
same time think also of the Son : for between
the Son and the Father no being whatever
comes.

5. God then is- in an improper sense' the
Father of many, but by nature and in truth
of One only, the Only-begotten Son, our Lord
Jesus Christ; not having attained in course
of time to being a Father, but being ever the
Not that being
Father of the Only-begotten *.
without a Son before, He has since by change
of purpose become a Father : but before every
substance and every intelligence, before times
and all ages, God hath the dignity of Father,
magnifying Himself in this more than in His
other dignities ; and having become a Father,
not by passion 5, or union, not in ignorance, not
by effluence 6, not by diminution, not by altera
tion, for every good gift and every peiject gift is
from above, coming down from the Father of
lights, with whom can be no variation, neither
shadow of turning''.
Perfect Father, He begat
a perfect Son, and delivered all things to Hiin
who is begotten : (for all things, He saith, are
delivered unto Me of My Father6:) and is
honoured by the Only- begotten : for, I honour
My Father 9, saith the Son ; and again, Even as
I have kept My Father's commandments, and

Son, I designated Him also in the Father.
I brought in the Son,
and even it
I had not previously mentioned the Kather, in any
wise He would have been presupposed in the Son."
3 naravpnjTiicwc. A technical term in Grammar, applied to
the use of a word in a derived or metaphor ical sense
Sec Aris
totle's description of the various kinds of metaphor, Poet, f xxi.
7-16.
The opposite to ieaTaxpncrnic&>s is Kvpi'cus, as used in
a parallel passage by Athanasius. Oratio i. contra Arianos, t 21
fin. " It belongs to the Godhead alone, that the Father is properly
(«vpt'w«) Father, and the Son properly Son."
* "And in Them, and Them only, does it hold, that the
Father is ever Father, and the Son ever Son." (Athan.. as above.)
The importance at
5 Compare vi. 6: 6 yeynj-'tic diraftuc
tached to the assertion of a " passionless generation* arose from
the objections offered by Eusebius of Nicomedia and others to
the word ojioovtrtoc when proposed by Constautine at Nioea.
We learn from Eusebius of Carsarea [Epist. ad sua' parweitr
k.wiaes, I 4) that the Emperor himself explained that the word
was used ''not in the sense of the affections (rra0n) of bodies,"
because "the immaterial, and intellectual, and incorporeal nature
could not be the subject of any corporeal affection."
Again, in
f 7, Eusebius admits that " there are grounds for saying that the
Son is 'one in essence' with the Father, not in the way of bodies,
nor like mortal beings, for He is not such by division of essence,
or by severance, no, nor by any affection, or alteration, or chang
ing of the Father's essence and power."
* Athanasius [Expos. J-'idei, 81): " Word not pronounced nor
mental, nor an effluence of the Perfect, nor a dividing of the
passionless nature."
Also (de Decrrtis, $ ii).'_ ''God being
without parts is Father of the Son without partition or passion ;
for there is neither effluence ol the Immaterial, nor influx from
w'thont, as among men."

(See the next note )

8 Matt. xi. 37.

9 John riii. 49.

7 James i. t7-

abide in His love *.
Therefore we also say like
the Apostle, Blessed be the God and Father of
our LordJesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and
God of all consolation* : and, We bow our knees
unto the Father, from whom all fatherhood in
heaven and on eatin is named*: glorifying Him
with the Only-begotten: for he that denieth the
Fattier, denieth the Son also*: and again, He
that confesseth the Son, hath the Father also 5 ;
knowing thai Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory
of God the Father 6.

6. We worship, therefore, as the Father of
Christ, the Maker of heaven and earth, the
God of Abraham, Isaac, andJacob' ; to whose
honour the former temple also, over against us
here, was built.
For we shall not tolerate the
heretics who sever the Old Testament from
the New8, but shall believe Christ, who says
concerning the temple, Wist ye not that I must
be in My Father's house* 1 and again, Take
these things hence, and make not my Father's
house a house ofmerchandise1 : whereby He most
clearly confessed that the former temple in
Jerusalem was His own Father's house.
But
if any one from unbelief wishes to receive yet
more proofs as to the Father of Christ being
the same as the Maker of the world, let him
hear Him say again, Are not tit>o sparrows sold
for a farthing, and not one of them shall fall on
the ground without My Father which is in
heaven"; this also, Behold theJowls of the heaven
that they S07V not, neither do they reap, nor
gather into barns ; and your heavenly Father
feedeth them 3; and this, My Father worketh
hitherto, and I work *.

7. But lest any one from simplicity or per
verse ingenuity should suppose that Christ is
but equal in honour to righteous men, from
His saying, L ascend to My Father, and your*
is well to make this distinction
Father, it
beforehand, that the name of the Father is one,
but the power of His operation6 manifold.
And Christ Himself knowing this has spoken
unerringly, Igo to My Father, and your Father :
not saying 'to our Father,' but distinguishing,
and saying first what was proper to Himself, to
My Father, which was by nature ; then adding,
and your Father, which was by adoption.
For however high the privilege we have re
ceived of saying in our prayers, Our Father,

» a Cor. i 3.

3 Eph. iii. 14, 15.

' John xv. to,
4 1 John ii. 22 : " This is the Antichrist, even he that denieth
5 v. 33. bracketed in the A. V. as spurious, but rightly restored

the Father and the Son " (R V.).
inR.V.6 Phil. ii. ii.
9 Lulce ii. 49.
a Matt. x. 29.
3 Malt. vi. 36.
5 John xx. 27. On this text, quoted again in Cat. xi. 19, see
6 irtpyix, meaning here, the operation of God, by nature in

the three Sermons of Bishop Andrcwes On the Resurrection.
begetting His Son, by adoption in malting many sons.

Father which is in heaven :" so Origen and Athanasius.

S. Cyril instead of " your Father" writes •' my

8 Compare Lect. iv. 33.

4 John v. 17.

1 John ii. 16.

7 Ex. iii. 6.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

which art in heaven, yet the gift is of lovingkindness. For we call Him Father, not as having
been by nature begotten of Our Father which
is in heaven ; but having been transferred from
servitude to sonship by the grace of the Father,
through the Son and Holy Spirit, we are permit
ted so to speak by ineffable loving-kindness.

8. But if any one wishes to learn how we
call God "Father," let him hear Moses, the
excellent schoolmaster, saying, Did not this
thy Father Himself buy thee, and make thee, and
create thee'?
Also Esaias the Prophet, And
now, O Lord. Thou art our Father: and we
all are day, the works of Thine hands*.
For
most clearly has the prophetic gift declared
that not according to nature, but according to
God's grace, and by adoption, we call Him
Father.

9. And that thou mayest learn more exactly
that in the Divine Scriptures it is not by any
means the natural father only that is called fa
ther, hear what Paul says :-For thoughye should
have ten thousand tutors in Christ, yet have ye
not many fathers : for in Christ Jesus I begat
For Paul was father
you through the Gospel*.
of the Corinthians, not by having begotten
them after the flesh, but by having taught and
begotten them again after the Spirit.
Hear
Job also saying, I was a father of the needy1 :
for he called himself a father, not as having
begotten them all, but as caring for them.
And God's Only-begotten Son Himself, when
nailed in His flesh to the tree at the time of
crucifixion, on seeing Mary, His own Mother
according to the flesh, and John, the most
beloved of His disciples, said to him, Behold 1
thy mother, and to her, Behold I thy Son3:
teaching her the parental affection due to him 3,
and indirectly explaining that which is said in
Luke, and His father and His mother marvel
led at Him * : words which the tribe of heretics
snatch up, saying that He was begotten of a
man and a woman.
For like as Mary was
called the mother of John, because of her
parental affection, not from having given him
birth, so Joseph also was called the father of
Christ, not from having begotten Him (for he
knew her not, as the Gospel says, until she had
brought forth her first-bom Son 5), but because
of the care bestowed on His nurture.

10 Thus much then at present, in the way
of a digression, to put you in remembrance.
Let me, however, add yet another testimony in
proof that God is called the Father of men in
For when in Esaias God
an improper sense.

7 Deut. xxxii. 6.
8 Is. lxiv. 8.
* Job xxix. 16.
3 ^tAoo-roo-yta might be applied to the mutual affection of
mother and son. but the cunlexl shews that it refers here to
parental lore only; see Polybius, V. {74,5; Xenoph. Cyrop. I.
I 3. a.

■ John xix. 26, 27.

9 i Cor. it. 15.

* Luke ii. 33.

5 Matt. i. as.

is addressed thus, For Thou art our Father,
though Abraham be ignorant of us*, and Sarah
travailed not with usi, need we inquire further
on this point ? And if the Psalmist says, Let
them be troubledfrom His countenance, the Father
of thefatherless, andJudge of the widows8, is it
not manifest to all, that when God is cailed
the Father of orphans who have lately lost
their own fathers, He is so named not as
begetting them of Himself, but as caring for
them and shielding them.
But whereas God,
as we have said, is in an improper sense the
Father of men, of Christ alone He is the Father
by nature, not by adoption : and the Father
of men in time, but of Christ before all time,
as He saith, And now, O Father, glorify Thou
Me with Thine own self, with the glory which
I had with Thee before the world was °.

11. We believe then in one God the Fa
ther the Unsearchable and Ineffable, Whom no
man hath seen *, but the Only-begotten alone hath
declared Him 3.
Fur Lie which is of God, LLe
hath seen God*: whose face the Angels do
alway behold in heaven *, behold, however,
each according to the measure of his own rank.
But the undimmed vision of the Father is
reserved in
its purity for the Son with die
Holy Ghost.

12. Having reached this . point of my dis
course, and being reminded of the passages
just before mentioned, in which God was ad
dressed as the Father of men, I am greatly
For God with
amazed at men's insensibility.
unspeakable loving-kindness deigned
be
to
called the Father of men,-He in heaven, they
on earth,-and He the Maker of Eternity, they
made in time,-He who holdeth the earth
in the holloju of His hand, they upon the
earth
Yet man forsook
his heavenly Father, and said to the stock,
Thou art my father, and to the stone, Thou hast
begotten me6.
And for this reason, methinks,
the Psalmist says to mankind, Forget also thine
oivn people, and thyfather's house'', whom thou
hast chosen for a father, whom thou hast
drawn upon thyself to thy destruction.

as grasshoppers

13. And not only stocks and stones, but even
Satan himself, the destroyer of souls, have
some ere now chosen for a father ; to whom
the Lord said as a rebuke, Ye do the deeds of
yourfather 8, that is of the devil, he being the
father of men not by nature, but by fraud.

7 lb. li. 1.

« Is. Ixiii. 16.
8 Ps. Ixviii. 5.

Cyril quotes as usual from the Septuagint
( Ps. lxvii. 6), where the clause rapaxOyvovrat airb wfioauvov avrov,
answering to nothing in the Hebrew, is evidently an interpolation,
and may have crept in from a marginal quotation of Is. lxiv. 2.
1 1 Tim. it. 16.
authority is against the reading (rov dfdy) which Cyril lollows.
6 Jer. ii. 27.

9 John xvii. 5.
3 John vi. 46 : He hath seen the Father. The weight of
5 Is. xl. 12 and 22.
4 Matt, xviii. 10.
8 John viii. 41.
7 Ps. xlr. 10.

2 John i. 18.

LECTURE VII.

For like as Paul by his godly teaching came to
be called the father of the Corinthians, so the
devil is called the father of those who of their
own will consent unto him °.

For we shall not tolerate those who give a
wrong meaning to that saying, Hereby know
we the children of God, and the children of the
devil*, as if there were by nature some men to
Whereas we
be saved, and some to be lost.
come into such holy sonship not of necessity
but by choice: nor was the traitor Judas
by nature a son of the devil and of perdition ;
for certainly he would never have cast out devils
at all in the name of Christ: for Satan casteth not
out Satan *. Nor on the other hand would Paul
have turned from persecuting to preaching.
But the adoption is in our own power, as
John saith, But as many as received Him, to
them gave He power to become the children of
God, even to them that believe in His name 3.
For not before their believing, but from their
believing they were counted worthy to become
of their own choice the children of God.

14. Knowing this, therefore, let us walk
spiritually, that we may be counted worthy of
God's adoption.
For as many as are led by
the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God*.
For it profiteth us nothing to have gained the
title of Christians, unless the works also fol
low ; lest to us also it be said, Ifye were Abra
ham's children, ye would do the works of Abra
ham 5.
For if we call on Him as Father, who
without respect of persons judgeth according to
every man's work, let us pass the time of our
sojourning here in fear6, loving not the ivorld,
neither the things that are in the world : for if
any man love the world, the love of the Father is
not in him 7.
Wherefore, my beloved children,
let us by our works offer glory to our Father
■which is in heaven, that they may see our good
roorks, and glorify our Father which is in
heaven*.
Let us cast all our care upon Him,
for our Father knoweth what things we hare
need of9.

9 Ps. I. 18.
3 John i. is.
.* 1 Pet. i. 17.
• 1 Pet. v. 7 ; Matt. vi. 8.

1 1 John iii. to.
4 Rom. viii. 14.
1 1 John ii. 15.

5 John viii. 39.

• Mark iii. 33.
8 Matt. v. 16.

15.

But while honouring our heavenly
Father let us honour also the fathers of our
flesh*; since the Lord Himself hath evidently
so appointed in the Law and the Prophets,
saying, Honour thy father arid thy mother, that
it may be well with thee, and thy days shall be
long in the land2. And let this commandment
be especially observed by those here present
Children, obey
who have fathers and mothers.
your parents in all things : for this is well
pleasing to the Lord 3.
For the Lord said not,
He that loveth father or mother is not worthy
of Me, lest thou from ignorance shouldest
perversely mistake what was rightly written,
but He added, more than Me*.
For when our
fathers on earth are of a contrary mind to our
Father in heaven, then we must obey Christ's
word.
But when they put no obstacle to god
liness in our way, if we are ever carried away
by ingratitude, and, forgetting their benefits to
us, hold tlierft in contempt, then the oracle
will have place which says, He that curseth
\father or mother, let him die the death s.

1 6. The first virtue of godliness in Chris
tians is to honour their parents, to requite the
troubles of those who begat them 6, and with all
their might to confer on them what tends to
their comfort (for if we should repay them
ever so much, yet we shall never be able to
that they also may
return their gift of life
enjoy the comfort provided by us, and may
confirm us in those blessings which Jacob the
supplanter shrewdly seized ; and that our
Father in heaven may accept3 our good pur
pose, and judge us worthy to shine amid the
righteous as the sun in the kingdom of our
Father ^ : To whom be the glory, with the
Only-begotten our Saviour Jesus Christ, and
with the Holy and Life-giving Spirit, now and
ever, to all eternity.

Amen.

5 Ex. xxi. 17 ; Lev. XX. 9 ; Matt. xv. 4.

* Heb. xii. 9.
3 Col. iii. 20.
8 Dent. v. 16.
4 Matt. x. 37.
6 Compare lor the thought Euripides, Medea, 1029-1035.
7 o.v7\.yevvj\trajL. Jeremy Taylor {Ductor Dubitantium, Book
III. cap. ii. g 17) mentions several stories in which a parent is
nourished from a daughter's breast, who thus 'saves the life she
cannot give.'
8 On the change of Moods, see Jelf, Greek Grammar, % 809.
The second verb (xaroftiitrntv) expresses a wish and a consequence
which might follow, if the first (a-riipifaatv) wish be realize*.',
Cf. Herod, ix. 51.
as it probably may be.

» Matt. xiii. 43

LECTURE VIII.

Almighty.

Jeremiah xxxix. i8, 19 (Septuagint).

The Great, the strong God, Lord ofgreat Counsel, and mighty in His works, the Great God,
the Lord Almighty and ofgreat name '.

1. By believing in One God we cut off all there is nothing higher than heaven, and it
hell is deeper than the earth, He who rules
the lower regions reaches the earth also.

misbelief in many gods, using this as a shield
against Greeks, and every opposing power of
heretics ; and by adding, in One God the
Father, we contend against those of the cir
cumcision, who deny the Only-begotten Son
of God.
For, as was said yesterday, even
before explaining the truths concerning our
Lord Jesus Christ, we made it manifest at
once, by saying " The Father," that He is the
Father of a Son : that as we understand that
God is, so we may understand that He has
But to those titles we add that He is
a Son.
also "Almighty ; " and this we affirm because
of Greeks and J ews a together, and all heretics.
2. For of the Greeks some have said that
God is the soul of the world 3 ; and others that
His power reaches only to heaven, and not to
earth as well.
Some also sharing their error,
and misusing the text which says, "And Thy
truth unto the clouds*," have dared to circum
scribe God's providence by the clouds and the
heaven, and to alienate from God the things
on earth ; having forgotten the Psalm which
says, If I go up into heaven, Thou art there :
if Igo down into hell, Thou art present s. For if

.

a

3 Cicero, Df Natura Deorum, Lib. I. 37 :

found
Jents
English A. V. and R.V. [he passage stands thus: Tef. xxxii- 18,
19 : The Grral, the Mighty God, the LOKD of Hosts, is Hit
name. Great in counsel, ami mighty in work.
For even the Jewish nation had wicked heresies: for of
. the Pharisees, who ascribe the practice of sinners
them were .
to fortune and fate : and the Basmotheans, who deny providence
and say that the world is made by spontaneous motion "(Apost.
Const. VI. 6). Compare Euseb. (£'.//. IV. 22.)
11 Pythagoras
thought that God was the soul pervading all nature." The doc
trine was accepted both by Stoics and Platonists, and became very
general.

Cf. Virg. Georg. iv. 221 :
Deum namque ire per omnis
Terrasque, iractusque maris, cxlumque profunrium.
Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus
Mens agitat molern, et magno se corpore iniscet.
Cyril appears to have borrowed this statement
from Clement of Ak-xandria, who states (Stromal. V. xiv. $ or)
that fr. m this Psalm the thought occurred to Aristotle to let
Providence come down a* far as to the Moon.

and Aen. vi. 726 :

* Ps. xxxvi. 5.

5 P». exxxix. 8.

3. But heretics again, as I have said before,
know not One Almighty God.
For He is
Almighty who rules all things, who has power
over all things.
But they who say that one
God is Lord of the soul, and some other of
the body, make neither of them perfect, be
cause either is wanting to the other 6. For how
is he almighty, who has power over the soul,
but not over the body? And how is he al
mighty who has dominion over bodies, but no
power over spirits?
But these men the Lord
confutes, saying on the contrary, Rather fear
ye Him which is able to destroy both soul and
body in hell''.
For unless the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ has the power over both,
how does He subject both to punishment?
For how shall He be able' to take the body
which is another's and cast it into hell, except
He first bind the strong man, and spoil his
goods 8 1

4. But the Divine Scripture and the doc
trines of the truth know but One God, who
rules all things by His power, but endures
many things of His will.
For He rules even
over the idolaters, but endures them of His
forbearance : He rules also over the heretics
who set Him at nought, but bears with them
because of His long-suffering : He rules even
over the devil, but bears with him of His
long-suffering, not from want of power, as if
P'or he is the beginning of the Lord's
defeated.
creation, made to be mocked1), not by Himself,

* See note on Lect. IV. 4.
7 Matt. x. 28.
8 lb. xii. 29.
9 Jobxl. r<, tout' eo-Ttv oLpjrtf v-AdoTiaroc Kvptov, 1

In this description of
cy«aTairat^f<rdat virb tmc ayyiXtov aitrov.
Behemoth the Septuagint differs much from the Hebrew, which
is thus rendered in our English Versions, xl. 19 : He is the chief
of the ways of God : he (on/y, R.V.) that made him can make
his sword to approach unto him. Compare Job xii. 5 : Wilt them
play with kim as with a bird t and Ps- civ. 26 : There is that
Leviiithan whom thou hastformed to play therein (Sept. to tale
See Baruch lii. 17, with the note in the
thy pastime with hint).
Speaker's Commentary.

LECTURE VIII.

for that were unworthy of Him, but by the
Angels whom He hath made. But He suffered
him to live, for two purposes, that he might
disgrace himself the more in his defeat, and
that mankind might be crowned with victory.
0 all wise providence of God ! which takes
the wicked purpose for a groundwork of sal
vation for the faithful.
For as 'He took the
unbrotlierly purpose of Joseph's brethren for
a groundwork of His own dispensation, and,
by permitting them to sell their brother from
hatred, took occasion to make him king
whom He would ; so he permitted the devil
to wrestle, that the victors might be crowned ;
and that when victory was gained, he might
be the more disgraced as being conquered
by the weaker, and men be greatly honoured
as having conquered him who was once an
Archangel.

5. Nothing then is withdrawn from the power
of God ; for the Scripture says of Him, for
all things are Thy servants '°.
All things alike
are His servants, but from all these One, His
only Son, and One, His Holy Spirit, are ex
cepted ; and all the things which are His
servants serve the Lord through the One Son
and in the Holy Spirit. God then rules all,
and of His long-suffering endures even mur
derers and robbers and fornicators, having
appointed a set time for recompensing every
one, that if they who have had long warning
are still impenitent in heart, they may re
ceive the greater condemnation. They are
kings of men, who reign upon earth, but not
without the power from above : and this
Nebuchadnezzar once learned by experience,
when he said ; For His kingdom is an ever
lasting kingdom, and His powerfrom generation
to generation

6. Riches, and gold, and silver are not, as
some think, the devil's* : for the whole world of
riches is for thefaithful man, butfor thefaithless
not even a fenny 3. Now nothing is more faith
less than the devil ; and God says plainly by
the Prophet, The gold is Mine, and the silver is
Mine, and to whomsoever I will I give it*.
Do thou but use it well, and there is no fault
to be found with money : but whenever thou

1 Dan. iv. 34.

3 Prov. xvii. 6, according to the Septuagint.

a Ps. cxix. 91.
• On this doctrine of the Manicheans see Archelaus (Dispvtatie, cap. 42), Epiphanius {Hares, lxvi. £ 81).
Compare
Clement. Horn. xv. cap. 9 : "To all of us possessions are sins."
Plato (Laws, V. 74 3) : "I can never agree with them that the
rich mau will be really happy, unless he is also good : but for one
who is eminently good to be also extremely rich is impossible."
See note on
Cat. V. 2. where the same passage is quoted. Clement of Alex
andria (Stromat.^ II. 5) refers to it in connexion with the passage
of Ptato quoted in the preceding 1
[ note. S Augustine also quotes
and explains it in Epist. 153, | 26.
* The former clause is from hHaggai ii. 8; the latter, taken
from the words of the Tempter in Luke iv. 6, is quoted both
by Cvril and by other Fathers as if from Haggai.
Chrysostom
(Hem. xxxiv. 9 5, in 1 Cor. xiii.) treats the use which some made
of the misquotation as ridiculous.

'

VOL. VII.

hast made a bad use of that which is good,
then being unwilling to blame thine own
management, thou impiously throwest back
the blame upon the Creator. A man may
even be justified by money: / was hungry,
and ye gave Me meat*: that ' certainly was
from money. I was naked, andye clothed Me:
that certainly was by money. And wouldest
thou learn that money may become a door
of the kingdom of heaven?
Sell, saith He,
that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou
shall have treasure in heaven 6.

7. Now I have made these remarks because
of those heretics who count possessions, and
For I nei
money, and men's bodies accursed
ther wish thee to be a slave of money, nor to
treat as enemies the things which God has given
thee for use.
Never say then that riches are
the devil's : for though he say, All these will I
give thee, for they are delivered unto me 8, one
may indeed even reject his assertion ; for we
need not believe the liar: and yet perhaps
he spake the truth, being compelled by the
power of His presence : for he said not, All
these will Igive thee, for they are mine, but,/t>7
they are delivered unto me. He grasped not
the dominion of them, but confessed that he
had been entrusted » with them, and was for
a time dispensing them. But at a proper time
interpreters should inquire whether his state
ment is false or true *.

8. God then is One, the Father, the Almighty,
whom the brood of heretics have dared to
blaspheme. Yea, they have dared to blaspheme
the Lord of Sabaoth3, who sitteth above the
Cherubim 3 .■ they have dared to blaspheme the
Lord Adonai* : they have dared to blaspheme
Him who is in the Prophets the Almighty

« ib.

5 Matt.
7 The connexion of trwfxa.Ta with money and possessions sug
gests the not uncommon meaning "slaves.*
See Polyb. xviii. 18,
{ 6: Kai rrfv ckSoux"1*' airtSovro xai tol •rutfi.ara, xal tritv Tovrot<7
in ru is rue KT^rTeuf, " household furniture, and slaves, and
besides these some also of their lands."
Sec Dictionary 0/
Christian Antiquities^ *' Slavery," where it is shewn that Chris
tians generally and even Bishops still possessed slaves throughout
the 4th Century.
But here it is perhaps more probable thnt Cyril refers, as before.
Cat. iv. I 23, to the Manichcan doclriuc of the body as the root of
sin.

8 Matt. W. 9 ; Luke iv. 6.
9 For «y<c*xetP^(r^ot» tne reading of all the printed Editions,
which hardly yields a suitable sense, we should probably sub
stitute iyxtxttpicrdat. A similar confusion of the two verbs occurs
in Polybius (Ifist. VIII. xviii. 6); the proper use of the latter
4, quoted by
is seen in Joh- Damasc. (De Fide Orthcd. II.
Cleopas), who speaks of Satan as being "of these Angelic powers
the chief of the earthly order, and entrusted by God with the
guardianship of the earth" (.nijs yijs ttjv <^v\oktiv *yx*tpioB«i<;
wapa 0€ov).
1 On this point compare Irena:us (//<rr. V. xxi.-xxiv.), and
Gregory of Nyssa {prat. ( atech. $ 5).
a The reference is to Manes, of whom his disciple Turbo says
{Arckelai Dttfni. % 10), " The name Sabaoth which i> honourable
and mighty with you. he declares to be the nature of man, and the
fiarent of lust : for which reason the simple, he says, worship
11st, and think it to be a god."

3 Ps. Ixxx. 1.
4 "At: umt, Heb. >^S* " tnc Lord," an old form of the

Plural of majesty, used of God only.

t

~;

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

God*.
But worship thou One God the Al
mighty, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Flee from the error of many gods, flee also
from every heresy, and say like Job, But I will
call upon the Almighty Lord, which dotth great
things and unsearchable, glorious things and

5 nuroxparopa, Heb. Y^jp L%1, El-Shaddai, " God AI-

ughly."

marvellous without number6, and, For all these
things there is honour from the Almighty! : to
Whom be the glory for ever and ever. Amen.

* Job v. 8, o.

Cyril's quotation agrees with the Codex Alexandrinus of the Septuagint, which has irawoxpoTopa, " Al.nighly,
while the Vatican and other MSS. read r'ov ndvrnnr 6eavo n\v.
7 Job xxxvii. 23 : Goa htrth upon Him terrible majesty(K.V.)^
i The Vatican and Alexandrine MSS. of the Septuagint read iwi
Tourotf utfaXij yj 64(a leal Tiar/ iraKTOxpaTopos. (For these^ thing*
great is theglory and honour of the Almighty.) But Cyril's text
is the same as the Aldine and Complutensian.

LECTURE IX.

On the words, Maker of heaven and earth, and of all things visible and invisible.

Job xxxviii. 2 -3.
Who is this that hidcth counselfrom Me, and keepeth words in his heart,
and thinketh to hide them from Me 1 1

1. To look upon God with eyes of flesh is
impossible :
for the incorporeal cannot be
subject to bodily sight : and the Only begotten
Son of God Himself hath testified, saying, No
man hath seen God at any time2. For if accord
ing to that which is written in Ezekiel any one
should understand that Ezekiel saw Him, yet
what saith the Scripture ? He saw the lincness of
the glory of the Lord* ; not the Lord Himself,
but the likeness of His glory, not the glory
itself, as it really is. And when he saw merely
the likeness of the glory, and not the glory
itself, he fell to the earth from fear.
Now
if the sight of the
likeness of the- glory
brought fear and distress upon the prophets,
any one who should attempt to behold God
Himself would to a certainty lose his
life,
according to the saying, No man shall see My
face and live*.
For this cause God of His
great loving-kindness spread out the heaven
as a veil of His proper Godhead, that we
should not perish.
The word is not mine, but
the Prophet's • Jf Thou shalt rend the heavens,
trembling will take hold of the mountains at
sight of
And why dost thou wonder that Ezekiel fell
down on seeing the likeness of the glory 1
when Daniel at the sight of Gabriel, though
but a servant of God, straightway shuddered
and fell on his
face, and, prophet as he
was, dared not answer him, until the Angel
transformed himself into the likeness of a son
of man6. Now if the appearing of Gabriel
wrought trembling in the Prophets, had God
Himself been seen as He is, would not all have
perished ?

will flow down

Thee, and they

2. The Divine Nature then it is impossible
to see with eyes of flesh : but from the works,

1 The Septuagint, from which Cvril quotes the text, (lifters much
from the Hebrew, and from the English Versions : Who it this
that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge i Gird up
now thy loins like a man : /or I will demand 0/ thee, arid an
swer thou Me.
a John i
4 Exod. xxxiii. 20.
3 Ezekiel i. a8.
18.
R.V. Oh that Thou tvvuldest rend
5 Is. lxiv. 1, Septuagint.
the heavens, that Thou wovldest come down, that the mountains
mightJlow down,

6 Dan. x. 9, z6, 18.

which are Divine, it
is possible to attain to
some conception of His power, according to
Solomon, who says, For by the greatness and
beauty of the creatures proportionably the Maker
of them is seem.
He said not that from
the creatures the Maker is seen, but added
proportionably.
For (iod appears the greater
to every man in proportion as he has grasped
a larger survey of the creatures : and when his
heart is uplifted by that larger survey, he gains
withal a greater conception of God.

3. Wouldest thou learn that to comprehend
the nature of God is impossible? The Three
Children in the furnace of fire, as they hymn the
praises of God, say Blessed art thou that beholdest the depths, and sit.'est upon the Cherubim 8.
Tell me what is the nature of the Cherubim,
and then look upon Him who sitteth upon
them. And yet Ezekiel the Prophet even made
a description of them, as far as was possible,
saying that every one has four faces, one of
a man, another of a lion, another of an eagle,
and another of a calf ; and that each one had
six wings », and they had eyes on all sides ; and
that under each one was a wheel of four sidas.
Nevertheless though the Prophet makes the ex
planation, we cannot yet understand it even as
weread. Butif we cannotunderstand the throne,
which he has described, how shall we be able
to comprehend Him who sitteth thereon, the
Invisible and Ineffable God? To scrutinise
then the nature of God is impossible : but it is
in our power to send up praises of His glory
for His works that are seen.

4. These things I say to you because of the

7 Wisdom xiii. 5. Compare Theophilus of Antioch To Autolycus, I. 5, 6 : " God cannot indeed he seen hy human eyes, hut is
beheld and perceived through His providence and works. „ . He
Is not visible to eyes ol flesh, since He is incomprehensible."

8 Song of the Three Children, yi.
9 In Ezekiel i. 6-iz. the four living creatures have each /our
Hut in the latter
wings, as also in x. az according to the Hebrew.
passage, according to the Vatican text ot the Septuagint. each
has eight wings, as Codd. R. and Casaub. read here. _ Cyril seet
to have confused the number in Ezekiel with that in Is. vi.
each one had six wings. By " a wheel of four sides " Cyril ex
plains Ez. i. 16 : a wheel in the midst o'a wheel, as meaning two
circles set at right angles to each other, like the equator and
meridian on a globe.

E 2

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

following context of the Creed, and because we
say, We believe in One God, the Father
Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth,
and of all things visible and invisible;
in order that we may remember that the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ is the same as He
that made the heaven and the earth
and that
\vc may make ourselves safe against the wrong
paths of the godless heretics, who have dared
to speak evil of the Allwise Artificer of all
this world 2, men who see with eyes of flesh, but
have the eyes of their understanding blinded.

5. For what fault have they to find with the
vast creation of God ?-they, who ought to
have been struck with amazement on beholding
the vaultings of the heavens : they, who ought
to have worshipped Him who reared the sky
as a dome, who out of the fluid nature of the
waters formed the
stable substance of the
For God said, Let there be a firma
heaven.
ment in the midst of the water 3. God spake once
for all, and it stands fast, and falls not.
The
heaven is water, and the orbs therein, sun,
moon, and stars are of fire : and how do the
orbs of fire run their course in the water 1 But
if anyone disputes this because of the opposite
natures of fire and water, let him remember the
fire which in the time of Moses in Egypt
flamed amid the hail, and observe the all-wise
workmanship of God.
For since there was
need of water, because the earth was to be
tilled, He made the heaven above of water,
that when the region of the earth should need
watering by showers, the heaven might from its
nature be ready for this purpose.

6. But what ?

Is there not cause to wonder
when one looks at the constitution of the sun ?
For being to the sight as it were a small body
he contains a mighty power ; appearing from
the East, and sending forth his light unto the
West : whose rising at dawn the Psalmist de
scribed, saying: And he cometh forth out of
his chamber as a bridegroom''. He was de
scribing the brightness and moderation of his
state on first becoming visible unto men : for
when he rides at high noon, we often flee
from his blaze : but at his rising he is wel
come to all as a bridegroom to look on.

Observe also his arrangement (or rather not
his, but the arrangement of Him who by an
course), how in
ordinance determined his
summer he rises higher and makes the days
longer, giving men good time for their works :

4.

1 Compare Cat. iv.

Irenxiis (I. x. 1): "The Church,
though dispersed throughout the whole world, even to the ends
of the earth, yet received from the Apostles and their disciples
the Faith in One God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven, and
earth, and the sea and all that therein is."
Tcrtullian {de Pla
teriptioru Hatrot. cap. xiii.)
" The rule of faith is that whereby
we oelieve that there is One God only, and none other than the
Creator of the w orld, who brought forth all things out cf nothing
through His own Word fir»t of all sent forth."
4 Ps. xix. 5.
3 Gen. i. 6.

3 Compare Cat. vi. 13, 37.

but in winter contracts his course, that the
period of cold may be increased, and that the
nights becoming longer may contribute to
men's rest, and contribute also to the fruitfulSee also
ness of the products of the earth 5.
how the days alternately respond each to other
in due order, in summer increasing, and in
winter diminishing ; but in spring and autumn
granting equal intervals one to another. And
the nights again complete the like courses ; so
that the Psalmist also says of them, Day unto
day uttereth speech, and night unto night prodaimcth know/edge6.
For to the heretics who
have no ears, they all but cry aloud, and by
their good order say, that there is none other
God save the Creator who hath set them their
bounds, and laid out the order of the Universe

7. But let no one tolerate any who say that
one is the Creator of the light, and another ot
darkness 8 : for let him remember how Isaiah
says, / am the God who made the light, and
created darkness 9. Why, O man, art thou vexed
thereat? Why art thou offended at the time
that is given thee for rest 1 ? A servant would
have had no rest from his masters, had not the
darkness necessarily brought a respite. And
often after wearying ourselves in the day, how
are we refreshed in the night, and he who
was yesterday worn with toils, rises vigorous in
the morning because of the night's rest2 ? And
what more helpful to wisdom than the night 3 ?
For herein oftentimes we set before our minds
the things of God ; and herein we read and
contemplate the Divine Oracles. And when
is our mind most attuned to Psalmody and
toO 4nj\ov* irktiuv yivqrcu &
Ypoyos, oAA' iya at vvKTts, x.t.A. gives a meaning contrary to
the facts. The translation follows the MSS. Roe, Casaubon,
which omit fxrj and for aAAa read icat.
Compare WhewelPs
Astronomy, p. 22: "The length of the year is so determined
as to be adapted to the constitution of most vegetables : or
the construction of vegetables is so adjusted as to be suited
to the length which the year really has, and unsuited to a
duration longer or shorter by any considerable portion.
The
vegetable clock-work is so set as to go for a year."
Ibid. p. 34 :
" The terrestrial day, and consequently the length of the cycle
of light and darkness, being what it is, we find various parts of
the constitulion both of animals and vegetables, which have a
periodical character in their functions, corresponding to the diurnal
succession of external conditions, and we find that the length
of the period, as it exists in their constitution, coincides with me
Length of the natural day."
° .Ps. xix. 2 Compare a beautiful passage of Theophilus of Autioch {To Aittolyctis, vi.).
7 Lucretius, V. 1182 :

5 The common reading Iva

" They saw the skies in constant order run.
The varied seasons and the circling sun.
Apparent rule, with unapparcnt cause,
And thus they sought in gods the source of lasvs."
8 See note 3 on Cat. iii. 33.
9 Is. xlv. 7. Compare the Homily of Chrysostom on this text.
< Whewcll, Astronomy, p. 38 : " Animals also have a period in
their functions and habits ; as in the habits of waking, sleeping,
eating, &c, and Uieir well-being appears to depend on the coin
cidence of this period with the length of the natural day."
2 Chrysostom, VI. p. 171 : " As the day brings man out to his
work, so the ni^ht succeeding releases him from his countless toils
and thoughts, and lulling his weary eyes to sleep, and closing their
lids, prepares him to welcome the sunbeam again with his force
in full vigour."
3 Clement of Alexandria (Strvmat. IV. 22, E. Tr.) : " And io
this way they seem to have called the night Euphronc, sinre then
the soul released from the perceptions of sense turns in on itself,
and has a truer hold of intelligence (cVpdnjffif)."

LECTURE IX.

Prayer?
Is it not at night? And when have
we often called our own sins to remembrance ?
Is it not at night ♦?
Let us not then admit
the evil thought, that another is the maker of
darkness : for experience shews that this also
is good and useful.

8. They ought to have felt astonishment
and admiration not only at the arrangement
of sun ami moon, but also at the well-ordered
choirs of the stars, their unimpeded courses,
and their risings in the seasons due to each :.
and how some are signs of summer, and
others of winter; and how some mark the
season for sowing, and others shew the com
mencement of navigation s. And a man sitting
in his ship, and sailing amid the boundless
waves, steers his ship by looking at the stars.
For of these matters the Scripture says well,
And let them be for signs, and for seasons, and
/or years1', not for fables of astrology and
nativities.
also
graciously given us the light of day by gradual
increase : for we do not see the sun at once
arise ; but just a little light runs on before, in
order that the pupil of the eye may be enabled
by previous trial to look upon his stronger
beam : see also how He has relieved the dark
ness of the night by rays of moonlight.

But observe how He has

9. Who is thefather of the rain ? And who
hath begotten the drops of dew 1 1 Who con
densed the air into clouds, and bade them
carry the waters of the rain8, now bringing
golden-tinted cloudsfrom the north », now chang
ing these into one uniform appearance, and
again transforming them into manifold circles
and other shapes ?
Who can number the clouds
in wisdom 1 1 Whereof in Job it saith, And He
krwweth the separations of the clouds'1, and hath

4 Chrysostom (Tom. II. p. 793) : ''We usually take the reckon
ing of our money early in the morning, but of our actions, of all
that we have said and done by day, let us demand of ourselves the
account after supper, and even after nightfall, as we lie upon our
bed, wkh none to trouble, none to disturb us. And if we see
anything done amiss, let us chastise our conscience, let us rebuke
our mind, let us so vehemently impugn our account, that we may
no more dare to rise up and bring ourselves to the same pit uf sin, I
beii)£ mindful of the scourging at night."
5 Clem. Alex. (Stromal. VI. it;: "The same is true also of
Astronomy, for being engaged in the investigation of the heavenly
bodies, as to the form of the universe, and the revolution of the
heaven, and the motion of the stars, it brings the soul nearer
to the Creative Power, and teaches it to be quick in perceiving
the seasons of the year, the changes of the atmosphere, and the
risings of the stars; since navigation also and husbandry are full
of benefit from this science." Compare Lactantius (De Irtl Dei,
cap. xiii.J.
8 Whewell, Astronomy, p. 88 : " Clouds are produced by
aqueous vapour when it returns to the state of water." p. 89 :
" Clouds produce rain.
In the furmation of a cloud the pre.
cipitatiDn of moisture probably forms a fini watery pmuiier, which
remains suspended in the air in consequence ot the minuteness
of its particles : but if from any cause the precipitation is collected
in larger portions, and becomes drops, these descend by their
weight and produce a shower." Compare Aristotle, Meteorologica,
I. ix. 3 ; Ansteii, Physical Geography, p. a10.
9 Job xxxvii. aa : *' Out of the north Cometh golden splendour"
(R.V.1
1 Job xxxviii. 37.
■Job xxxvii. 16: "Dost thou know the balancings of the
clouds?"
In the Septuagint Siaxpitriv vttpat* may mean "the
separate path of the clouds" (Vulg. " semitas nubium,") or " the
dissolving," as in Aristotle (Meteorol. I. vii. 10 : 6taxptVe aOcu Kai

7 Job xxxviiL 28.

6 Gen. i. 14.

bent down the heaven to the earth ' .• and, He who
numbereth the clouds in wisdom : and, the cloud
is not rent under Him
For so many measures
of waters lie upon the clouds, yet they are not
rent : but come down with all good order upon
the earth. Who bringeth the winds out of their
treasuries 5 1 And who, as we said before, is he
that hath begotten the drops of davl And
out of whose womb cometh the ice 6 i For its
substance is like water, and its strength like
stone.
And at one time the water becomes
snow like wool, at another it ministers to Him
who scattereth the mist like
ashes'', and at
another it is changed into a stony substance ;
Its
since He governs the waters as He will 8.
nature is uniform, and its action manifold in
force.
Water becomes in vines wine that
ma keth glad the heart of man : and in olives
oil that makcth man's face to shine: and is
transformed also into bread that strengthened
man's hearts, and into fruits of all kinds which
He hath created *.

io. What should have been the effect of
these wonders ? Should the Creator have been
blasphemed? Or worshipped rather? And
so far I have said nothing of the unseen works
of His wisdom.
Observe, I pray you, the
spring, and the flowers of every kind in all
their likeness still diverse one from another ;
the deepest crimson of the rose, and the purest
whiteness of the lily : for these spring from the
same rain and the same earth, and who makes
them to differ? Who fashions them? Observe,
pray, the exact care : from the one substance
of the tree there is part for shelter, and part
for divers fruits : ami the Artificer is One.
Of the same vine part is for burning
and part
for shoots, and part for leaves, and part for ten
drils, and part for clusters.

Admire also the great thickness of the knots
which run round the reed, as the Artificer hath

6 Job xxxviii. 28.

5iaAve<r0ai rb otdrut'^bv vypby wjrb tou bAj;0ovc njs depfiij^ avaOv-
" The moist
utdVewc, utrrc p\i\ trvvifrTturBu paft'ws «is viutp.
vapour is separated and dissolved by the great heat of the evapor
Cf. Plato,
ation, so that it does not easily condense into water."
SeP/lisfes 243 B : otaicpicrcis; xai uvyiepiai'is'.
3 Job xxxviii. 37 (according to the Siptuagint): "And who is
he that numberetn the clouds by wisdom, and bent down the
heaven to the earth?" A.V., R.V. "Or who can pour out the
bottles of heaven?"
4 Job xxvi. 8 : "He bindeth up the waters in His thick clouds ;
and the cloud is not rent under them "
5 Ps. exxxv. 7.
7 Ps. cxlvii. z6: "He scattereth the hoar frost tike ashes."
The Hebrew "053 is rendered by irdxKi,, "hoar frost," ia Job
xxxviii. 29, but here by ouixAi, " mist."
8 Job xxxvii. 10: "the breadth of the waters is straitened"
(Marg. R.V. " congealed"). The word otMtfft in the Septuagint
means to " steer," Lat. " gubernare " to " turn as by a helm."

9 Ps. civ. 15.
s There is a similar passage on the various effects of water in
Chrysostom {cU Statuis, Horn. xii. 2), Epiphanius
Cat. xvi. 12.
(Ancorattts, p. 69), and other Fathers, appear to reproduce both
the thoughts and words of Cyril.
3 For ttavaiv, " burning,' Morel and Milles, with Cod. CoisL,
read Kavtsriv, a rare word explained by Hcsychius as the "growth
or "foliage" of the vine: but this is fully expressed in what
follows, aiid the reading xaDcriv is confirmed by Virgil (Georg. ii.
403) : " Primus d^vecla cremato sarmenta " (Reischl).

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

made them. From one and the same earth
come forth creeping things, and wild Leasts,
and cattle, and trees, and food ; and gold, and
silver, and brass, and iron, and stone. The
nature of the waters is but one, yet from it
comes the substance of fishes and of birds ;
whereby 3 as the former swim in the waters,
so the birds fly in the air.

n. This great and wide sea, therein are
things creeping innumerable*. Who can describe
the beauty of the fishes that are therein ?
Who can describe the greatness of the whales,
and the nature 5 of its amphibious animals, how
they live both on dry land and in the waters ?
Who can tell the depth and the breadth of the
sea, or the force of its enormous waves?
Yet
it stays at its bounds, because of Him who
said, Hitherto shalt thou come, and no further,
but within thyself shall thy waves be broken*1.
Which sea also clearly shews the word of the
command imposed upon it, since after it has
run up, it leaves upon the beach a visible
line made by the waves, shewing, as it were,
to those who see it, that it has not passed
its appointed bounds.

12. Who can discern the nature of the
birds of the air? How some carry with them
a voice of melody, and others are variegated
with all manner of painting on their wings, and
others fly up into mid air and float motion
less, as the hawk :
for by the Divine com
mand the hawk spreadeth out his wings and
floatelh motionless, looking towards the south i.
What man can behold the eagle's lolty flight?
If then thou canst not discern the soaring of
the most senseless of the birds, how wouldest
thou understand the Maker of all ?

the

physiology of each ?

13. Who among men knows even the names
of all wild beasts ? Or who can accurately
discern
But if
of the wild beasts we know not even the
mere nances, how shall we comprehend the
Maker of them ?
God's command was but
one, which said, Let the earth bring forth wild
beasts, and cattle, and creeping things, after their
kinds* 1 and from one earth », by one command,
have sprung diverse natures, the gentle sheep
and the carnivorous lion, and various instincts 1
of irrational animals, bearing resemblance to
the various characters of men ;
the fox to
manifest the craft that is in men, and the
snake the venomous treachery of lriends, and

3 For the construction of tva with the Indicative Im-curox,
see Bernliajdy, Syntax, p. 40s. Winer {Gram. N.T. 111. sect,
* Ps. civ. 25.
xli. c).
5 Gr. iivotrraiTiV, literally "substance."
7 lb. xxxix. 26.
6 job xxxviii. 11.
9 Instead of aWrojc (Millc.s), or irrry*)? (Bened. Roe, Casaub.)
the recent Editors have restored rqs yijf with the Jerusalem and
Munich MSS., and Basil.
1 Gr. Kivijtrtis "movements," "impulses." Aristotle {fit's 'aria
Animaliitin. IX. vii. 1) remarks that many imitations of tnau's
mode of life may be observed in the habits of other animals.

8 Gen. i. 24.

the neighing horse the wantonness of young
men a, and the laborious ant, to arouse the
sluggish and the dull : for when a man passes
his youth in idleness, then he is instructed by
the irrational animals, being reproved by the
divine Scripture saying, Go to the ant, thou
sluggard, see and emulate her ways, and become
wiser than she 3.
For when thou seest her
treasuring up her food in good season, imitate
her, and treasure up for thyself fruits of good
works for the world to come. And again, Go
to the bee, and learn how industrious she is * :
how, hovering round all kinds of flowers, she
collects her honey for thy benefit : that thou
also, by ranging over the Holy Scriptures,
mayest lay hold of salvation for thyself, and
being filled with them miyest say, How sweet
are thy words unto my throat, yea sweeter than
honey and the honeycomb unto my mouth

14.

For what ?

Is not then the Artificer worthy the
rather to be glorified ?
If thou
knowest not the nature of all things, do the
things that have been made forthwith become
useless ?
Canst thou know the efficacy of all
herbs ? Or canst thou learn all the benefit
which proceeds from every animal?
Ere now
even from venomous adders have come anti
But thou
dotes for the preservation of men 6.
wilt say to me, " The snake is terrible."
Fear
thou the Lord, and it shall not be able to
hurt thee.
Fear the
" A scorpion stings."
" A lion is
Lord, and it shall not sting thee.
Fear thou the Lord, and he
bloodthirsty."
shall lie down beside thee, as by Daniel.
But
truly wonderful also is the
action of the
animals : how some, as the scorpion, have the
sharpness in a sting ; and others have their
power in their teeth ; and others do battle
with their claws ; while the basilisk's power is
his gaze'.
So then from this varied work
manship understand the Creator's power.

• Jer. T. t.
3 Prov. vi. 6.
Instead of the epithet ** laborious " {ytaipyoTaTos) some MSS. have " agile " or " restless" (vopydrnrov).
* After the description ot J.he ant, Prov. vi. 6-8, there follows
in the Septuagint a similar refercrcc to the bee: "Or go to the
bee, and learn how industrious she is, and how comely she makes
her work, and the produce^ of her labours kings and commons
adopt for health, and she is desired and esteemed by- all, and
though feeble in strength has been exalted by her regard for
wisdom." The interpolation is supposed to be of Greek origin, as
containing ** idiomatic Greek expressions which would not occur
to a translator from the Hebrew ' (Delitzsch).

5 Ps. cxix. 103.
6 Compare Bacon [Natural Hist. 965): "I would have trial
made of two other kinds of bracelets, for comforting the heart and
spirits : one of the trochisch of vipers, made into little pieces of
beads ; for since they do great good inwards (especially for
pestilent agues), it is like they will be effectual outwards, where
they may be applied in greater quantity. There would be trochisch
likewise made of snakes ; whose flesh dried is thought to have
a veiy good opening and cordial virtue." lb. 969 : "The writers
of natural magic commend the wearing of the spoil of a snake,
for preserving of health." Thomas Jackson {On tht Cretd, VIII.
8. 8 4) : "The poisonous bitings of the scorpion are usually cured
by the oil of scorpions."

7 Shakespeare {Richard III. Act. I. Sc. ii.) .
Glo. '* Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine."
Anne.

" 'Would they were basilisks to strike thee dead."

LECTURE IX.

15. But these things perhaps thou knowest
not : thou wouldest have nothing in common
with the creatures which are without thee.
En
ter now into thyself, and from thine own nature
consider its Artificer. What is there to find fault
with in the framing of thy body ? Be master of
thyself, and nothing evil shall proceed from
any of thy members. Adam was at first with
out clothing in Paradise with Eve, but it was
not because of his members that he deserved
to be cast out.
The members then are not
the cause of sin, but they who use their mem
bers amiss ; and the Maker thereof is wise.
Who prepared the recesses of the womb for
child-bearing? Who gave life to the lifeless
thing within it ? Who knitted us with sinews
and bones, and clothed us with skin and flesh 8,
and, as soon as the child was born, brought
streams of milk out of the breasts ? How
grows the babe into a boy, and the boy into
a youth, and then into a man ; and, still the
same, passes again into an old man, while no
one notices the exact change from day to day?
Of the food, how is one part changed into
blood, and another separated for excretion,
and another part changed into flesh? Who
gives to the heart its unceasing motion ? Who
wisely guarded the tenderness of the eyes with

Compare Bacon (Dr Augmentil, VII. cap. ii.): " The fable goes
of the basilisk, that if he see you first, you die for it, but if you
see him first, he dic4." Bacon icfers to Pliny {Nat. JJi&i. viii. 33).

8 Job x. IU

the fence of the eyelids' ? For as to the com
plicated and wonderful contrivance of the eyes,
the voluminous books of the physicians hardly
Who distributes the
igive us explanation.
one breath to the whole body? Thou seest,
O man, the Artificer, thou seest the wise
Creator.

16. These points my discourse has now
treated at large, having left out many, )ca, ten
thousand other things, and especially things
incorporeal and invisible, that thou mayest
abhor those who blaspheme the wise and
good Artificer, and from what is spoken and
read, and whatever thou canst thyself discover
or conceive, from the greatness and beauty of
the creatures mayest proporticnably see the maker
of them *, and bending the knee with godly
reverence to the Maker of the worlds, the
worlds, I mean, of sense and thought, both
a
visible and invisible, thou mayest with
grateful and holy tongue, with unwearied lips
and heart, praise God and say, How wonderful
are Thy works, O Lord; in wisdom hast Thou
made them all". For to Thee belongeth honour,
and glory, and majesty, both now and through
out all ages.

Amen.

9 Xenophon (Mcmor. Socratis, I. cap. iv.): "And moreover
does not this al>o seem to thee like a work of providence, that,
whereas the sight is weak, the Creator furnished it with eyelids
for doors, which are opened whenever there is need to use the
sight, hut are closed in sleep."

z Wisdom xiii. 5.

a Pa, civ. 34.

APPENDIX TO
Note. -In the manuscripts which contain
this discourse under the name of " A Homily
of S. Basil on God as Incomprehensible," some
portions are changed to suit that subject : but
the conclusion especially is marked by great
addition and variation, which it is well to re
produce here.
Accordingly in place of the
words in §15 : W /ifuiTw, "What is there to
find fault with?" and the following, the manu
scripts before mentioned have it thus :

" What is there to find fault with in the fram
ing of the body ? Come forth into the midst
and speak. Control thine own will, and nothing
evil shall proceed from any of thy members.
For every one of these has of necessity been
made for our use.
Chasten thy reasoning unto
piety, submit to God's commandments, and
none of these members sin in working and serv
If
ing in the uses for which they .were made.
thou be not willing, the eye sees not amiss, the
ear hears nothing which it ought not, the hand
is not stretched out for wicked greed, the foot
walketh not towards injustice, thou hast no

LECTURE IX.

strange loves, committestno fornication, covetest
not thy neighbour's wife.
Drive out wicked
thoughts from thine heart, be as God made
thee, and thou wilt rather give thanks to thy
Creator.

Adam at first was without clothing, faring
daintily in Paradise : and after he had received
the commandment, but failed to keep it, and
wickedly stretched forth his hand (not because
the hand wished this, but because his will
stretched forth his hand to that which was for
bidden), because of his disobedience he lost
also the good things he had received.
Thus
the members are not the cause of sin to those
who use them, but the wicked mind, as the
Lord says, For outoftheheartproceed evilthoughts,
fornications, adulteries, envyings, and such like.
In what things thou choosest, therein thy limbs
serve thee ; they are excellently made lor the
service of the soul : they are provided as ser
vants to thy reason.
Guide them well by the
motion of piety ; bridle them by the fear of
God ; bring them into subjection to the desire

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

of temperance and abstinence, and they will
never rise up against thee to tyrannise over
thee ; but rather they will guard thee, and help
thee more mightily in thy victory over the
devil, while expecting also the incorruptible and
everlasting crown of the victory. Who openeth
the chambers of the womb ? Who, &c."

At the end of the same section, after the
words " Wise Creator," this is found : " Glorify
Him in His unsearchable works,and concerning
Him whom thou art not capable of knowing
It
inquire not curiously what His essence is.

is better for thee to keep silence, and in faith
adore, according to the divine Word, than dar
ingly to search after things which neither thou
canst reach, nor Holy Scripture hath delivered
to thee.
These points my discourse has now
treated at large, that thou mayest abhor those
who blaspheme the wise and good Artificer,
and rather mayest thyself also say, How won
derful are Thy works O Lord ; in wisdom hast
Thou made them all. To Thee be the glory,
and power, and worship, with the Holy Spirit,
! now and ever, and throughout all ages. Amen."

LECTURE X

On the Clause, And in one Lord Jesus Christ, with a reading from
the First Epistle to the Corinthians.

For though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or on earth 1 / yet to us there is One
God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in Him; and One Lord Jesus Christ,
through ni/iom are all things, and we through Him.

t. They who have been taught to believe t
'in One God the Father Almighty," ought
also to believe in His Only-begotten Son.
For he that denieth the Son, the same hath not
the Father''. lam the Door*, saith Jesus; no one
For
cometh unto the Father but through Me*.
if thou deny the Door, the knowledge concern
ing the Father is shut off from thee. No man
knowcth the Father, save the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son shall reveal Him
For if
thou deny Him who reveals, thou remainest in
ignorance.
the
is
Gospels, saying, He that bcJcveth not on the
Son, shall not see life ; but the wrath of God
abideth on him6
For the Father hath indig
nation when the Only-begotten Son is set at
nought.
For it is grievous to a king that
merely his soldier should be dishonoured; and
when one of his nobler officers or friends is
dishonoured, then his anger is greatly increased:
hut if any should do despite to the king's onlybegotten son himself, who shall appease the
father's indignation on behalf of his
onlybegotten son ?

sentence

There

in

a

2.

If, therefore, any one wishes to shew
piety towards God, let him worship the Son,
since otherwise the Father accepts not his
service. The Father spake with a loud voice
from heaven, saying, This is My belied Son, in
whom I am well p'easedT.
The Father was
well pleased ; unless thou also be well pleased
Be not thou
in Him, thou hast not life.
carried away with the Jews when they craftily
say, There is one God alone ; but with the
knowledge that God is One, know that there
is also an Only begotten Son of God.
I am not
the first to say this, but the Psalmist in the
person of the Son saith, The Lord said unto

* i Cot. viii. 5, 6.
many and lords many.
4 I1), xiv. 6.
7 Matt. iii. 17.

Cyril omits the clause : as there be gods
5 Matt. xi. 37.

3 lb. x. 9.
• John iii. 36.

3 1 John ii. 33.

, Me, Thou art My Son 8. Heed not therefore
what the Jews say, but what the Prophets say.
Dost thou wonder that they who stoned and
slew the Prophets, set at nought the Prophets'
words ?

3. Believe thou in One Lord Jesus Christ,
the Only-begotten Son of God.
For we
say "One Lord Jesus Christ," that His Sonship may be " Only-begotten :" we say " One,"
that thou mayest not suppose another : we
say "One," that thou mayest not profanely
diffuse the many names 9 of His action among
many sons.
For He is called a Door 1 ; but
take not the name literally for a thing of wood,
but a spiritual, a living Door, discriminating
those who enter in. He is called a Way2, not
one trodden by feet, but leading to the Father
in heaven ; He is called a Sheep 3, not an irra
tional one, but the one which through its
precious blood cleanses the world from its
sins, which is led before the shearers, and
This Sheep again is
knows when to be silent
called a Shepherd, who says, L am the Good
Shepherd*: a Sheep because of His manhood,
a Shepherd because of the loving-kindness of
His Godhead. And wouldst thou know that
there are rational sheep ? the Saviour says to
the Apostles, Behold, I send you as sheep in the
midst ofwolves s.
Again, He is called a Lion 6,
not as a devourer of men, but indicating as it
were by the title His kingly, and stedfast,
also
and confident nature : a Lion He is
called in opposition to the lion our adver-

• Ps. ii. 7.
9 to TtoKvuwpov, a word used by the Greelc Poets oftheir gods,
as by Homer (llymn to Demeter, 18, 32) of Zeus, Kpopov iroAvwCf. Soph. Ant. 1115 ; Aeschyl. Prom. V. 210.
fv/*os vio«.
Cyril calls Christ a ''spiritual." or " rational
(X07KCT1) door, ' and applies the same term to His sheep, below.
Origen (In Evang.Jok. Tom. j. cap. 29): 6vpa 6 Swrqp araycypa-jaL. ibid. <t>i \av6pWTT<K &f uiv .

1 John x. 7, 9.

. . notfkijy yivtTat.
3 lb. i 29 ; Is. liii. 7, 8 ; Acts viii. 32.
5 Mutt. x. 10, 16.

6 Gen. xlix. 9 ;

2 Juhn xiv. 6.
4 Johu x. 11

Apoc. v. 5.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

sary, who roars and devours those who have
been deceived
For the Saviour came, not as
having changed the gentleness of His own
nature, but as the strong Lion of the tribe of
Judak 8, saving them that believe, but treading
down the adversary. He is called a Stone,
not a lifeless stone, cut out by men's hands,
but a chief corner-stone*, on whom whosoever
bciieveth shall not be put to shame.

He is

4. He is called Christ, not as having been
anointed by men's hands, but eternally an
ointed by the Father to His High-Priesthood
on behalf of men
He is called Dead, not
as having abode among the dead, as all in
Hades, but as being sionefree among the dead2.
He is called Son of Man, not as having had
His generation from earth, as each of us,
but as coming upon the clouds to judge
both Quick and Dead 3.
called
Lord, not improperly as those who are so
called among men, but as having a natural
and eternal Lordship +. He is called Jesus by
a fitting name, as having the appellation from
His salutary healing. He is called Son, not as
advanced by adoption, but as naturally be
gotten.
of our
Saviour ; lest, therefore, His manifold appel
lations should make thee think of many sons,
and because of the errors of the heretics, who
say that Christ is one, and Jesus another, and
the Door another, and so on
the Faith secures
thee beforehand, saying well, Is One Lord
Jesus Christ: for though the titles are many,
yet their subject is one.

And many are

the titles

5. But the Saviour comes in various forms
to each man for his profit6.
For to those who
have need of gladness He becomes a Vine ;
and to those who want to enter in He stands
as a Door ; and to those who need to offer
up their prayers He stands a mediating High

7 1 Pet. v. 8.
9 Is. xxviii, i6;
8 Ps. cxviii. aa.
i Pet. ii. 4-6.
1 The reading of the earlier Editions vwip avOptitirw is free
from all difficulty, and so the more likely to have been substituted
tor what is at tirst sight more difficult vn*ep lii^wrm-, the reading
of Cod. CuUHn* adopted by the Benedictine and subsequent
Editors. The idea of a super-human Priesthood to which the
Son in His Divine nature was anointed by the Father from
eternity is repeated by Cyril in $ 14 of this Lecture, and in Cat. xi.
Sec Index, " Priesthood." and the icferencc there given to
r, 14.
a fuller consideration of the subject in the Introduction.

* Ps. Ixxxviii. 5.
3 John v. 37. Comparing what Cyril says here with Cat. iv. 15,
and xv. to, we see that he means to explain why Christ is called
the "Son of Man" when "He cometh again from heaven." and
" no more from earth." The preceding clause refers to His first
coming in the flesh, as differing in the manner of His conception
and birth irom other men.
* Cf. Athatias. (e. A Han. II. xv. 14), " That very Word who
was by nature Lord, and was then made man, hath by means
of a servant's form neen made Lord of all and Christ."
8): "All therefore are outside the
Dispensation, who under pretence of knowledge understand that
Jesus was one, and Christ another, and the Only-begotten another
(from whom again is the Word), and the Saviour another." The
Cerinthians, Lbionites, Ophites, and Valentinians are mentioned
by IrefUEU* as thus separating the Christ irom Jesus.
0 Cf. Athanas. (hpist. X.) : "Since He is rich and manifold,
lie varies Himself according to the individual capacity of each
soul."

5 Cf. Irenxus (III. jtvi

Priest.
Again, to those who have sins He
becomes a Sheep, that He may be sacrificed
for them. He is made all things to all men
For
remaining in His own nature what He is.
so remaining, and holding the dignity of His
Sonship in reality unchangeable, He adapts"
Himself to our infirmities, just as some ex
cellent physician or compassionate teacher ;
though He is Very Lord, and received not the
Lordship by advancement8, but has the dignity
of His Lordship from nature, and is not called
Lord improperly °, as we are, but is so in verity,
since by the Father's bidding 1 He is Lord of His
own works.
For our lordship is over men of
equal rights and like passions, nay often over
our elders, and often a young master rules over
aged servants.
But in the case of our Lord
Jesus Christ the Lordship is not so ; but He is
first Maker, then Lord 2 :
first He made all
things by the Father's will, then, He is Lord of
the things which were made by Him.

6. Christ the Lord is He who was born in
the city of David*. And wouldest thou know

7 x Cor. tx. 32.
8 *k trpoieoirijs. We learn from Athanasius (c. Arian. t. 37, 38,
40), that from St. Paul's language Philip}, ii. 9: "Wherefore
also God highly exalted Him, &c," and from Ps. xlv. 7 : " Thou
hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity : therefore God, thy
God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows," the Arians argued that Christ first received Divine
honour as Son and Lord as the reward of His obedience as Man.
Athanasius replies (c. 40) : " He was not from a lower state pro
moted ; but rather, existing as God, He took the form of a ser
vant, and in taking it was not promoted but humbled Himself.
Where then is there here any reward of virtue, or what advance
ment (fl-poicomi) and promotion in humiliation V
The same doctrine had been previously held by the disciples
of Paul of Samosata, who said that Christ was not originally God,
but after His Incarnation was by advance (*■« s-poKOJrrjs) made
see Athanas.
God, from being made by nature a mere man :
S. Cyril refers to the error,
(de Decretis, % 24, c. Avian, i. 38).
and uses the same word, in xi. x, 7, 13, 15, 17, and xiv. 27.
9 (caTtt^pijcrTixws, i.e. in a secondary or metaphorical sense.
Cf- vii. 5.'
1 vtvfian, " command" or "bidding," as expressed by nodding
the head.
ii. 10) had argued that "even
2 Oilmen (De Prindjiis, I.
God cannot be called Omnipotent, unless there exist' those over
whom He may exercise His power," and therefore creation must
ha»c been eternal, or God could not have been eternally Omni
potent.
In other passages Origcn declares it an impiety to hold
that matter is co-etemal with God (De Princif. II. i. 4), and yet
maintains that there were other worlds before this, and that there
was never a time when there was no world existing.
Methodius, in a fragment of his work On things Created* pre
served by Photius, and quoted by Bishop Bull (OeJ. Fid. Nic. II.
xiii. 9), argues against these theories 01 Origen. that in John L a
the words *'The same was in the beginning with God" indicate
the authority (to c£ovo*tairruc6V) of the Word which He had with
the Father before the world came into existence ; since from all
eternity God the Father, together with His Word, possessed the
Almighty power whereby whenever He would He could create
worlds to rule over.
Dean Church remarks that "On the other hand Tertullian,
contra Hermog. 3. considering the attributes in question to lielong not to the Divine Nature, but Office, denies that God was
Almighty (Lord?) from eternity; while the Greeks affirmed this
(vid. Cyril Alex, in Joann. xvii. S. p. 065 : Athan. Oral, ii- 12-14),
as understanding by the term the inherent but latent attribute
of doing what He had not yet done, to ifouo-iatrriKoV."
Cleopas, the Jerusalem Editor, regards the' passage as directed
against Paul of Samosata, who asserted that Christ had become
God, and received His kingdom and Lordship only after His In
carnation, and remarks :-"S. Cyril evidently regard* the I-ordsh p
of Jesus Christ as twofold: one that which from eternity be
longed to Him as God, which he calls natural, according to which
' He was ever both Lord and King, as being by nature God'
(Cyril Alex, in Johann. cap. xvii.); and the other the Lordship
in time relative to the creatures, by which He exercises domi
nion over the works created by Him, as being their Maker."

3 Luke ii. 11.

LECTURE X.

that Christ is Lord with the Father even before
His Incarnation
that thou mayest not only
accept the statement by faith, but mayest also
receive proof from the Old Testament? Go
to the first book, Genesis : God saith, Let us
make man, not 'in My image,' but, in Our
image K And after Adam was made, the sacred
writer says, And God created man; in the
For he did not
image of God created He him 6.
limit the dignity of the Godhead to the Father
alone, but included the Son also : that it might
be shewn that man is not only the work of
God, but also of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is
Himself also Very God.
This Lord, who
works together with the Father, wrought with
Him also in the case of Sodom, according
to the Scripture : And the Lord rained upon
Sodom and Gomorrah fire and brimstonefrom
the Lord out of heaven 7. This Lord is He who
afterwards was seen of Moses, as much as he
was able to see.
For the Lord is loving unto
man, ever condescending to our infirmities.

that

Thou seest

7. Moreover, that you may be sure that this
is He who was seen of Moses, hear Paul's testi
mony, when he says, For they all drank of a
spiritual rock that followed them ; and the rock
was Christ 8. And again : Byfaith Mosesforsook
Egypt?, and shortly after he says, accounting
the reproach of Christ greater riches than the
This Moses says to Him,
treasures in Egypt1.
Shew me Thyself.
the
Prophets also in those times saw the Christ,
that is, as far as each was able. Shew me Thy
self, that L may see Thee with understanding 2.
But He saith, There shall no man see Myface,
and live*.
For this reason then, because no
man could see the face of the Godhead and
live, He took on Him the face of human
nature, that we might see this and live.
And
yet when He wished to shew even that with a
little majesty, when His face did shine as the
sun*, the disciples fell down affrighted.
If
then His bodily countenance, shining not in
the full power of Him that wrought, but
according to the capacity of the Disciples,
affrighted them, so that even thus they could
not bear it, how could any man gaze upon the
majesty of the Godhead ?
' A great, thing,'
saith the Lord, ' thou desirest, O Moses : and I
approve thine insatiable desire, and L will do

* Among those who denied the Divine pra-existence of Christ
Cleopas enumerates Ebion, Carpocrates, Thcodotus, Artemon,
Paul of Samosala, Mai cell:.s. and Photinus.
5 Gen. i. 36.
6 lb. i. 27.
9 Heb. xi. 27.
8 1 Cor. x. 4.
1 Heb. xi. 26. Quoting from memory Cyril mistakes the order
of the two sentences.
Cyril means that even before His Incarna
2 Ex. xxxiii. 13.
tion Christ was seen as far as was possible by Prophets such as
Moses. This view was held by many of the Fathers before Cyril.
See Justin M. (Tr)fh. g 56 ff.); Tertull. (adv. Praxean, | 16);
Euseb. (Demonstr. i-.vang. V. 13-16).

7 lb. xix. 94.

1 Ex. xxxiii. 20.

4 Matt. xvii. 2.

this things for thee, but according as thou art
able.
Behold, L will put thee in the clift of the
rock6 : for as being little, thou shalt lodge in a
little space.'

8. Now here I wish you to make safe what
I am going to say, because of the Jews.
For
our object is to prove that the Lord Jesus Christ
was with the Father.
The Lord then says to
Moses, L will pass by before thee with My glory;
and will proclaim the name of the Lord before
theei.
Being Himself the Lord, what Lord
doth. He proclaim ? Thou seest how He was co
vertly teaching the godly doctrine of the Father
and the Son. And again, in what follows it is
written word for word : And the Lord descended
in the cloud, and stood with him there, and pro
claimed the name of the Lord. And the Lord
passed by before him, andproclaimed, The Lord,
the Lord God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,
both keeping righteousness and shewing mercy
unto thousands, taking azvay iniquities, and
transgressions, and sins 8. Then in what follows,
Afoses bowed his head and worshipped? before
the Lord who proclaimed the Father, and said :
Go Thou then, O Lord, in the midst of us

9. This is the first proof : receive now a
second plain one.
The Lord said unto my
Lord, sit Thou on My right hand1. The Lord
says this to the Lord, not to a servant, but to
the Lord of all, and His own Son, to whom
He put all things in subjection. But when He
saith that all things are put under Him, it is
manifest that He is excepted, which did put all
things under Him, and what follows ; that God
may be all in all 3.
The Only-begotten Son is
Lord of all, but the obedient Son of the
Father, for He grasped not the Lordship <,
but received it by nature of the Father's
own will.
For neither did the Son grasp it,
nor the Father grudge to impart it. He it is
who saith, All things are delivered unto Me ofMy
Father*; "delivered unto Me, not as though

Gr. AiS-yoK, *'word," in imitation oi the

t

Hebrew idiom.

5 Ex. xxxiii. 17.
6 Ex. xxxiii. 23.
7 Ex. xxxiii. 19.
8 Ex. xxxiv. 5-7.
9 Ex. xxxiv. 8.
a Ps. ex. r.

3 1 Cor. xv. 27, 28.

Literally " will call in the name of the Lord
For "keeping righteousness and shewing

(Jehovah):" compare Gen. iv. 26.
mercy," the Hebrew has only " keeping mercy."
1 lb. xxxiv. g.
Heb. "An oracle of Jehovah unto my lord."
Cyril's argument is based upon the common mistake of supposing
that Kupiof represents the same Hebrew word in both parts
of the sentence.
4 Cyril evidently alludes to Phiiipp. ii. 6, " Who being in the
form of God thought ic not a prize to be on an equality with
God:" for the right interpretation of which passage, see Dean
Gwynn's notes in the Speaker z Commentary.
5 Matt. xi. 27 ; Luke x. 22. On this text Athanasius wrote
a special treatise (In illud • Omnia' 6>c), against the argument*
of Arius, Kusebius, and their fellows, who said,-" If all things
were delivered (meaning by ' all ' the Lordship of Creation), there
was once a time when He had them not.
But ii He had them
not, He is not 01 tne Father, for it He were, He would on th.it
account have had them always."
Again (conlr. Arian. Oral. III. cap. xxvii. 136), Athanasius
*' Lest a man, perceiving that the Son lias all that tli^
argues :
Father hath, irom the exact likeness and identity of what he

6o

CATFXHETICAL LECTURES.

I had them not before ; and I keep them well,
not robbing Him who hath given them."

10. The Son of God then is Lord: He is
Lord, who was born in Bethlehem of Judaea,
according to the Angel who said to
the
shepherds, I bring you good tidings ofgreatjoy,
that unto you is born this day in the city of
David Christ the Lord6 : of whom an Apostle
says elsewhere, The word which God sent unto
the children of Israel, preaching the gospel of
.peace by Jesus Christ : He is Lord of all'''. But
when he says, of all, do thou except nothing
from His Lordship :
for whether Angels, or
Archangels, or principalities, or powers, or
any created thing named by the Apostles,
all are under the Lordship of the Son.
Of
Angels He is Lord, as thou hast it in the
Gospels, Then the Devil departed from Him,
and th? Angels came and ministered unto Him 8/
for the Scripture saith not, they succoured
Him, but they ministered unto Him, that is,
like servants. When He was about to be
born of a Virgin, Gabriel was then His servant,
having received His service
as a peculiar
dignity. When He was about to go into
Egypt, that He might overthrow the gods of
Egypt made with hands 9, again an Angel
appeareth to Joseph in a dream
After He had
been crucified, and had risen again, an Angel
brought the good tidings, and as a trustworthy
servant said to the women, Go, tell His disciples
that He is risen, and goeth before you into Gali
lee; lo, I have told you * : almost as if he had
said, " I have not neglected my command, I
protest that I have told you ; that if ye dis
regard it, the blame may not be on me, but on
those who disregard it." This then is the One
Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the lesson just
now read speaks : For though there be many
that are called gcds, whether in heaven or in
earth, and so ov>,yet to us there is One God, the
Fathe?; of whom are all things, and we in Him ;
and One Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are
all things, and we through Him 3.

11. And He is called by two names, Jesus
Christ; Jesus, because He saves,- Christ, be-

6 Lukeii. to, tt.
9 Isa. xix. t.

hath, should wander into the impiety of Sabellius, considering
Him to be the Father, therefore He has said, Was given unto Me,
and / received, and Were dclivrred to Me, only to shew that He
is not the Father, but the Father's Word, and the Eternal Son,
who, because of His likeness to the Father, has eternally what
He has from Him. and, because He is the Son, has from the
Father what eternally He hath."
7 Acts x. 36.^
'* Behold, the Lohd rideth upon a swift cloud,
anil cometh unto Ej>ypt : and the idols of Egypt shall be moved
at H s ptesence." The prophecy wa-i supposed by many of the
Cf.
rathers to have been fulfilled by the tliglit into Egypt.
Athanas. (Ffi. LXI.atf Maximum, $ 4) : ''As a child He came
down to Egypt, and brought to nought its idols made with hands:"
i»nd (de htcarn. i 36) : "Which of the righteous men or kings
went down into Egypt, so that at his coming the idols ot Egypt
fell?" On the parage of Isaiah see Delitzsch, and riay (Speaker's
Commentary).
Hi Cor. viii. 5, 6.
» lb. xxviii. 7.

8 Matt. ir. 11.

< Matt. ii. s»-

cause He is a Priest *. And knowing this the in
spired Prophet Moses conferred these two titles
on two men distinguished above alls : his own
successor in the government, Auses 6, he re
named Jesus ; and his own brother Aaron he
surnamed Christ?, that by two well-approved
men he might represent at once both the High
Priesthood, and the Kingship of the One Jesus
Christ who was to come. For Christ is a High
Priest like Aaron ; since He glorified not Him
self to be made a High Pries!, but He that spake
unto Him, Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Afetchizedek*. And Jesus the son of
Nave was in many things a type of Him. For
when he began to rule over the people, he
began from Jordan 9, whence Christ also, after
He was baptized, began to preach the gospel
And the son of Nave appoints twelve to divide
the inheritance1; and twelve Apostles Jesus
sends forth, as heralds of the truth, into all the
world.
The typical Jesus saved Rahab the
harlot when she believed : and the true Jesus
says, Behold, the publicans and the harlots go
before you into the kingdom of God1. With only
a shout the walls of Jericho fell down in the
time of the type : and because Jesus said, Tfure
shall not be left here one stone upon another*, the
Temple of the Jews opposite to us is fallen, the
cause of its
fall not being the denunciation
but the sin of the transgressors.

12. There is One Lord Jesus Christ, a won
drous name, indirectly announced beforehand
by the Prophets. For Esaias the Prophet says,
Behold, thy Saviour cometh, having His own re
ward •». Now Jesus in Hebrew is by interpreta
tion Saviour. For the Prophetic gift, foreseeing
the murderous spirit of the Jews against their
Lord 5, veiled His name, lest from knowing it
plainly beforehand they might plot against
Him readily.
But He was openly called Jesus
not by men, but by an Angel, who came not
by his own authority, but was sent by the power
of God, and said to Joseph, Fear- not to take
unto thee Mary thy wife ; for that which is con-

4 Compare Eu^ebius (Eccl. Hist. I. cap. iii.), a fassage which
Cyril seems to have followed in his explanation of the names
* Jesus ' and 1 Christ.'
5 For the common reading eyxpiVoic navrntv Cod. Mon. I. has
efcxptrotf w. which is required both by the construction and the
sense. The change may have been caused by the occurrence
of iyxpiraiv just below.
0 Euscbius (*.*.): "His successor, therefore, who had not
hitherto borne the name Jesus, but had been called by another
name, Auses, which had been given him by his parents, he now
called Jesus, bestowing the name upon him as a gift of honour
far greater than any kingly diadem." Auses is a common cor
See the note on the passage of
ruption of the name Oshca.
Euscbius in this series.
7 Eusebius: "He consecrated a man high-priest of God, in
so far as that was po>sible, and him he called Christ." Cf. Lev. iv.
5, 16 ; vi. 22 : o tepevs 6 Xpicrros.
Cyril omits from his quotation the reference
11 Xliou art My Son : this day have I begotten Thee.'
to Ps. ii. 7 :

a Heb. v. 4, 5. 6.
9 Josh. iii. 1.
3 Matt. xxiv. 2.
4 lsa. Ixii. 11: "Behold, thy salvation cometh; bchoM, hut
reward is with him."

5 to KvpuutTOyav t£ht 'loviaimtr.

3 Malt. xxi. 31.

1 lb. jtiv. x.

LECTURE X.

6l

ccivcd in her is of the Holy Ghost. And she shall
bringforth a Son, and thou shall call His name
Jesus6. And immediately he renders the reason
of this name, saying, for He shall save His
people from tlteir sins.
Consider how He who
was not yet born could have a people, unless
He was in being before He was born
This
also the Prophet says in His person, From the
bowels of my mother hath He made mention of
My name* ; because the Angel foretold that He
should be called Jesus. And again concerning
Herod's plot again he says, And under the
shadow of His hand hath He hid Me °.

13. Jesus then means according to

the
Hebrew " Saviour," but in the Greek tongue
" The Healer ; "
since He is physician of
souls and bodies, curer of spirits, curing the
blind in body', and leading minds into light,
healing the visibly lame, and guiding sinners'
steps to repentance, saying to the palsied, Sin
no moie, and, Take up thy bed and 7calhQ. For
since the body was palsied for the sin of
the soul, He ministered first to the soul that
He might extend the healing to the body.
If,
therefore, any one is suffering in soul from sins,
there is the Physician for him : and if any one
faith, let him say to Him,
here is of little
Help Thou mine unbelief1.
If any is encom
passed also with bodily ailments, let him not be
faithless, but let him draw nigh ; for to such
diseases also Jesus ministers *, and let him learn
that Jesus is the Christ.

14. For that He is Jesus the Jews allow, but
not further that He is Christ
Therefore saith
the Apostle, Who is the liar, but he that denieth
thatJesus is the Christ 5 1 But Christ is a High
Priest, whose priesthood passes not to another 6,
neither having begun His Priesthood in time
nor having any successor in His High-Priest
hood : as thou heardest on the Lord's day, when
we were discoursing in the congregation8 on

oiiK

i v'v

9 lb. xlix. a.

3 Mark ix. 94.

4 Matt. i. jo.
7 The Anathema appended to the Creed of Nicsea condemns
those who said nplv
"Jr On this F.usebius of
Casarea (Epiit. I 9) remarks : " Moreover to anathematize 4 Be
fore His generation He was not,' did not seem preposterous, in
that it is confessed by all, that the Son of God was before the
generation accoiding to the flesh."
8 Isa. xlix. 1.
1 rv^Kaiv alaOijTuv.
3 John v. 14, 8.
* Compare the fragment of the Apology of Quadratus pre
sented to Hadrian 127 a. a,, preserved by Eusebius(//. A". IV. hi.):
"But the works of our Saviour were always present, for they were
genuine:-those that were healed, and those that arose from the
dead, who were seen not only when they were healed and when
they were raised, hut were also always present; and nut merely
while the Saviour was on earth, but also alter His death they
were alive for a long while, so that some of them survived even to
See the notes on the passage of Eusebius, in this
our times."
series.

s 1 John ii. 23.
7 On the opinion that Christ was from all eternity the tme
High Priest ot the Cieaiion, see Index, t'riesthood, and the
relerence there given to the Introduction. Cf. x. 4 : xi. 1. Athan.
(c Arian. Or. ii. n,/.UJf.\
8 The word 'synaxis' was used by the early Christians to
distinguish their assemblies from the Jewish ' synagogue,' a word
formed from the same root and more regularly.
' Synaxis' came
See
to be used more especially of a celebration of the Eucharist.
Suicer, Tfusaurus, Xvra£ic.

6 Heb. vii. 24.

the phrase, After the Order ofMtlchizcdek. He
received not the High-Priesthood from bodily
succession, nor was He anointed with oil
prepared by man', but before all ages by the
Father ; and He so far excels the others as
with an oath He is made Priest : For they are
priests without an oath, but He with an oath by
Him that said, The Lord sware, and will not
repent1. The mere purpose of the Father was
sufficient for surety : but the mode of assur
ance is twofold, namely that with the purpose
there follows the oath also, that by two immu
table things, in which it was impossible for God
to lie, we might have strong encouragement 2 for our
faith, who receive Christ Jesus as the Son of
God.

15. This Christ, when He was come, the
Jews denied, but the devils confessed.
But
His forefather David was not ignorant of Him,
when he said, / have ordained a lamp for
mine Anointed 3 : which lamp some have inter
preted to be the brightness of Prophecy ■», others
the flesh which He took upon Him from the
Virgin, according to the Apostle's word, But
The
we have this treasure in earthen vessels s.
Prophet was not ignorant of Him, when He
said, and announceth unto men His Christ6.
Moses also knew Him, Isaiah knew Him, and
Jeremiah ; not one of the Prophets was ig
Even devils recognised Him,
norant of Him.
for He rebuked them, and the Scripture says,
because they knnv that He was Christ J.
The
Chief-priests knew Him not, and the devils
confessed Him : the Chief Priests knew Him
not, and a woman of Samaria proclaimed Him,
saying, Come, see a man which told me all things
that ever J did.

Is not this the Christ 3 1

16. This is Jesus Christ who came a HighPriest of the good things to come 9; who for the
bountifulness of His Godhead imparted His
own title to us all.
For kings among men
have their royal style which others may not
share : but Jesus Christ being the Son of God
gave us the dignity of b^ing called Christians.
But some one will say, The name of "Chris
tians " is new, and was not in use aforetime 1 :
and new-fashioned phrases are often objected to

a lb. vi. 18.

^rixof) after the art of the perfumer" (K.V.).

9 o-Kevfurrcp, Ex. xxx. 97-25 : "a perfume compounded [fivpi1 Heb. vii. at.
3 Ps. exxxii. 17. The "lamp for the Anointed " was commonly
applied by the Fathers to John the BaptUt. Compare John v. 35,
and Bishop Westcott's note there.
4 2 Pet. i. 19. The supposed reference in the Psalm to the
lamp of prophecy is mentiuiied by Euscbius (Dtmonstr. Evang.
IV. cap. 16).
5 2 Cor. iv. 7. The reference ofthe ' lamp' to Christ's Incarna
tion is mentioned by Eusebius (u.s.) and other Fathers.
6 Amos. iv. 13 : ''and dcclareth unto man what is his thought."
For intffVTQ' ' wl,iU '* his though'.' the LXX. read •}rY'tI7I21
' His Anointed,' top Xfitarbv avrov.

7 Luke iv. 41.
8 John iv. 39.
1 ovk eiroAtrev«ro, 11 was not in citizenship,*' "not naturalised.
Cf. Sueton. Xero. cap. 16: "Christian!, genus hominum supcrstitionis novae et maleficae."

9 Heb. ix. 11.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

on the score of strangeness". The prophet made
this point safe beforehand, saying, But upon
My servants shall a new name be called, which
shall be blessed upon the earth*. Let us question
the Jews : Are ye servants of the Lord, or
not? Shew then your new name.
For ye
were called Jews and Israelites in the time of
Moses, and the other prophets, and after the
return from Babylon, and up to the present
But
time : where then is your new name ?
we, since we are servants of the Lord, have
that new name : new indeed, but the new
name, which shall be blessed upon the earth.
This name caught the world in its grasp : for
Jews are only in a certain region, but Chris
tians reach to the ends of the world : for it is
the name of the Only-begotten Son of God
that is proclaimed.

the
17. But wouldest thou know that
Apostles knew and preached the name of
Christ, or rather had Christ Himself within
them ?
Paul says to his hearers, Or seek ye a
proof of Christ that speaketh in me*? Paul pro
claims Christ, saying, For we preach not our
selves, but Christ Jesus as Lord, and ourselves
your servantsforJesus' sake s. Who then is this ?
The former persecutor. O mighty wonder !
The former persecutor himself preaches Christ.
But wherefore ? Was he bribed ? Nay there
was none to use this mode of persuasion.
But was it that he saw Him present on earth,
and was abashed ? He had already been
taken up into heaven. He went forth to per
secute, and after three days the persecutor is a
By what power ?
preacher in Damascus.
Others call friends as witnesses for friends :
but I have presented to you as a witness the
former enemy : and dost thou still doubt ?
The testimony of Peter and John, though
weighty, was yet of a kind open to suspicion :
But of one who
for they were His friends.
was formerly his enemy, and afterwards dies
for His sake, who can any longer doubt the
truth ?

18. At this point of my discourse I am
truly filled with wonder at the wise dispen
sation of the Holy Spirit; how He confined
the Rpistles of the rest to a small number, but
to Paul the former persecutor gave the pri
vilege of writing fourteen.
For it was not
because Peter or John was less that He re
strained the gift ; God forbid !
But in order
that the doctrine might be beyond question,
He granted to the former enemy and per
secutor the privilege of writing more, in order

■ rh tivw.
3 Isa. Ixv. 15, 16. The LXX. here depart from the meaning
of the Hebrew : " He shall call His servants by another name :
.0 that he -who blesseth himselfin the earth shall bless himself in
the Cod of truth " (R.V.).

4 a Cor. xiii. 3.

S lb. ir. 5. .

that we all might thus be made believers. For
all were amazed at Paul, and said, Is not this lie
that was formerly a persecutor6? Did he not
come hither, that he might lead us away bound
to Jerusalem?
Be not amazed, said Paul. I
know that it is hard for me to kick against the
pricks : I know that I am not worthy to be called
an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church oj
GodT ; but I didit;'« ignorance*: for I thought
that the preaching of Christ was destruction of
the Law, and knew not that He came Himself
to fulfil the Law and not to destroy it °. But the
grace of God was exceeding abundant in me '.

19. Many, my beloved, are the true testimonies
The Father bears witness
concerning Christ.
from heaven of His Son : the Holy Ghost
bears witness, descending bodily in likeness
of a dove: the Archangel Gabriel bears wit
ness, bringing good tidings to Mary :
the
Virgin Mother of God2 bears witness: the
blessed place of the manger bears witness.
Egypt bears witness, which received the Lord
while yet young in the body 3: Symeon bears
witness, who received Him in his arms, and
said, Now, Lord, Idlest Thou Thy servant de
part in peace, according to Thy word ; for mine
eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou hast
prepared before the face of all people*. Anna
also, the prophetess, a most devout widow, of
John
austere life, bears witness of Him.
the Baptist bears witness, the greatest among
the Prophets, and leader of the New Cove
nant, who in a manner united both Cove
nants in Himself, the Old and the New.
Jordan is His witness among rivers ; the sea
of Tiberias among seas : blind and lame bear
witness, and dead men raised to life, and
devils saying, What have we to do with Thee,
Jesus 1 we know Thee, who Thou art, ihe Holy
<~>ne of God*.
Winds bear witness, silenced" at
His bidding : five loaves multiplied into five

1 I Hm. i. r4.

8 i Tim. i. ij.

7 i Cor. xv. o.

• Acts ix. 21.
9 Malt. v. 17.
» rj OtoTOKot - Drfyara. Gibbon (Chap, xlvii. 34) says, " It is
not easy to fix the invention of this word, which La Croze {Chris,
tianisme ties Index, torn i. p. 16) ascribes to Euscbius of Cx-sarem
and the Arians. The orthodox testimonies are produced by Cyril
(of Alexandria) and l'etavius (Dogmat. Theo/og. torn, v, L. v.
cap. 15. p. 154, ttc), but the veracity of the Saint is questionable,
and the epithet of 0cor6*oc so easily slides from the margin to
the text of a Catholic MS." This passage is justly described
as "Gibbon's calumny'' by Dr. Newman: see his notes on the
title Pforoxo? (Athan. c. Arian. Or. ii. cap. la, n. : Or. iii.
capp. 14, 20. 33). The word is certainly used by Origen (Dent.
xxiL 13, Lommat7sch. Tom. k. p. 378): "She that is already
betrothed is called a wife, as aUo in the case of Joseph and
the Theotokos."
Cf. Archelaus (Dis/ut. cum Marie, cap. xxxiv.
"qui de Maria Dei Genetrice natus est"); Euscbius \iie Vita
Constantini, 111. cap. 43: "The pious Empress adotned with
rare memorials the place of the travail of the Theotokos").
For
other examples see Suicer's Thesaitnis, faorbicof, Pearson, Creed,
Art. iii. notes 1, m, n, o, and Routh, Reliq. Sacr. ii. p. 33a.
3 " Chrysostom describing the flourishing state of the Church
in Egypt in those times, says: ' Egypt welcomes and saves Him
when a fugitive and plotted against, and receives a beginning as
it were of its appropriation to Him. in order that when it shall
hear Him proclaimed by the Apostles, it may in their day also
be honoured as having been first to welcome Him ' " (Cleopas).

4 Luke ii. 20, 30.

5 Mark i. 24.

LECTURE X.

thousand bear Him witness. The holy wood
of the Cross bears witness, seen among us to
this day, and from this place now almost
filling the whole world, by means of those who
in faith take portions from it 6. The palm-tree ?
on the ravine bears witness, having supplied
the palm-branches to the children who then
Gethsemane 8 bears witness, still
hailed Him.
Gol
to the thoughtful almost shewing Judas.
gotha', the holy hill standing above us here,
bears witness to our sight : the Holy Sepulchre
bears witness, and the stone which lies there 1
to this day. The sun now shining is His
witness, which then at the time of His saving
Passion was eclipsed a : the darkness is His
witness, which was then from the sixth hour
to the ninth : the light bears witness, which
shone forth from the ninth hour until evening.
The Mount of Olives bears witness, that holy
mount from which He ascended to the Father :
the rain -bearing clouds are His witnesses,
having received
yea, and the
gates of heaven bear witness [having received
their Lord3], concerning which the Psalmist
said, Lift up your doors, O ye Princes, and be

their Lord :

6 See Cat. iv. jo, note 7.
7 The Bordeaux Pilgrim, who visited the Holy Places of Jeru
salem, A.D. 333, c. speaks of this palm-tree as still existing. The
cf. Aristot. {De Longilulongevity ol the palm was proverbial :
dime Vita*, c. iv. 2).
8 The same Pilgrim (as quoted by the Benedictine Editor)
says, "There is ako the rock where Judas Iscariot betrayed
Christ." Compare Cat. xiii. 38.
9 Sec Index, Golgotha,
1 See the passage ol the Introduction referred to in Index,
Sepulchre.
3 See Cat. ii. 15, note 8, and xiii. 35, 34, 38. On the super
natural character of the datkness mentioned in the Gospels see
Meyer. Commentary, Matt, xxvii. 45. An eclipse of the sun
Mr. J. R. Hind
was of course impossible, as the moon was full.
{Historical Eclipses, "Times," 19th July, 1872) states that the
solar eclipse, mentioned by Phlegon the freedman of Hadrian,
which occurred on Nov. 34, A.D. 20, and was partial at Jerusalem,
is " the only solar eclips ■ that could have been visible at Jerusalem
during the period usually fixed for the ministry of Christ." He
adds, "The Moon was eclipsed on the generally received date
I find she had emerged from
of the Crucifixion, 3 April, A.D. 33.
the earth's dark shadow a quarter of an hour before she rose at
Jerusalem (6.36 p.m.), but the penumbra continued upon her disc
tor an hour afterwards." Thus the "darkness from the sixth hour
unto the ninth " cannot be explained as the natural effect of an
eclipse either solar or lunar.
3 This clause is omitted in Codd. Mon. 1, a, Roe, Casaub., and
is probably repeated from the preceding line : such repetitions,
however, are not uncommon in Cyril's style.

ye lift up. ye everlasting doors ; and the King of
Glory shall come in «. His former enemies bear
witness, of whom the blessed Paul is one,
having been a little while His enemy, but for
a long time His servant : the Twelve Apostles
are His witnesses, having preached the truth
not only in words, but also by their own
torments and deaths: the shadow of Peter*
bears witness, having healed the sick in the
name of Christ. The handkerchiefs and aprons
bear witness, as in like manner by Christ's
power they wrought cures of old through Paul *.
Persians? and Goths8, and all the Gentile con
verts bear witness, by dying for His sake,
whom they never saw with eyes of flesh : the
devils, who to this day' are driven out by the
faithful, bear witness to Him.

20. So many and diverse, yea and more
than these, are His witnesses :
is then the
Christ thus witnessed any longer disbelieved?
Nay rather if there is any one who formerly
believed not, let him now believe : and if any
was before a believer, let him receive a greater
increase of faith, by believing in our Lord
Jesus Christ, and let him understand whose
name he bears.
Thou art called a Christian :
be tender of the name ; let not our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, be blasphemed through
thee: but rather let your good works shine be
fore men ' that they who see them may in Christ
Jesus our Lord glorify the Father which is in
heaven : To whom be the glory, both now and
Amen.
for ever and ever.

^

6 lb. xix. ta.

from whom Cyril quotes.

4 Ps. xxiv. 7. The first clause is mistranslated by the LXX.
5 Acts v. 15.
7 The persecution of the Christians in Persia by Sapor II.
is described at length by Sozomen (E.Ff. II. cc. ix.-xv., in this
Series).
It commenced in a.d 343, and was going on at the date
of these Lectures and long after. "During fifty years the Cross
lay prostrate in blood and ashes" {Diet. Bid. ' Sassanidae '). Com*
pare Neanclcr. Church History, Tom. III. p. 148, Bohn.)
8 The Goths here mentioned are the Gothi minores dwelling
on the north of the Danube, where Ullilas, "the Apostle of the
Goths" (311 -381^, converted many of his countrymen to Chris
After suffering severe persecution, he was allowed by
tianity.
Constantius to take refuge with his Arian converts in Moesia and
This migration took place in 348 A.D., the same year
Thrace.
in which Cyril's Lectures were delivered.

9 See Index, Exorcism.

> Matt. v. x6.

LECTURE XI.

On the words, The Only-Begotten Son of God, Begotten of the Father Very
God before all ages, By Whom all things were made.

God. who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in times past unto the Fathers
by the Prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by His Son.

Hebrews i.

I.

1. That we have hope in Jesus Christ has
been sufficiently shewn, according to our
ability, in what we delivered to you yesterday.
But we must not simply believe in Christ
Jesus nor receive Him as one of the many
For they
who are improperly called Christs'.
were figurative Christs, but He is the true
Christ; not having risen by advancement 2 from
among men to the Priesthood, but ever having
the dignity of the Priesthood from the Father \
And for this cause the Faith, guarding us be
forehand lest we should suppose Him to be
one of the ordinary Christs, adds to the pro
fession of the Faith, that we believe In One
Lord Jesus Christ, The ONLY-BtcoTrKN
Son of God.

2. And again on hearing of a "Son," think

not of an adopted son but a Son by nature
an Only-begotten Son, having no brother.
For this is the reason why He is
called
"Only-begotten," because in the dignity of
the Godhead, and His generation from the
Father, He has no brother.
But we call Him
the Son of God, not of ourselves, but because
the Father Himself named Christ 5 His Son 6 :
and a true name is that which is set by
fathers upon their children

3. Our Lord Jesus Christ erewhile became

* Compare x. u, 15 ; xvi. 13 : xxi. 1.
* *k irpoicojr^?. Sec x. 5, note 8.
3 Compare x. 14, note 9.
4 Qcrov.

Athanasius (<ie SentcntiA Dicnysii, I 93), represents
Arius as saying that the Word "is not by nature (icari <t>vaiy)
and in truth Son of God, but is called Son, He too, by adoption
(Kara Biviv), as a creature." Again (c. Arian. Orat. iii.
19),
he says, " This is the true God and the Life eternal, and we arc
made sons through Him by adoption and grace (0c'ir«4 Kit xapiri)."
Cf. vii. 10, and $ 4, below.
5 The MSS. all read airrov Xpttrrov which might mean " Christ
and no other." But Xpiffrop is probably a gloss introduced from
the margin.
* Compare the passages in which Cyril quotes Ps. ii. 7, as
Cat. vii. a ; x. a ; xi. 5 ; xii. 18.
7 *' It was one of the especial rights of a father to choose the
names for his children, and to alter them if he pleased" {Diet.
Greek ami Raman Antiq. " Nomen. 1 Greek.") The sight to the
name given by the father is the subject of one of the Private
Orations ot Dcmo>thenes (Ilpbs BoLwrbr irepi row bvonarof)-

Man, but by the many He was unknown.
Wishing, therefore, to teach that which was not
known, He called together His disciples, and
asked them, Whom do men say that I, the Son of
Man, ams?- not from vain-glory, but wishing
to shew them the truth, lest dwelling with
God, the Only-begotten of God', they should
think lightly of Him as if He were some mere
man.
And when they answered that some
said Elias, and some Jeremias, He said to
them, They may be excused for not knowing,
but ye, My Apostles, who in My name cleanse
lepers, and cast out devils, and raise the
dead, ought not to be ignorant of Him,
through whom ye do these wondrous works.
And when they all became silent
(for the
matter was too high for man to learn), Peter,
the foremost of the Apostles and chief herald 1
of the Church, neither aided by cunning in
vention, nor persuaded by human reasoning,
but enlightened in his mind from the Father,
says to Him, Thou art the Christ, not only so,
but the Son of the living God. And there fol
lows a blessing upon his speech (for in truth
it was above man), and as a seal upon what
he had said, that it was the Father who had
For the Saviour says,
revealed it to him.
Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and
blood hath not revealed it to thee, but My Father
which is in heaven
H e therefore who acknow
ledges our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God,
partakes of this blessedness ; but he who de
nies the Son of God is a poor and miserable
man.

4. Again, I say, on hearing of a Son, under-

8 Matt. xiii. 16.
9 Compare iv. 7 : " God of God begotten : " xiii. 3, and 13 :
11 God the Son of God."
Here, however, the MSS. vary, and the
reading of Cod. Coisl. Yty Orav ftwuytml is approved by the
Benedictine Editor, though not adopted. The confusion of Yitp
and <")*<u is like that in John i. 18.
1 6 irpwTooraTijs twv 'A.nocrTo\ojv xai tt}c 'EKxAijcri'as xopv^xuof
K^pu£.

8 Matt. xvi. 17.

Cf. ii. 19.

LECTURE XI.

stand it not merely in an improper sense, but
as a Son in truth, a Son by nature, without
beginning 3; not as having come out of bondage
into a higher state of adoption «, but a Son
eternally begotten by an inscrutable and
incomprehensible generation.
like
manner on hearing of the First-born s, think
not that this is after the manner of men j for
the first-born among *nen have other brothers
also. And it is somewhere written, Israel is
My son, Myfirst-born^. But Israel is, as Reuben
was, a first-born son rejected : for Reuben went
up to his father's couch ; and Israel cast his
Father's Son out of the vineyard, and crucified
Him.

And in

To others also the Scripture says, Ye are the
sons of the Lord your God 7.- and in another
place, I have said, Ye are gods, and ye are all
sons of the Most High*. I have said, not, " I
They, when God so said,
have begotten."
received the sonship, which before they had
not : but He was not begotten to be other
than He was before ; but was begotten from
the beginning Son of the Father, being above
all beginning and all ages, Son of the Father,
in all things like* to Hiiji who begat Him,

.

3 Athanasius (de Synodis, | 15) quotes a parage from the
Thalia of Anus, in which he says : "We praise Him as without
beginning, because of Him who has a beginning: and adore Him
as eternal, because of Him who in time ha_s come to be. He who
is without beginning made the Son a beginning of things created."
It is important, therefore, to notice the sense in which Cyril
here calls the Son avapxos- The word has two meanings, which
should be clearly distinguished, (i) unoriginate, (ii) without begin*
ning in time. The former referring to origin, or cause, can
properly be applied to the One true God, or to God the Father
only, as it is used by Clement of Alexandria (Protrept. cap. v.
. ayvoovvTtt, rbv avap\ov Oedv.
I 65 : to* watrrw rotirri|v .
[Strom. IV. cap. xxv. f 164 : b ©tos Si dVap^oc «PX'? t«»- oXuv
waiT*Aiis (ipv rj< iroiTjTifcof]. [Slromat. V. cap. xiv. ft 142 : i( np\i)t
avipxov]-
Methodius (06. 312 a.d. circ.) in a fragment (On
things created, ft 8, English Trans. Clark's Ante-Nic. Libr.) com
ments thus on Joh. i. 1 - 3 : " And so after the peculiar unbeginning beginning, who is the Father, He (the Word) is the beginning
of other things, ' by whom all things are made.' "
In this sense Cyril has said (iv. 4) that God alone is " unbegotten,
unoriginate:" and in xi. 20 he explains this more fully,-" Suffer
of?\>ji ).
none to speak of a beginning of the Son in time ( \t'on
but as a timeless beginning acknowledge the father.
For the
Father is the beginning of the Son, timeless, incomprehensible,
without beginning." From a confusion of the two meanings the
won! came to be improperly applied in the sense of " unoriginate"
to the Son, and to the Spirit ; and this improper usage is con*
demned in the 49th Apostolic Canon, which Hefele regards as
amongst the most ancient Canons, and taken from the Apostolic
Constitutions, vi. xi : " If any Bishop or Presbyter shall bantize
noi according to our Lord's ordinance into the Father, and Son,
and Spirit, but into three Unoriginales. or three Sons, or three
Paracletes, let him be deposed." (ii.) Athanasius frequently calls
the Son ai-apxov in the sense of ' timeless,' as being the co-eternal
brightness (awavyavp-a) of the Eternal Light : see deSent. Dionys.
|| 15. 16, 22 ; " God is the Eternal Light, which never either began
or shall cease : accordingly the Brightness is ever before Him,
and co-exists with Him, without beginuing and ever-begotten
(dVapvop *°i act-yepe's)."

4 ctf wpoKonrfv vio6tala%.
5 TlpmroTottov. The word occurs in Heb. i. 6, which had been
read in the Lesson before this Lecture. The exact dogmatic
sense of the word is carefully explained by Athanasius (c. Arian.
Or. ii. 62): " The same cannot be both Only-begotten and First*
bom, exceDt in different relations ;-that is, Only-hegctten, be
cause of His generation from the Father, as has been said ; and
First-born, because of His condescension to the creation, and
His making the many His brethren." See Mr. Robertson's dis
cussion f>i the word s-piuTOTOKO? (A than. p. 344, in this series), and
Bp. Bull (De/. Fid. Nic. iii. 5-8).
7 Deut. xiv. 1.
See the note on iv. 7. That the phrase
was not equivalent to o/iocwiofi and did not adequately express

* Ex. iv. 22.
9 iv vaaiv tytotof.

8 p5> Uxxii. 6.

Cf. | 2, note 4.

VOL. VII.

5.

eternal of a Father eternal, Life of Life be
gotten, and Light of Light, and Truth of
Truth, and Wisdom of the Wise, and King of
King, and God of God, and Power of Power \
If then thou hear the Gospel saying, The
book of the generation ofJesus Christ, the Son of
David, tlie Son of Abraham2, understand "ac
For He is the Son of
cording to the flesh."
but the Son of
David at the end of the ages
God before all ages, without beginning4.
The one, which before He had not, He re
ceived ; but the other, which He hath, He
hath eternally as begotten of the Father.
Two fathers He hath : one, David, according
to the flesh, and one, God, His Father in
As the Son of David,
a Divine manner5.
He is
handling,
subject to time, and to
and to genealogical descent : but as Son ac
cording to the Godhead 6, He is subject neither
place, nor to genealogical
to time nor to
descent : for His generation who shall declare! ?
God is a Spirit*; He who is a Spirit hath
spiritually begotten, as being incorporeal, an
inscrutable and incomprehensible generation.
The Son Himself says of the Father, The Jora
said unto Me, Thou art My Son, to-day have 1
begotten Thee*. Now this to-day is not recent,
but eternal: a timeless to-day, before all ages.
From the womb, before tlie morning star, have
I begotten Thee1.

6. Believe thou therefore on Jesus Christ,
Son of the living God, and a Son OnlyBegotten, according to the Gospel which
the relation of the Son to the Father is clearly shewn by Athana
sius (<r« Synodis, cap. iii. ft 53).
1 The additions which the Benedictine Editor has here made
to the earlier text, as represented by Milles, may be conveniently
dAAd Yip? [rou IlarpbsJ* «£ fPX*)* ifvwfrnt
shewn in brackets.
[vwtpdvat »ra<njs a;i\ ij( KM aiwewe TVYYafWi'] *, Yib« rov I! a rp'< f
[aiiio? «£ ii&iov HaTpof,]*
[iv tt .1 rj . 1- , t op.otot Tut ytytvvrjKOTi'
. KO.i Wtu> CM 6tOU, [*<U 6vVOfi.lt
y;n * K yu

y■yI 1'V (\fX t W>* . • .

* Codd. Coisl. Ottob. Mon. 2.

f Coisl. Ottob. Roe, Casaub

Mon. 1, 2.

8 John iv. 24,

4 See ft 4, note 3.

I Coisl. Ottob. Mon. x, a.
3 Heb. ix. 26.
.
.

. to St card tjj*- Oednrra.

9 Matt. i. t.
5 &«ucft»f.
6 to p.iv una rov AofiiS .
7 Isa- liii. 8. Compare ft 7, below.
9 Ps. ii. 7.
1 Ps. ex. 3. " From the womb of the morning thou hast the
dew of thy youth" tR.V.). There is a remarkable various reading
in Codd- Roe, Casaub.
To el av, a\povov nai aiitov' to 6) aijp.*pov Ttpoafyarov, aAA* ovk aiSiov, oiKftovfiivov tov Tlarpot «rai
Trf*- Karw yivvrfViv. Kai irdAii/ Aryei* "Bit ycWTpbs irpb iut<r<i>Qpov
ytyivvr}na ort* touto p.6vov rffs ©eorijros* II(<rTevo*oi', k.t.A. The
words *' Thou art My San" are thus referred to the eternal
generation, and " This day " to the binh in lime : whereas in the
received text, followed in our translation, tr^p-tpov refers to the
timeless and eternal generation of the Son. The former inter
pretation of Ps. ii. 7 is found in many Fathers, as for example
in Tcrtullian (adv. Prax. vii.
xi.), and Methodius (Conviv.
Virg. VIII. cap.ix.): '* He says 'Thou art,' and not * Tuou hast
become,' shewing that He had not recently attained to the position
of Son. ... But the expression, ' Tiiis day have I begotten Thee,'
signifies that He willed that existing already before the a«ts
in heaven He should also be begotten for the world, that is that
He who was belore unknown should he made kno*n." Th* same
interpretation was held by many Fathers, some referring triipipo*
to the Nativity, as Cyprian (adv. Juda-os Testfm ii. 8), others to
the Baptism (Justin M. Dialog, cap. Ixxxviii. ; Tamilian, adv.
Maraon- iv.
Athanasius (c. Arian. iv. ft 27), has a long
discussion on the question whether Ps. ex. 3, ix ynorpbt irpo
vwo^opov ytyevvuKa ert, refers to the eternal generation of ih«
Son, or to His Nativity.

72).

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

says, For God so loved the world, that He gave
His Only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth
on Him should not perish, but have everlasting
life'. And again, He that believeth on the Son
is not judged, but hath passed out of death into
life 3. But lie that believeth not the. Son shall not
see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him
And John testified concerning Him, saying,
And we beheld His glory, glory as of the onlybegotten from the Fatlier,--full of grace and
truth*: at whom the devils trembled and said,
Ah I what have we to do with T/iee, Jesus, Thou
Son of the living God 6.

7. He is then the Son of God by nature
begotten of the Father.
and not by adoption
And he that loveth Him that begat, loveth Him
also that is begotten of Him 8 / but he that
despiseth Him that is begotten casts back the
insult upon Him who begat. And whenever
thou hear of God begetting, sink not down in
thought to bodily things, nor think of a cor
ruptible generation, lest thou
be guilty of
impiety.
God is a Spirit' °, His generation is
spiritual : for bodies beget bodies, and for the
generation of bodies time needs must inter
vene ; but time intervenes not in the genera
tion of the Son from the Father.
And in our
case what is begotten is begotten imperfect :
but the Son of God was begotten perfect ; for
what He is now, that is He also from the
beginning ', begotten without beginning. We
are begotten so as to pass from infantine
ignorance to a state of reason : thy generation,
O man, is imperfect, for thy growth is pro
But think not that it is thus in His
gressive.
case, nor impute infirmity to Him who hath
begotten.
For if that which He begat was
imperfect, and acquired its perfection in time,
thou art imputing infirmity to Him who hath
begotten ; if so be, the Father did not bestow
from the beginning that which, as thou sayest,
time bestowed afterwards a.

8. Think not therefore that this generation
is human, nor as Abraham begat Isaac.
For
in begetting Isaac, Abraham begat not what
he would, but what another granted.
But in
God the Father's begetting there is neither
For
ignorance nor intermediate deliberation *.

Cf. I 5*

4 lb. ill. 36.

3 lb. iii. 18 ; v. 94.
Cf. I 2, note 4.

6 Luke iv. 34.
9 John iv. 24.
Cf. I 5, note 4.

■ John iii. 16.
5 lb. i. 14.
1 «ai oil Btari.
7 $1 t
8 1 John v. 1.
1 Y.^ci't-j|n.ro( apapxvf.
Bencd. c. Codd. Roe. Casaub. Coisl. h xp°>f>'C
• 6 ypopoc.
A. With the latter reading, the meaning will
Oltob. Mon. 1. 2.
be-11 if He did not bestow from the beginning, as thou sayest,
what He bestowed in after times."
Cyril does not here address
his auditor, but an imaginary opponent,-"U man."
Co npare Athan {de SyKotiis, § 26).
3 The Arians appear to have made use of a dilemma: If God
bc;at with will and purpose, these preceded the begetting, and so
i,v hot* ore oint ^v, there was a time when the Son was not : if
without will and purpose, then He begat in ignorance and of
necessity. Tue answer is fully given by Athanasius (c. Arian. iii.
58-67, pp. 425-431 in this Series).

to say that He knew not what He was be
getting is the greatest impiety; and it is no
less impious to say, that after deliberation in
For God
time He then became a Father.
was not previously without a Son, and after
wards in time became a Father ; but hath the
Son eternally, having begotten Him not as
men beget men, but as Himself only knoweth,
who begat Him before alTages Very God.

9. For the Father being Very God begat
the Son like unto Himself, Very God * ; not as
teachers beget disciples, not as Paul says to
some, For in Christ Jesus I begat you through
the Gospel*.
For in this case he who was not
a son by nature became a son by discipleship,
but in the former case He was a Son by
nature, a true Son.
Not as ye, who are to be
illuminated, are now becoming sons of God :
for ye also become sons, but by adoption of
grace, as it is written, But as many as received
Him, to them gave He the
right to become
children of God, even to them that believe on
His name: which were begotten not of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God6. And we indeed are begotten
of water and of the Spirit, but not thus was
Christ begotten of the Father.
For at the
time of His Baptism addressing Him, and
saying, This is My Son He did not say, " This
has now become My Son," but, This is Afy
Son; that He might make manifest, that even
before the operation of Baptism He was a
Son.

10. The Father begat the Son, not as among
For the mind is sub
men mind begets word.
stantially existent in us ; but the word when
spoken is dispersed into the air and comes to
But we know Christ to have been
an end 8.
begotten not as a word pronounced
but as a
Word substantially existing 1 and living ; not
spoken by the lips, and dispersed, but be
gotten of the Father eternally and ineffably, in
substance
For, In tlie beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God*, sitting at God's right

_

4 Athanasius (ttd Epiicopos A^Lgyfti, I r3), referring to i John
v. 20, This is the true (oAtj&kos) Cod, writes: " But these men
(the Arians), as if in contradiction to this, allege that Christ is not
the true God, but that He is only called God, as are other
creatures, in regard of His participation in the Divine nature."
Again ic. Arian. iii. 9), "He gave us to know that of the true
Father He is the true Offspring (dAne'ikby yivvwo).
7 Matt. iii. 17.
5 1 Cor. iv. 15.
o John i. 12, 13.
*' the
8 Compare Athanasius (de Sententid Dionysii, % 23) :
mind creates the word, being manifested in it, and the word
shews the mind, having originated therein."
Tertullian {adv.
Frctx. vii.) : " You will say what is a word but a voice and sound
of the mouth, and (as the Grammarians teach) air when struck
against, intelligible to the ear, but for the rest a sort of void,
Cf. Athan. {de Synodis, (12):
e.nptv, and incorporeal thing."
awTTOffrarov.

9 irpoQopiKov.
1 «wiro(TTaTov. ibid. So the Spirit is described in Cat. jrvii. 5
" not uttcreil or breathed by the mouth and lips of the Father and
the Son, nor dispersed into the air, but personally subsisting
{irufroo"rarer)."

Sec Cat. iv. 8, note 9.

■ iv vtror/Tuo'fL.

3 John i. 1.

t

LECTURE XI.

hand ;-the Word understanding the Father's
will, and creating all things at His bidding:
the Word, which came down and went up ;
for the word of utterance when spoken comes
not down, nor goes up ; the Word speaking
and saying, The things which I have seen with
My Father, these Ispeak * .• the Word possessed
of power, and reigning over all things : for the
Father hath committed all things unto the Son s.
1 1. The Father then begat Him not in such
wise as any man could understand, but as
Himself only knoweth.
For we profess not to
tell in what manner He begat Him, but we
insist that it was not in this manner. And not
we only are ignorant of the generation of the
Son from the Father, but so is every created
nature.
Speak to the earth, if perchance it may
teach thee6 : and though thou inquire of all
things which are upon the earth, they shall
For the earth cannot
not be able to tell thee.
tell the substance of Him who is
its own
potter and fashioner.
Nor is the earth alone
ignorant, but the sun also » : for the sun was
created on the fourth day, without knowing
what had been made in the three days before
him ; and he who knows not the things made
in the three days before him, cannot tell forth
the Maker Himself.
Heaven will not declare
this: for at the Father's bidding the heaven
also was like smoke established* by Christ. Nor
shall the heaven of heavens declare this, nor the
waters which are above the heavens 9. Why then
art thou cast down, O man, at being ignorant
of that which even the heavens know not ?
Nay, not only are the heavens ignorant of this
generation, but also every angelic nature. For
if any one should ascend, were it possible, into
the first heaven, and perceiving the ranks of
the Angels there should approach and ask
them how God begat His own Son, they would
say perhaps, "We have above us beings greater
and higher ; ask them." Go up to the second
heaven and the third ; attain, if thou canst, to
Thrones, and Dominions, and Principalities,
and Powers : and even if any one should reach
them, which is impossible, they also would
decline the explanation, for they know it not

12. For my part, I have ever wondered at
the curiosity of the bold men, who by their
imagined reverence fall into impiety.
For
though they know nothing of Thrones, and
Dominions, and Principalities, and Powers,
the workmanship of Christ, they attempt to

5 Matt. xi. 27 ; John v. 23.

4 John viii. 28.
6 Job xii. 8."
7 In saying; that the earth, the sun, and the heavens know not
their Maker, Cyril is simply using figurative language like that of
the passage of Job just quoted.
There is no reason to suppose
that he accepted Origen's thtory {fie Principiis, II. cap. 7), that
the heavenly bodies are living and rational beings, capable of
sin.

8 Isa. li. 6 : the heaven* shall vanish away like smoke.
9 Ps. cxlviii. 4.

scrutinise their Creator Himself.
Tell me first,
O most daring man, wherein does Throne
differ from Dominion, and then scrutinise what
Tell me what is a Prin
pertains to Christ
cipality, and what a Power, and what a Virtue,
and what an Angel : and then search out their
Creator, for all things were made by Him '. But
thou wilt not, or thou canst not ask Thrones
or Dominions. What else is there that kno7ce/h
the deep things of God'', save only the Holy
Ghost, who spake the Divine Scriptures? But
not even the Holy Ghost Himself has spoken
in the Scriptures concerning the generation of
the Son from the Father. Why then dost thou
busy thyself about things which not even the
Holy Ghost has written in the Scriptures ?
Thou that knowest not the things which are
written, busiest thou thyself about the things
which are not written ?
There are many
questions in the Divine Scriptures ; what is
written we comprehend not, why do we busy
ourselves about what is not written ?
It is
sufficient for us to know that God hath be
gotten One Only Son.

13. Be not ashamed to confess thine ig
norance, since thou sharest ignorance with
Angels.
Only He who begat knoweth Him
who was begotten, and He who is begotten of
Him kno.veth Him who begat.
He who
begat knoweth what He begat : and the
Scriptures also testify that He who was be
gotten is God 3.
For as the Father hath life in
Himself, so also hath He given to the Son to
have life in Himself* ; and, that all men should
honour the Son, even as they honour the Father s /
and, as the Father quickeneth whom He will,
even so the Son quickeneth whom He will6.
Neither He who begat suffered any loss, nor
is anything lacking to Him who was begotten
(I know that I have said these things many
times, but it is for your safety that they are
said so often) : neither has He who begat,
a Father, nor He who was begotten, a brother.
Neither was He who begat changed into the
Son', nor did He who was begotten become
the Father8. Of One Only Father there is One

■ 1 Cor. ii. 10, II.

1 John i. 3.
3 1 have followed the reading of Codd. Coisl. Roe, Casaub.
Mon. A . which is approved though not adopted by the Bene
dictine Editor. The common text is manifestly interpolated :
''And the Holy Spirit of God testifies in the Scriptures, that He
who was begotten without beginning is God. For what man
knoweth, cV<r."
This insertion of 1 Cor. ii. 11 interrupts the
argument, and is a useless repetition of the allusion to the same
passage in J ta.
4 John v. 26.
5 lb. v. 23.
7 See iv. 8, note 8, on the Siibellian doctrine, and Athanas.
(de Sytiodis, ft 16, note 10 in this series).
8 The doctrine of Sabellius might be expressed in two forms,
either the Father became the Son, or the Son became the Father.
Both forms are here denied. The Jerusalem Editor thinks there
is an allusion to the Arian argument mentioned by Athanasius
(c. Arian. Or. I. cap. vi. a?): "' II the Son is the Father's off
spring and Image, and is like in all tilings to the Father, tl en
it necessarily holds that as He is begotten so He begets, and He
too becomes father of a son." But the close connexion of the two
clauses is in favour of the reference to the Sabcllian viorraropfo.

6 lb. v. 21.

F 2

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

Only-begotten Son : neither two Unbegotten »,
nor two Only-begotten ; but One Father, Un
begotten (for He is Unbegotten who hath
no father); and One Son, eternally begotten
of the Father ; begotten not in time, but
before all ages; not increased by advance
ment, but begotten that which He now is.

14. We believe then In The Only-Begot
ten Son of God, who was begotten of the
Father Very God.
For the True God begetteth not a false god, as we have said, nor
did He deliberate and afterwards beget 1 ; but
He begat eternally, and much more swiftly
than our words or thoughts : for we speaking
in time, consume time ; but in the case of the
Divine Power, the generation is timeless. And
as I have often said, He did not bring forth
the Son from non existence into being, nor
take the non-existent into sonship a : but the
Father, being Eternal, eternally and ineffably
begat One Only Son, who has no brother.
Nor are there two first principles ; but the
Father is the head ofthe Son*; the beginning is
One.
For the Father begat the Son Very
God, called Emmanuel ; and Emmanuel being
interpreted is, God with us

15. And wouldest thou know that He who
was begotten of the Father, and afterwards
became man, is God?
Hear the Prophet
saying, This is our God, none other shall be
accounted of in comparison with Him. He hath
found out every way of knowledge, and given it to
Jacob His servant, and to Israel His beloved.
Ajterwards He was seen on earth, and conversed
Seest thou herein God become
among men*.
man, after the giving of the law by Moses ?
Hear also a second testimony to Christ's Deity,
that which has just now been read, Thy throne,
O God, is for ever and ever6. For lest, because
of His presence here in the flesh) He should
be thought to have been advanced after this to
the Godhead, the Scripture says plainly, There
fore God, even Thy God, hath anointed Thee
with the oil of gladness above Thy fellows 1.
Seest thou Christ as God anointed by God
the Father ?

16. Wouldest thou receive yet a third tes
Hear Esaias

timony to Christ's Godhead?

9 ay«Wtrroi. The context shews that this, not ayrVnrot, is
Athanasius seems to have used aycVfijroc
here the right form.
in both senses " Un.bcgotlen," as h^-re, and " unoriginate." Thus
(e. Arian. Or. i, cap. ix. I 30) he says of the Arians :
11 Their
further question ' whether the Unoriglnate be one or two,' shews
how false are their views." Compare Bp. Lightfoot's Excursus on
Ifnatius, F.pJus. | 7, and Mr. Robertson's notes on Athanasius
in this Scric«.
* Athan. (c. Arian. I. ix. 31) ''speaking against the Lord,
' He is of nothing,' and ' He was not before His generation.' "
3 1 Cor. xi. 3.
5 Baruch iii. 35- 17. The last verse was understood by Cyril,
as by many of the Greek and Latin Fathers, to be a prophecy
of the Incarnation: but in reality it refers to "knowledge"
(<iri<rrrj/i»), v. 36), and should be translated "she was seen upon
earth." See notes on the passage in the Sfxaktr'i Commentary.

1 Sec above, $ 8, note 3.

4 Matt. i. 23.

*> Heh. i. 8.

7 lb. L 9.

See x. 14, note 9.

saying, Egypt hath laboured, and the merchan
dise of Ethiopia : and soon after, In Thee shall
they make supplication, because God is in Thee,
For Thou art
and there is no God save Thee.
God, and we knew it not, the God of Israel, the
Saviour6.
Thou seest that the Son is God,
having in Himself God the Father: saying
almost the very same which He has said in
the Gospels : The Father is in Me, and I am
in the Father*. He says not, I am the Father,
but the Father is in Me, and I am in the Father.
And again He said not, I and the Father anr'
one, but, / and the Father are one, that we
should neither separate them, nor make a con
fusion of Son-Father1. One they are because
of the
dignity pertaining to the Godhead,
since God begat God. One in respect of their
kingdom ; for the Father reigns not over these,
and the Son over those, lifting Himself up
against His Father like Absalom : but the
kingdom of the Father is likewise the kingdom
of the Son. One they are, because there is
no discord nor division between them :
for
what things the Father willeth, the Son willeth
One, because the creative works of
the same.
Christ are no other than the Father's ; for the
creation of all things is one, the Father having
made them through the Son : For He spake,
and they were made ; He commanded, and they
For He
were created, saith the Psalmist 3.
who speaks, speaks to one who hears; -and
He who commands, gives His commandment
to one who is present with Him.

17. The Son then is Very God, having the
the
Father in Himself, not changed into
Father ; for the Father was not made man,
but the Son.
For let the truth be freely
The Father suffered not for us, but
spoken4.
the Father sent Him who suffered.
Neither
let us say, There was a time when the Son
was not ; nor let us admit a Son who is the
Father 5 ; but let us walk in the king's highway ;
let us turn aside neither on the left hand nor
on the right.
Neither from thinking to honour
the Son, let us call Him the Father ; nor from

9 John xiv. u.

8 Isa. xlv. 14, 15 : " They shall mike supplication unto thee,
saying, surely Gud is in thee."
'I'he woids are addressed to
Jerusalem as the city ol God. Cyril applies them to tue Son,
misled by the Septuagint.
1 Athanasius (c. Arian, Or. iv. 9 9), arguing for the opoovtrioi.
says: "There are two, because there is Father and Son, that
For if this is not so.
is the Word ; and one, because one God.
He would have said, I am the Father, or, I and the Father ain."
8 See iv. 8, notes 7 and 8.
3 Pss. xxxiii. 9 ; cxlviiL 5.
S. Cyril explains the creative
" Fiat " in Gen. i. as addressed by the Father to the Son.
4 We learn from Socrates {Eel. Hist- I. 34), that after
the Nicene Council "those who objected to the word &pAoovffto*"
conceived that those who approved it favoured the opinion ol
Marcellus of Ancyra, who was deposed on a charge
Sabellius."
of Sabellianism, and who did not in fact make clear the disiinct
personality of the Son, had been warmly supported by the triends
Cyril apparently fears to incur their censure, if
of Athanasius.
he too strongly condemned the Sabcbian view.
5 Cyril here rejeus both the opposite errors. Arianism, "There
was a time when the Son was not," and Sabellianism, "a Son
who is the Father."

LECTURE XI.

thinking to honour the Father, imagine the
Son to be some one of the creatures.
But let
One Father be worshipped through One Son,
Let
and let not their worship be separated.
One Son be proclaimed, sitting at the right
hand of the Father before all ages : sharing
His throne not by advancement in time after
His Passion, but by eternal possession.

18. He who hath seen the Son, hath seen the
Father h : for in all things the Son is like to
Him who begat Him » ; begotten Life of Life,
and Light of Light, Power of Power, God of
God ; and the characteristics of the Godhead
are unchangeable 8 in the Son ; and he who is
counted worthy to behold Godhead in the
Son, attains to the fruition of the Father.
This is not my word, but that of the Onlybegotten : Have I been so long time with you,
and hast thou not known Me, Philip ? He that
And to
hath seen Ale, hath seen the Father-°.
be brief, let us neither separate them, nor
make a confusion 1 : neither say thou ever that
the Son is foreign to the Father, nor admit
those who say that the Father is at one time
for these are
Father, and at another Son :
strange and impious statements, and not the
doctrines of the Church.
But the Father,
having begotten the Son, remained the Father,
and is not changed. He begat Wisdom, yet
lost not wisdom Himself; and begat Power,
yet became not weak : He begat God, but
lost not His own Godhead : and neither did
He lose anything Himself by diminution or
change ; nor has He who was begotten any
Perfect is He who begat, Per
thing wanting.
fect that which was begotten : God was He
who begat, God He who was begotten ; God of
all Himself, yet entitling the Father His own
God.
For He is not ashamed to say, J ascend
unto My Fattier and your Father, and to My
God and your God *.

19. But lest thou shouldest think that He
is in a like sense Father of the Son and of the
creatures, Christ drew a distinction in what
For He said not, " I ascend to our
follows.
Father," lest the creatures should be made
fellows of the Only-begotten ; but He said,
My Father and your Father; in one way
Mine, by nature ; in another yours, by adop
tion. And again, to my God and your God, in
one way Mine, as His true and Only-begotten
Son, and in another way yours, as His work
manship^ The Son of God then is Very God,

7 See above, § 4, note 9.

* }ohn xiv. 9.
8 ajrapoAAaxTo*. The word was used by the Orthodox Bishops
*t Nicaa, who said that "the Word must he described as the
True power and Image of the Father, in all things like the Father
See the notes of Dr, Newand Himself incapable of change."
"nan and Mr. Robertson on Athanasius (de Decretis, % ao).

» John xiv. 9,
x See iv. 8, note 8.
■ John xx. 17.
3 Compare Cat. viu J. The Jerusalem Editor observes that

ineffably begotten before all ages (for I say
the same things often to you, that it may be
graven upon your mind).
This also believe,
that God has a Son : but about the manner be
not curious, for by searching thou wilt not
find
Exalt not thyself, lest thou fall : think
upon those things only which have been com
manded Hue *.
Tell me first what He is who
begat, and then learn that which He begat ;
but if thou canst not conceive the nature of
Him who hath begotten, search not curiously
into the manner of that which is begotten.

20. For godliness it sufficeth thee to know, as
we have said, that God hath One Only Son, One
naturally begotten ; who began not His being
when He was born in Bethlehem, but Before
All Ages.
For hear the Prophet Micah
saying, And thou, Bethlehem, house of Ephrata,
art little to be among the thousands of Judah.
Out of thee shall come forth unto Me a Ruler,
wlio shallfeed Mypeople Israel: and His goings
forth are from the beginning, from days of
eternity s.
Think not then of Him who is now
come forth out of Bethlehem 6, 'but worship
Him who was eternally begotten of the Father.
Suffer none to speak of a beginning of the Son
in time, but as a timeless Beginning acknow
ledge the Father.
For the Father is the Be
ginning of the Son, timeless, incomprehensible,
The fountain of the river
without beginning
of righteousness, even of the Only-begotten, is
the Father, who begat Him as Himself only
knoweth. And wouldest thou know that our
Lord Jesus Christ is King Eternal? Hear
Him again saying, Yourfather Abraham rejoiced
to see My day, and he saw it, and was glad*.
And then, when the Jews received this hardly,
He says what to them was still harder, Before
Abraham was, I am*. And again He saith to
the Father, And nozv, Father, glorify Thou Me
with Thine own self, with the glory which I had
with Tfiee before the world was '. He says
plainly, " before the world was, I had the
glory which is with Thee." And again when

< Ecclus iii. aa.

the expression 11 My Cod" is understood by the Fathers generally
as spoken by Christ in reference to His human nature, but Cynl
applies this, as well as the other expression " My Father,* to the
Divine nature. So Hilary (de Trinit. iv, 53): " idcirco Deus
Compare Epipbanius
ejus est, quia ex eo natus in Deum est.
(//,/'-. Ixix. 55).
5 Micah v. a : on the various readings iAvioffTbc it, fiij oK, ft,
ovx oA. el, founu in tne M SS. of Cyril, sec the Commentaries on the
quotation of the passage in Matt. li. 6.
6 Codd. Roe, Casaub. have a different reacting-" Think not
then of His having now been born in Bethlehem, and (nur) suppose
Him as the Sun of Man to be altogether recent, but w01snip, Sec."
This is rightly tegarded by the Benedictine ana other Editors
as an interpolation intended to avoid the wppaient tendency of
Cyril's language in the received text to separate the Virgin's Son
from the Eternal Word. Had Cyril so written after the Nestorian
controvc^y arose, he would have appeared to favour the Nestorian
formula that 11 Mary did not give birth to the Deity." Compare
Swainson (.Vicene Creed, Ch. tx. f 7.) What Cyril really means is
that wc are not to think ot Christ simply as man, but to worship
Him as God.
9 lb. viii. 5S.
1 lb. xvii. 3.

7 Compare | 4, note 3.

* John viii. 56.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

He says, For Thou lovedst Me before the founda
tion of the world", He plainly declares, "The
glory which I have with thee is from eternity."
21. We believe then In One Lord Jesus
Christ, the Only-begotten Son of God,
Begotten of His Father Very God before
all worlds, by whom all things were made.
For whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers, all things were made
through Him 3, an d of things created none is
exempted from His authority.
Silenced be
every heresy which brings in different creators
and makers of the world ; silenced the tongue
which blasphemes the Christ the Son of God ;
let them be silenced who say that the sun is
the Christ, for He is the sun's Creator, not the
sun which we see *.
Silenced be they who say
that the world is the workmanship of Angels 5,
who wish to steal away the dignity of the OnlyFor whether visible or invisible,
begotten.
whether thrones or dominions, or anything
that is named, all things were made by Christ.
He reigns over the things which have been
made by Him, not having seized another's
spoils, but reigning over His own workman
ship, even as the Evangelist John has said,
All things were made by Him, and witfwut Him
was not anything made 6. All things were made
by Him, the Father working by the Son.

22. I wish to give also a certain illustration
of what I am saying, but I know that it is
feeble ;
for of things visible what can be
an exact illustration of the Divine Power ?
But nevertheless as feeble be it spoken by the
For just as any king,
feeble to the feeble.
whose son was a king, if he wished to form
a city, might suggest to his son, his partner in
the kingdom, the form of the city, and he
having received the pattern, brings the design
to completion ; so, when the Father wished to
form all things, the Son created all things at
the Father's bidding, that the act of bidding
might secure to the
Father His absolute
authority?, and yet the Son in turn might have
authority over His own workmanship, and
neither the Father be separated from the
lordship over His own works, nor the Son rule
over things created by others, but by Himself.
For, as I have said, Angels did not create the
world, but the Only-begotten Son, begotten, as
I have said, before all ages, By whom all

3 Col. i. 16.

• John xvii. 24.
4 Compare Cat. vi. 13, and xv. 3 : " Here let converts from the
Manichees gain instruction, and no longer make those lights their
gods ; nor impiously think that this sun which shall be darkened
is Christ."
5 The creation of the world was ascribed to Angels by the
Gnostics generally, e.g. uy Simon Magu-; (Irenacus, adv. Hares. I.
xxiii. I 2). Menander (ibid. % 5), Saturninus (iliid. xxiv. i), Basilides
{ 3), Carpocrates (ibid. xxv. 1).
7 On the doctrine of Creation by the Son as held by Cyril, see
tho reference to the Introduction in the Index, Creatien.

6 John i. 3.

things were made, nothing having been
excepted from His creation. And let this
suffice to have been spoken by us so far, by
the grace of Christ.

23. But let us now recur to our profession
of the Faith, and so for the present finish our
discourse.
Christ made all things, whether
thou speak of Angels, or Archangels, of Do
Not that the Father
minions, or Thrones.
wanted strength to create the works Himself,
but because He willed that the Son should
reign over His own workmanship, God Him
self giving Him the design of the things to be
made.
For honouring His own Father the
Only-begotten saith, The Son can do nothing of
Himself, but what He seeth the Father do ; for
what things soever He doeth, tliese also doeth the
Son likewise*. And again, My Father worketh
hitherto, and I work'), there being no opposition
For all Mine are Thine,
in those who work.
and Thine are Mine, saith the Lord in the
And this we may certainly know
Gospels
from the Old and New Testaments.
For He
who said, Let us make man in our image and
after our likeness 2, was certainly speaking to
some one present
But clearest of all are the
Psalmist's words, He spake and they were made;
He commanded, and they ivere created 3, as if the
Father commanded and spake, and the Son
made all things at the Father's bidding. And
this Job said mystically, Which alone spread
out the heaven, and walketh upon the sea as on
firm ground*; signifying to those who under
stand that He who when present here walked
upon the sea is also He who aforetime made
the heavens. And again the Lord saith, Or
didst Thou take earth, and fashion clay into
a living being* 1 then afterwards, Are the gates
of death opened to Thee through fear, and did the
door-keepers of hell shudder at sight of Thee 6 t
thus signifying that He who through lovingkindness descended into hell, also in the begin
ning made man out of clay.

24. Christ then is the Only-begotten Son of
For He was in
God, and Maker of the world.
the world, and the world was made by Him ;
and He came unto His own, as the Gospel
teaches us
And not only of the things which
are seen, but also of the things which are not
seen, is Christ the Maker at the Father's bid
For in Him, according to the Apostle,
ding.
were all things created that are in the heavens,
and that are upon the earth, things visible and
invisible, whether thrones, or dominions, or prin
cipalities, or powers; all things have been created
by Him andfor Him ; and He is before all, and

8 John v. iq.
9 Gen. i. 96.
S lb. xxxviii. 14.

9 lb. v. 17.
3 Ps. cxlviii. 5.
6 lb. xxxviii. 17.

1 lb. xvii. so.
4 Job ix. 8.

7 John i. 10, n.

LECTURE XI.

in Him all things consist*.
Even if thou speak
of the worlds, of these also Jesus Christ is the
Maker by the Father's bidding.
For in these
last days God spake unto us by His Son, whom

He appointed heir of all things, by whom also
He made tlie worlds'). To whom be the glory,
honour, might, now and ever, and world with
out end.

Amen.

• CoL L 16 17.

t Heb.Lx

LECTURE X.II.

On the words Incarnate, and made Man.
"And the Lord spake again unto Ahaz, saying, Ask thee a sign,

Isaiah vii. to- 14.

.-" and "■Behold!

a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call His name Emmanuel, &c."

1. Nurslings of purity and disciples of chas
tity, raise we our hymn to the Virgin-born God 1
with lips full of purity.
Deemed3 worthy to
partake of the flesh of the Spiritual Lamb 3, let
the
us take the head together with the feet
Deity being understood as the head, and the
Manhood taken as the feet.
Hearers of the
Holy Gospels, let us listen to John the Divine
For he who said, In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God6, went on to say, and the
Word was made flesh 1.
it
holy to worship the mere man, nor religious
to say that He is God only without the
For if Christ is God, as indeed
Manhood.
He is, but took not human nature upon Him,
we are strangers to salvation.
Let us then
worship Him as God, but believe that He
also was made Man.
For neither is there any
profit in calling Him man without Godhead,
nor any salvation in refusing to confess the
Manhood together with the Godhead.
Let us
confess the presence of Him who is both
King and Physician.
For Jesus the King
when about to become our Physician, girded
Himselfwith the linen of humanity 8, and healed
that which was sick. The perfect Teacher

For neither is

* This passage supplies a complete answer to the suspicion
of a quasi-Nestorian tendency referred to in note 6, on xi. ao.
See x. 19, note 2, on the title deordxoc.
a The Present Participle (Karactou/wyoO means that the Can
didates for Baptism were already on the way to be admitted to
Holy Communion. Compare Cat. i. i, where the same Candidates
are addressed as "partakers of the mysteries of Christ, as yet
by calling only, but ere long by grace also/'
3_Aubertin remarks on this passage that "this spiritual Lamb,
consisting of head and feet, can be received only by the spiritual
mouth." This explanation, however true in itself, cannot fairly
Sec the section
be held to express fully the meaning of Cyril.
of the Introduction referred to in the Index, " Eucharist."
4 Ex. xii. g : tht head with the feet. The same figurative
interpretation is given by Eusebius (£cc/. Hist. I. it It): "In
Christ there is a twofold nature ; and the one-in so far as He- is
thought of as God-resembles the head of the body, while the
other may be compared with the feet,-in so far as He, for the
iske of our salvation, put on human nature with the same passions
as our own.''
5 'Iudpyn rdi *f>coAdytu. The title is given to Moses by Philo
Judzcus {Vita Mos. III. f n), to Prophets by Eusebius (Demostr.
Evang. ii. 9), to Apostles by Athanasius (de Incam. 5 10 : twp
ovtoC row Swr^poc Qto\6yuty dvjpui/), and especially to St. John,
because the chief purpose of his Gospel was to set forth the Deity
1, in Speaker's Commentary,
Sec note on ReveL i.
of Christ.
and Suiccr, Thesaurus, OeoAdyoc.

6 John i. x.

7 lb. i. 14.

8 lb. xiii. 4.

of babes0 became a babe among babes,
that He might give wisdom to the foolish.
The Bread of heaven came down on earth '
that He might feed the hungry.

2. But the sons of the Jews by setting at
nought Him that came, and looking for him
who cometh in wickedness, rejected the true
Messiah, and wait for the deceiver, themselves
deceived ; herein also the Saviour being found
true, who said, I am come in My Father's
name, and ye receive Me not: but if another
shall come in his own name, him ye will receive
It is well also to put a question to the Jews.
Is the Prophet Esaias, who saith that Em
manuel shall be born of a virgin, true or false 3 ?
For if they charge him with falsehood, no
wonder : for their custom is not only to charge
with falsehood, but also to stone the Prophets.
But if the Prophet is true, point to the Em
manuel, and say, Whether is He who is to
come, for whom ye are looking, to be born of
a virgin or not ? For if He is not to be born of
a virgin, ye accuse the Prophet of falsehood :
but if in Him that is to come ye expect this,
why do ye reject that which has come to pass
already ?

3. Let the Jews, then, be led astray, since
they so will : but let the Church of God be
glorified.
For we receive God the Word made
Man in truth, not, as heretics say*, of the will
of man and woman, but of the Virgin
and the Holy Ghosts according to the

• lb.

1 John vi. 32, 33, 50.
3 Isa. vii. 14.

43.
9 Rom. ii. ao,
Cf. 2 John 7.
* Carpocratrs, Cerinthus, the Ebioniles, &c.
See Iranent
(Har. I. xxv. t 1 ; xxvi. g§ 1, 2).
5 Dr. Swainson (Creeds, Chap. vii. § 7), speaking of the Creed
of Cyril of Jerusalem, says that "the words <rap*w?<VTa xai croydpwirqtravra are found in it, but no reference whatever is made
to the birth from the Virgin." The present passage, and that
in Cat. iv. 59," begotten of the Holy Virgin and the Holy Ghost,"
seem to shew that such a clause formed part of the Creed which Cyril
was expounding. The genuineness of both passages is attested
by all the MSS., and Dr. Swainson was mistaken in charging the
Editors of the Oxford Translation with having omitted to " men
tion that Touttdc was himself doubtful as to the words within the
brackets " [ex Hap6ivov xai nvevp-aroc 'Avt'ov]. The brackets are
added by Dr. Swainson himself, and Touttee had no doubt of the
genuineness of the words : on the contrary he believed them to be
part of the Creed itself.
His note is as follows : " The words
0/ the Virgin and Holy Ghost I have caused to be printed in
larger letters as if taken from the Symbol : although they are

LECTURE XII.

Gospel, made "Man 6, not in seeming but
in truth. And that He was truly Man made
of the Virgin, wait for the proper time of
this Lecture, and thou shalt
instruction in
receive the proofs i : for the
error of the
heretics is manifold.
And some have said
that He has not been born at all of a virgin 8 :
others that He has been born, not of a virgin,
but of a wife dwelling with a husband. Others
say that the Christ is not God made Man,
but a man made God ».
For they dared to say
that not He- the pre-existent Word-was made
Man ; but a certain man was by advancement
crowned.

4. But remember thou what was said yester
day concerning His Godhead.
Believe that
He the Only-begotten Son of God-He Him
self was again begotten of a Virgin.
Believe
the Evangelist John when he says, And the
Word was madeflesh, and dwelt among us1. For
the Word is eternal, hegotten of the Father
before all worlds : but the flesh He took on
Him recently for our sake. Many contradict
this, and say : " What cause was there so great,
for God to come down into humanity ? And,
is
it at all God's nature to hold intercourse
with men? And, is it possible for a virgin to
bear, without man ?" Since then there is much
controversy, and the battle has many forms,
come, let us by the grace of Christ, and the
prayers of those who are present, resolve each
question.

5. And first let us inquire for what cause
Jesus came down. Now mind not my argu
mentations, for perhaps thou mayest be misled :
but unless thou receive testimony of the Pro
phets on each matter, believe not what I say :

wanting in the Title of this Lecture and in 1 13, where the third
Ankle of the Creed is referred to. But they are read in nearly all
the Latin and Greek Symbols, and are referred to in Cat. iv. i a."
6 ivavQptiiirrftratrra. The word occurs in the true Nicene for
mula, where, as Dr. Swainson thinks, it is " scarcely ambiguous,"
'"il is defective.''
Both the Verb and the Substantive ivavitpu*-
s^fTic are constantly used by Athanasius to denote the Incarnation
in a perfectly general way, without any indication of ambiguity or
defect.
In the Creed proposed by Eusebius of Qesarea instead
of tvavQfjtairrjtTavTa we find iv aptfpwjrotv iro\tTtvtTaf£tvov ; and in
the Expositio Fidei ascribed to Athanasius, but of somewhat
doubiful authenticity, the Incarnation is desi-ribed thus ex rrjc
avparrou napQeyov Mapfae rbv ^pcrepop ai-eiAn^cy avBpinwov
Xpurrov 'IijiroC*'.
In the Apollinarian controversy the attempt
*as made to interpret imjvOputjrriiriv as meaning not that "He
became Man," but that " He assumed a man," i.e. that "the man
*as first formed and then assumed" (Gregory, EpUt. adClcdon.
quoted by Swainson, p. 83), or else merely that " He dwelt among
mea." But the context of the passages in which Cyril uses the
word (iv. o; xii. 3) clearly shews that he employed it in the
perfectly orthodox sense which it has in the Nicene Formula and
tu Athanasius.
Cyril means that the direct proof cannot
be given at once, because there arc many errors to be set aside
first. Compare the end of 9 4.
8 See Cat. iv. 9, notes 3, 4.
9 Athanasius {contra Arian. Or. I. I 0) quotes as from Arius,
Tkalia, "Christ is not Very God, but He, as others, was made
wd (f0foirruvi0T)) by participation." The Eusebians in the Con
fession 01 Faith called Macrostichos (a.d. 344) condemned this
"iew as being held by the disciples of Paul of Samosata, " who
that after the incarnation He was by advance made God,
The orthodox use of
frorn heing made by nature a mere man.'
t^ie word ttfoirotcio-ftu is seen in Athan. de Incarttat. $ 54 : avTof
1 John i. 14.
'"ji^ujjrrjjty, lya T^MIC fcoirotndtojuie)'.

1 See below, 8. ar ff.

unless thou learn from the Holy Scriptures
concerning the Virgin, and the place, the time,
and the manner, receive not testimonyfrom man'2.
For one who at present thus teaches may
possibly be suspected :
but what man of
sense will suspect one that prophesied a thou
sand and more years beforehand ?
If then
thou seekest the cause of Christ's coming, go
In
back to the first book of the Scriptures.
six days God made the world : but the world
was for man.
The sun however resplendent
with bright beams, yet was made to give light
to man, yea, and all living creatures were
formed to serve us : herbs and trees were
All the works of
created for our enjoyment.
creation were good, but none of these was
an image of God, save man only. The sun
was formed by a mere command, but man
by God's hands : Let us make man after our
image, and after our likeness 3. A wooden image
of an earthly king is held in honour ; how
much more a rational image of God ?

But when this the greatest of the works of
creation was disporting himself in Paradise,
the envy of the Devil cast him out. The
enemy was rejoicing over the fall of him whom
he had envied : wouldest thou have had the
enemy continue to rejoice?
Not daring to
accost the man because of his strength, he
accosted as being weaker the woman, still
a virgin : for it was after the expulsion from
Paradise that Adam kneiv Eve his wife*.

6. Cain and Abel succeeded in the second
generation of mankind : and Cain was the first
Afterwards a deluge was poured
murderer.
abroad because of the great wickedness of
men :
fire came down from heaven upon the
people of Sodom because of their transgression.
After a time God chose out Israel : but Israel
also turned aside, and the chosen race was
wounded.
For while Moses stood before God
in the mount, the people were worshipping
a calf instead of God.
In the lifetime of
Moses, the law-giver who had said, Thou shalt
not commit adultery, a man dared to enter
After
a place of harlotry and transgress s.
Moses, Prophets were sent to cure Israel :
but in their healing office they lamented that
they were not able to overcome the disease, so
that one of them says, Woe is me / for the godly
man is perished out of the earth, and there is
none that doeth right among men6 : and again,
They are allgone out of the way, they are together
become unprofitable ;
there is none that doeth
good, no, not oneT : and again, Cursing and steal
ing, and adultery, and murder are poured out
Their sons and their daughters
upon the land 8.

* John v. 34.
5 Numb. xxv. 6.

Kom. iii. 12.

3 Gen. i. 36.

6 Micah vii. a.

8 Hosea iv. »,

4 Ih. iv. 1.
7 Ps. xiv. 3

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

they sacrificed unto devils
They used auguries,
and enchantments, anddivinations *. And again,
they fastened their garments with cords, and
made hangings attached to the altar ».

7. Very great was the wound of man's
nature ; from the feet to the head there -was no
soundness in it,- none could apply mollifying
ointment, neither oil, nor bandages 3.
Then be
wailing and wearying themselves, the Prophets
said, Who shall give salvation out of Sion*!
And again, Let Thy hand be upon the man
of Thy right hand, and upon the son of man
whom Thou madest strong for Thyself: so will
not we go backfrom Thee 5. And another of the
Prophets entreated, saying, Bow the Iteavens,
O Lord, and come down 6. The wounds of man's
They slew Thy Pro
nature pass our healing.
phets, and cast down Thine altars 1.
The evil
is irretrievable by us^ and needs thee to re
trieve it.

not

saith

to him :

disregarded

The Father

8. The Lord heard the prayer of the Pro
phets.
the
perishing of our race ; He sent forth His
Son, the Lord from heaven, as healer : and
one of the Prophets saith, The Lord whom ye
seek, comeih, and shallsuddenly come*. Whither ?
The Lord shall come to LLis own temple, where
Then another of the Pro
ye stoned Him.
phets, on hearing this,
In
speaking of the salvation of God, speakest
thou quietly? In preaching the good tidings of
God's coming for salvation, speakest thou in
secret ? O thou that bringest good tidings to
Zion, get th:e up into the high mountain.
Speak
What am I to speak ?
to the cities of Judah.
Behold our GodI Behold I
the Lord comeih
with strength') I Again the Lord Himself saith,
Behold 1 L come, and I will dwell in the midst
of thee, saith the Lord. And many nations
shallflee unto the Lord \ The Israelites rejected
salvation through Me : / come to gather all
nations and tongues 3. For He came to His oivn,
and His own received Him not*. Thou comest,
and what dost Thou bestow on the nations ?
/ come to gather all nations, and L will leave on
them a sign*. For from My conflict upon the
Cross I give to each of My soldiers a royal
seal to bear upon his forehead.
Another also
of the Prophets said, He bowedthe heavens also,
and came down ; and darkness was under His

t a Chron. xxxiii. 6.

upon clothes taken in fledge (R.V.).
4 Ps. xiv. 7.

9 Ps. cvi. 37.
3 Amos ii. 8 : they lay themselves dovm beside every altar
3 Isa. i. 6.
6 Ps. cxliv. 5.
7 1 Kings xix. xo.
9 lsa. xl. 9, 10.
1 Zech. ti. io, 11.
3 John i. xi.
4 Isa. lxvi. 10. a passage interpreted by the Fathers of the sign
of the Cross.
Eusebius (Dcmonstr. Evang. vi. 25): "Who, on
seeing that all who have believed in Christ use as a seal the
symbol of salvation, would not reasonably he astonished at hearing
the Lord's sa> ing of old time. And they shall come, and see My
Cf. Cat iv. 14 ;
glory, and I will leave a sign upon them t"
xiii. 36.

5 lb. lxxx. 17, 18.
8 Mai. ill. 1.
* Isa. lxvi. 18.

feet*. For His coming down from heaven was
not known by men.

9. Afterwards Solomon hearing his father
j David speak these things, built a wondrous
house, and foreseeing Him who was to come
into it, said in astonishment, Will God in very
deed dzvell with men on the earth 6 1 Yea, saith
David by anticipation in the Psalm inscribed
For Solomon, wherein is this, He shall come
down like rain into a fleece i : rain, because of
His heavenly nature, and into a fleece, because
of His humanity.
For rain, coming down into
a fleece, comes down noiselessly: so that the
Magi, not knowing the mystery of the Nativity,
say, / Vhere is He that is born King of tlie Jews* )
and Herod being troubled inquired concerning
Him who was born, and said, Where is the
Christ to be born 9?

10. But who is this that comcth down ? He
says in what follows, And with the sun He endureth, and before the moon generations of gene
rations1. And again another of the Prophets
saith, Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Sion, shout,
O daughter of Jerusalem.
Behold 1 thy King
cometh unto thee, fust and having salvation '.
Kings are many : of which speakest thou, O
Give us a sign which other Kings
Prophet?
have not.
If thou say, A king clad in purple,
the dignity of the apparel has been anticipated.
If thou say, Guarded by spear-men, and sitting
in a golden chariot, this also has been anti
cipated by others.
Give us a sign peculiar to
the King whose coming, thou announcest. And
the Prophet makcth answer and saith, Behold!
thy King comeih unto thee, fust, and having
salvation : He is meek, and riding upon an ass
and a youngfoal, not on a chariot Thou hast
a unique sign of the King who came.
Jesus
alone of kings sat upon an unyoked 3 foal,
entering into Jerusalem with acclamations as
a king. And when this King is come, what
doth He? Thou also by the blood of the covenant
hast sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit
wherein is no water «.

it. But He might perchance even sit upon a
foal: give us rather a sign, where the King
that entereth shall stand. And give the sign
not far from the city, that it may not be
unknown to us : and give us the sign plain
before our eyes, that even when in the city we
place. And the Prophet
may behold the
again makes answer, saying : And Hisfeet shall
stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives
Does
which is before Jerusalem on the east*.

5 Ps. xviii. o. The "feet, ' interpreted allegorically, mean th«
Humanity, and the "darkness" the mystery of the Incarnation.
See Enseb. Demanstr. Evang. vi. x, f a.
6 i Kings viii. 37 ; 2 Chion. vi r8.
7 Ps. lxxii. Title,
and v. 6.
1 Ps. lxxii. 5.
8 Matt. ii. a.
2 Zech. ix. 9.
3 io-ayri, a rare word, formed from ?avv,
"harness."
5 Zech. xiv. 4. " There is an excellent view from the city

4 Zech. ix. 11.

9 lb. ii. 4.

LECTURE XII.

any one standing within the city fail to behold
the place ?

1 2. We have two signs, and we desire to I
Tell us what the Lord doth I
learn a third.
when He is come.
Another Prophet saith,
Behold! our God, and afterwards, He will come
and save us.
Then the eyes of the blind shall be
opened, and the ears of the deaf shall hear : then
shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the
timgue of the stammerers shall be distinct*. But
let yet another testimony be told us. Thou
sayest, O Prophet, that the Lord cometh, and
doeth signs such as never were : what other
clear sign tellest thou ?
The Lord Himself
entereth into judgment with the elders of His
people, and with the princes thereoft. A notable
sign ! The Master judged by His servants,
the elders, and submitting to it.

13. These things the Jews read, but hear
not : for they have stopped the ears of their
heart, that they may not hear. But let us believe
in Jesus Christ, as having come in the flesh and
teen made Man, because we could not receive
Him otherwise.
For since we could not look
upon or enjoy Him as He was, He became what
we are, that so we might be permitted to enjoy
Him.
For if we cannot look full on the sun,
which was made on the fourth day, could we
behold God its Creator8? The Lord came
down in fire on Mount Sinai, and the people
could not bear it, but said to Moses, Speak
thou with us, and we will hear ; and let not
God speak to us, lest we die? : and again, For
who is there of allflesh that hath heard the voice
of the living God speaking out of the midst of
thefire, and shall live 1 ?
If to hear the voice of
God speaking is a cause of death, how shall not
the sight of God Himself bring death ? And
what wonder? Even Moses himself saith, /
exceedingly fear and quake

14. What wouldest thou then ?

That He
who came for our salvation should become a
minister of destruction because men could not
bear Him ? or that He should suit His grace
to our measure?
Daniel could not bear the
vision of an Angel, and wert thou capable of
the sight of the Lord of Angels ?
Gabriel
appeared, and Daniel fell down : and of what
nature or in what guise was he that appeared ?
His countenance was like lightning 3; not like
the sun : and his eyes as lamps offire, not as a
furnace of fire : and the voice of his words as the
voice of a multitude, not as the voice of twelve

ofthe Mount of Olive* which stands up over against it, especially
from the height of Golgotha where Cyril was delivering his Lec
* Isa. xxxv. 4-6.
tures" (Cleopa*).
8 Cf. Epist. Barnab. § 13: " For had He not come in flesh,
how could we men have been safe in beholding Him? For in
beholding the Sun, which being the work of His hands shall cease
to be, men have no strength to fix their eyes upon him."
1 Dcut. v. 36.

» Heb. xii. at,

7 lb. iii. 14.

* Exod. xx. 19,
J Dan. x. 6.

legions of angels ; nevertheless the Prophet
fell down. And the Angel cometh unto him,
saying, Fear not, Daniel, stand upright: be of
good courage, thy words are heard 4. And Daniel
says, / stood up trembling
and not even so
did he make answer, until the likeness of a
man's hand touched him. And when he that
appeared was changed into the appearance of
a man, then Daniel spake : and what saith he?
0 my Lord, at the vision of Thee my inward
parts were turned within me, and no strength
remainelh in- me, neither is there breath left
in me 6.
If an Angel appearing took away the
Prophet's voice and strength, would the ap
pearance of God have allowed him to breathe?
And until there touched me as it were a vision
of a man ?, saith the Scripture, Daniel took
not courage.
So then after trial shewn of our
weakness, the Lord assumed that which man
required : for since man required to hear from
one of like countenance, the Saviour took on
Him the nature of like affections, that men
might be the more easily instructed.
15. Learn also another cause.

Christ came
that He might be baptized, and might sanctify
Baptism : He came that He might work won
ders, walking upon the waters of the sea.
Since then before His appearance in flesh, the
sea saw Him and fled, and Jordan was turned
back 8, the Lord took to Himself His body, that
the sea might endure the sight, and Jordan re
ceive Him without fear. This then is one cause ;
but there is also a second.
Through Eve yet
virgin came death ; through a virgin, or rather
from a virgin, must the Life appear : that as
the serpent beguiled the one, so to the other
Gabriel might bring good tidings'. Men for
sook God, and made carved images of men.
Since therefore an image of man was falsely
worshipped as God, God became truly Man,
The
that the falsehood might be done away.
Devil had used the flesh as an instrument
against us ; and Paul knowing this, saith, But
1 see another law in my members warring against
the law of my mind, and bringing me into captiv
ity ', and the rest By the very same weapons,
therefore, wherewith the Devil used to van
quish us, have we been saved.
Tlie Lord
took on Him from us our likeness, that He
might save man's nature : He took our like
ness, that He might give greater grace to
sinful humanity
that
For where
might become partaker of God.
It
sin abounded, grace did much more abound*.

lacked ;

which

that

4 Dan. x. is.
* lb. x. 16, 17.
7 lb. x. 18.
9 Justin M. (Tryfk. \ too) : " Eve, when she was a virgin and
undented, having conceived the word of the serpent, brought forth
disobedience and death : but the Virgin Mary received taith and
joy, when the Angel Gabriel announced the gtoj tidings to her."

8 Ps. cxiv. 3.

5 lb. x. it.

« Rom. vii 73.

» lb. v. ao.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

behoved the Lord to suffer for us; but if the
Devil had known Him, he would not have
dared to approach Him. For had they known it,
they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory 3.
His body therefore was made a bait to death,
that the dragon *, hoping to devour it, might
disgorge those also who had been already
devoured 5. For Death prevailed and devoured ;
and again, God wiped away every tear from off
every face 6.

1 6. Was it without reason that Christ was
made Man ?
ingenious
Are our teachings
phrases and human subtleties?
Are not the
Holy Scriptures our salvation ?
Are not the
Keep then, I
predictions of the Prophets ?
pray thee, this deposit ' undisturbed, and let
none remove thee : believe that God became
Man.
But though it has been proved possible
for Him to be made Man, yet if the Jews still
disbelieve, let us hold this foith to them :
What strange thing do we announce in saying
that God was made Man, when yourselves say
that Abraham received the Lord as a guest 8 ?
Whatstrangething do we announce, when Jacob
says, For I have seen God face to face, and my
life
is preserved 9? The Lord, who ate with
Abraham, ate also with us. What strange thing
then do we announce ? Nay more, we produce
two witnesses, those who stood before the
Lord on Mount Sinai : Moses was in a clift of
the rock
and Elias was once in a clift of the
rock* : they being present with Him at His
Transfiguration on Mount Tabor, spake to the
Disciples of His decease tuhich He should ac
complish atJerusalem^. But, as I said before, it
has been proved possible for Him to be made
man : and the rest of the proofs may be left
for the studious to collect.

17. My statement, however, promised to de
clare* also the time of the Saviour's advent,
and the place : and I must not go away con
victed of falsehood, but rather send away the
Church's novices s well assured.
Let us there
fore inquire the time when our Lord came :
because His coming is recent, and is disputed ;
and because Christ Jesus is the same yesterday,
Moses then, the
and to-day, and for ever6.

3 t Cor. ii. 8.
4 Death is here called "the dragon," as in xiv. 17 he is called
M the invisible whale," in allusion to the case of Jonah.
5 On Christ's descent into Hades compare iv. 11 ; xiv. 19 ; and
Euscbius {Dcm. Evan£. x. 50). and Athanasius {c. Arian. Or. iii.
56): "The Lord, at Whom the keepers of hell's gates shuddered
and set open hell. The Lord, Whom death as a dragon flees."
6 Isa. xxv. 8. The first clause, He hath swallowed up death
for ever <R V.), is mistranslated in the Septuagint.
7 Tivnjv Tt\v iraocucaradrjo;*'.
9 lb. xxxii. 30.
8 Gen. xviii. iff.
■ t Kings xix. 8
' Ex. xxxiii. aa.
3 Luke ix. 30, 31. On the tradition that Mt. Tahor was the
place of the Transfiguration, accepted by S. Jerome and other
Fathers, compare Liglitfoot 'Mor. Hebr. in Marc. ix. a).
For nupelit the recent Editors with MSS. A.R.C.
and Grodecq. have ipeiv.
Cyril U supposed to refer to two objections

4 Cat. xii
6 Heb. xiii. 8.

x Tim. vL ao ; 3 Tim. i. 14,

5 veij^v&as'

5.

prophet, saith, A Prophet shall the Lord your
God raise up unto you of your brethren, like
unto me?: but let that "like unto me" be re
served awhile to be examined in its proper
place8. But when cometh this Prophet that is
expected?
Recur, he says, to what has been
written by me : examine carefully Jacob's pro
phecy addressed to Judah : Judah, thee may thy
brethren praise, and afterwards, not to quote
the whole, A prince shall not fail out ofJudah,
nor a ruler from his loins, until He come, for
whom it is reserved ; and He is the expectation,
not of the Jews but of the Gentiles*. He gave,
therefore, as a sign of Christ's advent the ces
If they are not now
sation of the Jewish r ile.
under the Romans, the Christ is not yet come :
if they still have a prince of the race of Judah
and of David ', he is not yet come that was
expected.
For I am ashamed to tell of their
recent doings concerning those who are now
called Patriarchs 2 among them, and what their
descent is, and who their mother : but I leave
it to those who know.
But He that cometh
as the expectation of the Gentiles, what further
sign then hath He ? He says next, Binding
his foal unto the vine 3.
Thou seest that foal
which was clearly announced by Zachariah 4.

1 8. But again thou askest yet another testi
The Lord said unto Me,
mony of the time.
this day have L begotten
Thou art My Son ;
Thee: and a few words further on, Thou shall
rule them with a rod ofiron5.
I have said before
that the kingdom of the Romans is clearly
called a rod of iron ; but what is wanting con
cerning this let us further call to mind out of
Daniel. For in relating and interpreting to Ne
buchadnezzar the image of the statue, he tells
also his whole vision concerning it : and that
a stone cut out of a mountain without hands,
that is, not set up by human contrivance,
should overpower the whole world : and he
speaks most clearly thus ; And in the days oj

to the Incarnation, one founded on the lateness of Christ's coming,
But the meaning of the
the other on the Divine immutability.
passage is not clear, and the construction of the second sentence
is incomplete.

7 Deut. xviii. 15 ; Acts vii. 37.
8 i$*Ta£6fievov. a clear instance of the Gerundive, or quasi-
'This
Future, sense of the Present Participle, common in Cyril.
intention is not fulfilled in the sequel of these Lectures " (R.W.C.).
9 Gen. xlix. 8, 10.
1 According to Cyril (| 10, below) and other Fathers, the
continuance of Jewish rulers ceased on the accession of Herod
an Idumcan. Compare Justin M. (Tryphcn. H 5a, 120) ; Eusebius
tDemonstr. Evang. VI II. 1). On modern interpretations 01 the
passage see Dclitzsch {New Commentary on Genesis), Briggs
uifetnamie Prophecy, p. 03). Cheyne i/saiah. Vol. 11. p. 189),
Driver {Journal ofPhilology, No. 27, 1885),
a A full and interesting account of the Jewish Patriarchs of
the West established at Tiberias from the time of Antoninus Pius
till the close of the 4th century is contained in Dean Mitotan's
History 0/the Jews, Vol. 111. Compare Epiphanius {hmres. xxx.
3 Gen. xlix. 11.
i 3 fT.).

4 Zcchar. ix. 9, quoted above, 5 to.
5 Ps. ii. 7, 9.

The passage is interpreted by Cyril (xi. 5)
of the eternal generation of the Son : here it refers to His Incar
nation, or perhaps is meant only to identify the Son of God with
him who " shall rule with a rod of iron."

LECTURE XII.

those kingdoms the God of heaven shall set up
a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed, and
His kingdom shall not be left to another people 6.
19. But we seek still more clearly the proof
of the time of His coming.
For man being
hard to persuade, unless he gets the very
years for a clear calculation, does not be
What then is the season,
lieve what is stated.
It is
and what the manner of the time?
when, on the failure of the kings descended
from Judah, Herod a foreigner succeeds to
the kingdom ?
The Angel, therefore, who
converses with Daniel says, and do thou now
mark the words, And thou shalt know and un
derstand: From the going forth of the wordfor
making annoeri, andfor the building ofJerusa
lem, •until Messiah the Prince are seven weeks
and three score and two weeks 8. Now three
score and nine weeks of years contain four
He said,
hundred and eighty-three years.
therefore, that after the building of Jerusalem,
four hundred and eighty-three years having
passed, and the
rulers having failed, then
cometh a certain king of another race, in whose
time the Christ is to be born. Now Darius
the Mede' built the city in the sixth year of
his own reign, and first year of the 66th Olym
piad according to the Greeks.
Olympiad is
the name among the Greeks of the games cele
brated after four years, because of the day
which in every four years of the sun's courses
is made up of the three1 (supernumerary) hours
in each year. And Herod is king in the 186th
Olympiad, in the 4th year thereof. Now from
the 66th to the 186th Olympiad there are 120
Olympiads intervening, and a little over.
So
then the 120 Olympiads make up 480 years :
for the other three years remaining are perhaps
taken up in the interval between the first and
fourth years. And there thou hast the proof
according to the Scripture which saith, From
the going forth of the ivord that Jerusalem be
restored and buiit until Messiah the Prince are
seven weeks and sixty-two weeks.
Of the times,
therefore, thou hast for the present this proof,
although there are also other different inter

• Dan. ii. 44.
7 Sept. tow airoxoidqwu. a frequent mraning of the Hebrew
H^n^, by which the Greek Translators understood the answer
Both A.V.
of Darius to the letter of Tatnai and his companions.
and R.V. render the word " to restore."

8 Dan. ix. 25.
9 Darius the Mede (Dan. t. 31) succeeded Belsharxar as
King in Babylon B.C. 538, the date assigned in Dan. ix. 1 to the
prophecy ol the 70 years.
But "Darius the king" in whose
tlh vear 1 b c. 516) the Temple was finished (Ezra vi. 15 k was
Darius Hystaspis, king of Persia, whom Cyril here confounds with
''Darius the Mede." He also fails to distinguish the rebuilding
°f lue Temple, n.c. 516, irum the rebuilding of the City by pernussinn of Artaxcrxes Longiinanus, B.C. 444 {Xehrmiah. ii. 1).
1 In speaking of three supernumerary huurs in the ye:ir instead
of nearly six. Cyril seems to follow the division of the diurnal
period into twelve parts, not twenty.four. The Jews haj derived
this division either from the Egyptians, or more probably from the
Babylonians: see Heiodotus, it. log.

pretations concerning the aforesaid weeks of
years in Daniel.

20. But now hear the place of the promise,
as Micah says, And thou, Bethlehem, house of
Ephrathah, art thou little to be among the thou
sands of Judah 1 For out of thee shall come
forth unto Me a ruler, to be governor in Israel:
and His goings forth are from the beginning,
from the days of eternity ». But assuredly as to
the places, thou being an inhabitant of Jeru
salem, knowest also beforehand what is written
in the hundred and thirty-first psalm. Lot
we heard of it at Ephrathah, wefound it in the
For a few years ago the
plains of the wood \
place was woody *.
Again thou hast heard
Habakkuk say to the Lord, When the years draiv
nigh, thou shalt be made known, when the lime
is come, thou shalt be shewn s. And what is the
sign, O Prophet, of the Lord's coming ? And
presently he saith, In the midst of two lives shalt
thou be known 6, plainly saying this to the Lord,
" Having come in the flesh thou livest and
diest, and after rising from the dead thou livest
again."
Further, from what part of the region
round Jerusalem cometh He? From east, or
west, or north, or south ?
Tell us exactly.
And he makes answer most plainly and says,
God shall comefrom Teman 1 (now Teman is by
interpretation ' south ') and the Holy One from
Mount ParanB, shady, ivoody: what the Psalmist

9 Micah v. 2, quoted also in Cat. xi. 20, where see note.
3 Ps. exxxii. 6. The Psalmist refers to the recovery of the
Ark, but Cyril interprets the passage mystically of Christ, and the
place of His Nativity.
4 The Benedictine Editor thinks that in calling the place
" woody " Cyril refers to a grove planted by Hadrian in honour of
Adonis, which had been destroyed about sixteen vears before, when
Helena built the Church at B-thlehem : see Eusebius, Life of
Constantine, 1 1 1. 43.
But Cyril evidently means that the wood
of which the Psalmist speaks had remained till a few years before.
Ephrathah is the ancient name of Bethlehem (Gen. xxxv. 19 ;
xlviii.
7), and by "the fields of the wood" is probably meant
the city of woods," where the Ark was found by
Kirjath-Jcarim,
D.ivid (2 Sam. vi. 2 ; 1 Chron. xiii. 6).
5 Hab. iii. 2 : (R.V.) O Lotd. revive Thy work in the midst
of the years, in the midst 0/ the years make it kutnvn. The
Septuagint gives a different sense : In the midst of two lives
(or, living beings} shilt Tliou be known : when the years draw
nigh Thou shalt be recognised': when the time is come. Thou
The two latter clauses seem to be different
shalt be shewn.
renderings of the same Hebrew words".
This clause comes before the preceding quotation :
In the Vatican and other MSS. of the
Cyril misplaces them.
Sept. and in some Fathers £wuii' ("living creatures") is found in
place of $tab*v " lives ;" but the latter reading is evidently required
by the interpretation which follows in Cyril.
Origen (de Principiis, I. 4), who recognises both readings (" In medio vel duorum auimalium, vel duariun vitarum, cognosceris,") interprets the
" two living beings " of the Son and the Spirit.
Eusebius
{DeutOHStr. Evung. VI. 15) observes that £w(up is to be read
as perispomenon from the Singular fwi/, and interprets it of Christ's
Theodoret says, in commenting
life with God, and life on earth.
on the passage, "To me it seems that the Prophet means not
"living beings" (£ua) but " lives" (sVas), the present life, and
that which is to come, between which is the appearance of the
Righteous Judge."
7 Hab. iii. 3.

Cyril interprets the word ftrntptir (Heb.

6 f^tfe.

as a common Noun meaning " South," and the Vutgite has here
" ab Austro venict." The prophecy is thus referred to Bethlehem,
as lying to th= South of Jerusalem.
Eusebius (Dem. Evang. VI.
15) mentions this as the rendering ot Thcodotion in his Greek
Version, about 180 A.o. As a proper name Teman denotes a district and town in the southern part ol Idumea, so called from
a grandson of Esau f^Gen. xxxvi. 11, 15, 42 ; Jer. xlix. 7, 20;
Ezek. xxv.
8 The following note is slightly abridged from the Edition

: Amos 1. 12 ; Obad. 9).

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

spake in like words, We found it in the plains
of the wood.

21. We ask further, of whom cometh He
and how? And this Esaias tells us : Behold I \
the virgin shall conceive in her womb, and shall
bringforth a Son, and they shall call His name
Emmanuel').
This the Jews contradict, for of
old it is their wont wickedly to oppose the
truth : and they say that it is not written " the
virgin," but " the damsel."
But though I as
sent to what they say, even so I find the truth.
For we must ask them, If a virgin be forced,
when does she cry out and call for helpers,
after or before the outrage ?
If, therefore, the
Scripture elsewhere says, The betrothed damsel
cried, and there was none to save her1, doth it
not speak of a virgin ?

But that you may learn more plainly that
even a virgin is called in Holy Scripture a
" damsel," hear the Book of the Kings, speak
ing of Abishag the Shunamite, And the damsel
was very fair*: for that as a virgin she was
chosen and brought to David is admitted.

22. But the Jews say again, This was said
to Ahaz in reference to Hezekiah. Well, then,
let us read the Scripture : Ask thee a sign of the
Lord thy God, in the depth or in the height 3. An d
the sign certainlymustbe something astonishing.
For the water from the rock was a sign, the sea
divided, the sun turning back, and the like.
But in what I am going to mention there is
still more manifest refutation of the Jews.
(I know that I am speaking at much length,
and that my hearers are wearied : but bear
with the fulness of my statements, because it
is for Christ's sake these questions are moved,
and they concern no ordinary matters.) Now
as Isaiah spake this in the reign of Ahaz, and
Ahaz reigned only sixteen years, and the pro
phecy was spoken to him within these years,
the objection of the Jews is refuted by the
fact that the succeeding king, Hezekiah, son

of Alexandrides of Jerusalem. " Previous Editions read
opoi-s
Qapav Kttravitiov &atreos. This reading is found in Cod. Vat.
and other MSS. of the Septuagint, but Qapav is omitted in the
Aldine and many other copies, nor was it read in the MSS. of the
Sept. in Jerome's time, as is clear from his comments on the
passage.
In the MSS. of Cyril, Ottob. R.C. V. Monac. I . and 1 1,
Paran is the name of the desert towards the S.
it is wanting.
of Palestine lying between it and Egypt (Gen. xxi. 2x ; Num. i. la).
There was also a Mount Paran (Deut. xxxiii. a).
But since
Cyril applies the prophecy to Bethlehem, and the " shady thicklywooded mountain" of Habakkuk is identified with "the plains
of the wood " of David, we may safely conclude that Cyril did not
read 'I'a^ai' in his copies of the Septuagint. nor write it in his
Lecture : but the reading crept in from the later copyists, accus
tomed to the reading Qapav in the Septuagint. '
The objection of the Jews that the Hebrew
word "Almah" means "a young woman," whether married or
not, is mentioned by Justin M. {Ttyph. 43, 67, 71), and by Eusebius (Dein. Evang. VII. i. 315).
Cyril's argument is fully justified by the
actual usage of "Almah," which certainly refers to unmarried
women in Gen. xxiv. 43; Ex. v.. 8; Caitt. i. 3. The same is
probably the meaning in Ps. Ixviii. 25 : " in the midst were the
damsel* playing with li.e timbrels." There is no passage in which
the word can be shewn to mean a married woman.

3 1 Kings i. 4.

1 Deut. xxii. 37,

9 Isa. vii. 14.

3 lsa. vii. xx.

of Ahaz, was twenty-five years old when he
began to reign : for as the prophecy is cont fined within sixteen years, he must have been
i begotten of Ahaz full nine years before the
prophecy.
What need then was there to utter
the prophecy concerning one who had been
already begotten even before the reign of his
father Ahaz ♦ ? For he said not, hath conceived,
but " the virgin shall conceive," speaking as with
foreknowledge 5.

23. We know then for certain that the
Lord was to be born of a Virgin, but we
have to shew of what family the
Virpin
The Lord sware in truth unto David,
was.
and will not set it aside. Of the fruit of thy
body willlset upon thy throne6 : and again, His
seed will I establish for ever, and his throne as
the days of heaven
And afterwards, Once have
I sworn by My holiness that I will not lie unto
His seed shall endure for ever, and his
David.
throne as the sun before Me, and as t/ie moon
Thou seest that the dis
established for ever*.
course is of Christ, not of Solomon.
For Solo
mon's throne endured not as the sun. But if any
deny this, because Christ sat not on David's
throne of wood, we will bring forward that say
ing, The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses1
seat 9/ for it signifies not his wooden seat, but
the authority of his teaching.
In like manner
then I would have you seek for David's throne
not the throne of wood, but the kingdom itself.
Take, too, as my witnesses the children who
cried aloud, Hosanna to the Son of David
blessed is the King of Israel''. And the blind
men also say, Son of David, have mercy on us 3.
Gabriel too testifies plainly to Mary, saying,
And the Lord God shall give unto Him the
throne of His father David*.
Paul also saith,
Remember Jesus Christ raised from the dead, of
the seed ofDavid, according to my Gospel 5 .• and
in the beginning of the Epistle to the Romans
he saith, Which was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh 6.
Receive thou therefore
Him that was born of David, believing the
prophecy which saith, And in that day there
shall be a root of Jesse, and He that shall rise
to rule over the Gentiles : in Him shall the Gen
tiles trust t.

24. But the Jews are much troubled atthese things.
This also Isaiah foreknew, say
ing, And they shall wish that they had been
burnt with fire : for unto us a child is born (not
unto them), unto us a Son is given 8. Mark thou

4 Compare Justin M. ( Try/h. ( 77), Euseb. (Dcmonxir. Evang.
L. VII. c. i. 37).
5 In the Hebrew the word used is a Participle, and describes
what Isaiah sees in a prophetic vision; " Behold, the damstlwith child."
1 lb lxxxix. aa.
1 lb. xxi. 0.
4 Luke i. 33.
1 Is. xi. 10; Rom. xv. la.

6 Ps. exxxii. n.
9 Matt, xxiii. a.
S Matt. xx. 30.
• Rom. i. 3.

* vff. 35-37.
• Joh xii. 13.
S a Tim. ii. 8.
8 Isa. ix. 5,

LECTURE XII.

that at first He was the Son of God, then was
given to us. And a little after he says, And
of His peace there is no bound'9. The Romans
have bounds : of the kingdom of the Son of
God there is no bound.
The Persians and
the Me'des have bounds, but the Son has no
Then next, upon the throne of David,
bound.
and upon his kingdom to order it.
The Holy
Virgin, therefore, is from David.

25. For it became Him who is most pure,
and a teacher of purity, to have come forth
from a pure bride-chamber.
For if he who
well fulfils the office of a priest of Jesus ab
stains from a wife, how should Jesus Himself
be born of man and woman ? For thou, saith
He in the Psalms, art He that took Me out of the
womb *. Mark that carefully, He that took Me out
of the womb, signifying that He was begotten
without man, being taken from a virgin's womb
and flesh.
For the manner is different with
those who are begotten according to the course
of marriage.

26. And from such members He is not
ashamed to assume flesh, who is the framer
of those very members.
But then who telleth
us this ?
The Lord saith unto Jeremiah : Be
fore Iformed thee in the belly, I knew thee : and
before thou earnestforth out of the womb, I sanc
If, then, in fashioning man He was
tified thee '.
not ashamed of the contact, was He ashamed
in fashioning for His own sake the holy Flesh,
the veil of His Godhead ?
It is God who
even now creates the children in the womb,
as it is written in Job, Hast thou not poured
me out as milk, and curdled me like cheese!
Thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh, and
hast knit me together with bones and sinews*.
There is nothing polluted in the human frame,
except a man defile this with fornication and
adultery. He who formed Adam formed Eve
also, and male and female were formed byGod's hands.
None of the members of the
body as formed from the beginning is polluted.
Let the mouths of all heretics be stopped who
slander their bodies, or rather Him who
formed them. But let us remember Paul's say
ing, Know ye not that your bodies are the temples
ofthe Holy Ghost which is in you « f And again
the Prophet hath spoken before in the person
of Jesus, My flesh isfrom them 5 : and in another
place it is written, Therefore will He give them
up, until the time that she bringeth forth 6. And
what is the sign ? He tells us in what follows,
She shall bring forth, and the remnant of their

• r. 7.
3 Job x. 10, 11.
3 Hos. ix. la.

1 Ps. xxii. 9.

» Jer. L 5.

* 1 Cor. vl. 19.

R.V. Woe also to them, when I depart from
them. The Seventy mistook ^H*ttE?22, "«t my departure." for
* Mic. v. 3
"llTSi " my flesh.'

brethren shall return. And what are the nup
tial pledges of the Virgin, the holy bride ? And
Iwill betroth thee unto Me infaithfulness''. And
Elizabeth, talking with Mary, speaks in like
manner : And blessed is she that believed; for
there shall be a performance of those things which
were told herfrom the Zords.

27. But both Greeks and Jews harass us
and say that it was impossible for the Christ
to be born of a virgin.
As for the Greeks we
will stop their mouths from their own fables.
For ye who say that stones being thrown were
changed into men 9, how say ye that it is imposssible for a virgin to bring forth ? Ye who
fable that a daughter was born from the brain ',
how say ye that it is impossible for a son to
have been born from a virgin's womb ? Ye
who falsely say that Dionysus was born from
the thigh of your Zeus 3, how set ye at nought
our truth ?
I know that I am speaking of
things unworthy of the present audience : but
in order that thou in due season mayest rebuke •
the Greeks, we have brought these
things
forward answering them from their own fables.
28. But those of the circumcision meet thou
with this question : Whether is harder, for an
aged woman, barren and past age, to bear,
or for a virgin in the prime of youth to con
ceive ?
Sarah was barren, and though it had
ceased to be with her after the manner of
women, yet, contrary to nature, she bore a
child.
If, then, it is against nature for a barren
woman to conceive, and also for a virgin,
either, therefore, reject both, or accept both.
For it is the same God 3 who both wrought the
one and appointed the other.
For thou wilt
not dare to say that it was possible for God in
that former case, and impossible in this latter.
And again : how is it natural for a man's hand
to be changed in a single hour into a different
appearance and restored again ? How then
was the hand of Moses mace white as snow,
But thou sayest
and at once restored again ?
that God's will made the change.
In that
case God's will has the power, and has it then
no power in this case?
That moreover was a
sign concerning the Egyptians only, but this
was a sign given to the whole world.
But
whether is the more difficult, O ye Jews ? For
a virgin to bear, or for a rod to be quickened
into a living creature? Ye confess that in the
case of Moses a perfectly straight rod became

8 Luke L 45.

7 Hos. ii. so.
9 See the story of Pyrrha and Deucalion in Pindar, 01. ix. 60:
arep fi' fvrat Knpraavai' AiOivor yovov, and in Ovid. Metam. i.
260 ff.
1 Athena was said to have sprung armed from the head of
Zeus : Pindar, 01. vii. 65 : kobv&iv xar' axpav avopov&aio-' aAaCf. lies. Theog. 924.
Xa-tv inrepnoKti p*oT.
2 Eurip. Bacchae. 295 : Ovid. Mctam. iv. 11.
3 Codd. Mon. i, A: 0 yap «vrbf 6«dc.

Bcned. o yap 0cv<

avrof.

So

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

like a serpent, and was terrible to him who
cast it down, and he who before held the rod
fast, fled from it as from a serpent ; for a ser
pent in truth it was : but he fled not because
he feared that which he held, but because he
dreaded Him that had changed it. A rod had
teeth and eyes like a serpent : do then seeing
eyes grow out of a rod, and cannot a child be
For I
born of a virgin's womb, if God wills ?
say nothing of the fact that Aaron's rod also
produced in a single night what other trees
produce in several years.
For who knows not
that a rod, after losing its bark, will never
sprout, not even if it be planted in the/nidst
But since God is not dependent on
of rivers ?
the nature of trees, but is the Creator of their
natures, the unfruitful, and dry, and barkless
rod budded, and blossomed, and bare almonds.
He, then, who for the sake of the typical highpriest gave fruit supernaturally to the rod,
would He not for the sake of the true HighPriest grant to the Virgin to bear a child ?

29. 'These are excellent suggestions of the
narratives : but the Jews still contradict, and
do not yield to the statements concerning the
rod, unless they may be persuaded by similar
strange and supernatural births. Question them,
therefore, in this way : of whom in the begin
ning was Kve begotten ? What mother con
But the Scripture
ceived her the motherless ?
saith that she was borh out of Adam's side.
Is Eve then born out of a man's side without a
mother, and is a child not to be born without
a father, of a virgin's womb? This debt of
gratitude was due to men from womankind : for
Eve was begotten of Adam, and not conceived
of a mother, but as it were brought forth of man
alone.
Mary, therefore, paid the debt of grati
tude, when not by man but of herself alone in
an immaculate way she conceived of the Holy
Ghost by the power of God.

30. But let us take what is yet a greater
wonder than this.
For that of bodies bodies
should be conceived, even if wonderful, is never
theless possible : but that the dust of the
earth should become a man, this is more won
derful.
That clay moulded together should
assume the coats and splendours of the eyes,
this is more wonderful.
That out of dust of
uniform appearance should be produced both
the firmness of bones, and the softness of lungs,
and other different kinds of members, this is
wonderful. That clay should be animated and
travel round the world self-moved, and should
build houses, this is wonderful.
That clay
should teach, and talk, and act as carpenter,
and as king, this is wonderful. Whence, then,
0 ye most ignorant Jews, was Adam made? Did
not God take dust from the earth, and fashion
Is then clay changed
this wonderful frame ?

into an eye, and cannot a virgin bear a son.
Does that which for men is more impossible
take place, and is that which is possible never
to occur ?

31. Let us remember these things, brethren :
let us use these weapons in our defence.
Let
us not endure those heretics who teach Christ's
coming as a phantom.
Let us abhor those
also who say that the Saviour's birth was of
husband and wife ; who have dared to say
that He was the child of Joseph and Mary,
because it is written, And he took unto him his
wife*.
For let us remember Jacob, who before
he received Rachel, said to Laban, Give me
For as she before the wedded state,
my wife*.
merely because there was a promise, was called
the wife of Jacob, so also Mary, because she
had been betrothed, was called the wife of
Joseph. Mark also the accuracy of the Gospel,
sixth month the Angel
saying, And in the
Gabriel zuas sentfrom God unto a city of Galilee,
named Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to a man
whose name was Joseph 6, and so forth. And
again when the census took place, and Joseph
went up to enrol himself, what saith the Scrip
ture? And Joseph also went up from Galilee,
to enrol himself 'with Mary who was espoused
to him, being great with child''.
For though she
was with child, yet it said not " with his wife,"
For God
but with her who was espoused to him.
sent forth His Son, says Paul, not made of
a man and a woman, but made of a woman 8
only, that is of a virgin.
For that the virgin
also is called a woman, we shewed before'.
For He who makes souls virgin, was born
of a Virgin.

32. But thou wonderest at the event: even
she herself who bare him wondered at this.
For she saith to Gabriel, How shall this be to
But he says,
me, since I knoiv not a man 1
The Hoy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
poiver of the Highest shall ovcrshadozv thee:
wherefore also the holy thing which is to be born
shall be called the Son of God1.
Immaculate
and undefiled was His generation : for where
the Holy Spirit breathes, there all pollution is
taken away : undefiled from the Virgin was the
incarnate generation of the Only-begotten. And
if the heretics gainsay the truth, the Holy Ghost
shall convict them : that overshadowing power
of the Highest shall wax wroth : Gabriel shall
stand face to face against them in the day of
judgment : the place of the manger, which
received the Lord, shall put them to shame.
The shepherds, who then received the good
tidings, shall bear witness ; and the host of the
Angels who sang praises and hymns, and said,

* Matt. i. 94.
7 lb. ii. 4, 5.
■ Luke i. 34, 3^

5 Gen. xxix. al.
8 Gal. iv. 4.

6 Luke i. a6, 37.
9 See above, f at.

LECTURE XII.

8 1

Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace
among men of His good pleasure'': the Temple
into which He was then carried up on the
fortieth day : the pairs of turtle-doves, which
were offered on His behalf 3 : and Symeon who
then took Him up in his arms, and Anna the
prophetess who was present.

33. Since God then beareth witness, and
in the witness, and
the Holy Ghost joins
Christ says, Why do ye seek to kill me, a man
who has told you the truth 4 1 let the heretics
be silenced who speak against His humanity,
for they speak against Him, who saith, Handle
me, and see ; for a spirit hath notflesh and bones,
Adored be the Lord the
as ye see me have 5.
Virgin-born, and let Virgins acknowledge the
crown of their own state : let the order also
of Solitaries acknowledge the glory of chastity ;
for we men are not deprived of the dignity of
In the Virgin's womb the Saviour's
chastity.
period of nine months was passed : but the
Lord was for thirty and three years a man :
so that if a virgin glories6 because of the

* Luke ii. 14.
3 lb. ii. 34.

Tn Lev. xii. 8 one pair only of turtles is pre
scribed, to be offered for the mother, not for the child.
But the
reading Ta £eu-yn in Cyril is confirmed Uy that in St. Luke, tow
See the authorities in Teschendorf.
xattaftiauoii avruF.

4 John vii. 19 ; viii. 40.
* trtfivvvtrat. Rivet, misled by a double error in the old Latin
version, " veneratur," accused Cyril of approving the worship
of the Virgin Mary.

5 Luke xxiv. 39.

nine months, much more we because of the
many years.

34. But let us all by God's grace run the
race of chastity, young tnen and maidens, old
men and children!; not going after wantonness,
Let us not
but praising the name of Christ.
be ignorant of the glory of chastity :
for its
crown is angelic, and its excellence above man.
Let us be chary of our bodies which are to
shine as the sun : let us not for short pleasure
defile so great, so noble a body : for short and
momentary is the sin, but the shame for many
years and for ever. Angels walking upon earth
are they who practise chastity : the Virgins have
Let all
their portion with Mary the Virgin.
vain ornament be banished, and every hurtlul
glance, and all wanton gait, and every flowing
robe, and perfume enticing to pleasure. But in
all for perfume let there be the prayer of sweet
odour, and the practice 8 of good works, and
the sanctification of our bodies: that the Virginborn Lord may say even of us, both men who
live in chastity and women who wear the crown,
/ will dwell in them ; and walk in them, and
I -willbe tlieir God, and they shall be My people*.
To whom be the glory for ever and ever.
Amen.

1 Ps. oriviii. IS.

8 if rue ayaffiiv s-po£t>. Cod. A.

9 a Cor. vi. 16.

▼OL. VTI.

O

LECTURE XIII.

On the Words, Crucified and Buried.

Isaiah liii. i, 7.
Who hath believed our report f and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed 1 ... He is
brought as a lamb to the slaughter, 6-v.

to

the

birth

Further ;

Phinees, when he waxed zealous and slew the
evil-doer, stayed the wrath of God, shall not
Jesus, who slew not another, but gave up
Himself for a ransom'', put away the wrath
which is against mankind ?

1. Every deed of Christ is a cause of
Catholic Church, but her
glorying
greatest of all glorying is in the Cross ; and
knowing this, Paul says, But God forbid that
I should glory, save in the Cross of Christ*.
For wondrous indeed it was, that one who
3. Let us then not be ashamed of the Cross
should receive
was blind from his
For the
of our Saviour, but rather glory in it.
sight in Siloam 3 ; but what is this compared
word of the Cross is unto Jeivs a stumbling-block,
with the blind of the whole world ? A great I and unto Gentiles foolishness, but to us salva
ging it was, and passing nature, for Lazarus tion : and to them that are perishing it is foolto rise again on the fourth day ; but the grace | ishness, but unto us which are being saved it is
extended to him alone, and what was it com
the pmver of God 5. For it was not a mere man
pared with the dead in sins throughout the
who died for us, as I said before, but the Son
world ?
Marvellous it was, that five loaves
of God, God made man.
if the
should pour forth food for the five thou
lamb under Moses drove the destroyer 6 far
sand ; but what is that to those who are
away, did not much rather the Lamb of God,
famishing in ignorance through all the world ?
which taketh away the sin of the world
deliver
It was marvellous that she should have been
us from our sins ? The blood of a silly sheep
loosed who had been bound by Satan eighteen
gave salvation ; and shall not the Blood of the
years : yet what is this to all of us, who were
Only-begotten much rather save?
If any dis
fast bound in the chains of our sins ?
But the
believe the power of the Crucified, let him ask
glory of the Cross led those who were blind
the devils ; if any believe not words, let him
through ignorance into light, loosed all who
Many have been cru
believe what he sees.
were held fast by sin, and ransomed the whole
cified throughout the world, but by none of
these are the devils scared ; but when they see
world of mankind.
even the Sign of the Cross of Christ, who was
crucified for us, they shudder 8. For those men
died for their own sins, but Christ for the sins
of others ; for He did no sin, neither was guile
found in His mouth').
It is not Peter who says
this, for then we might suspect that he was
partial to his Teacher ; but it is Esaias who
says it, who was not indeed present with Him
in the flesh, but in the Spirit foresaw His
coming in the flesh.
Yet why now bring the
Prophet only as a witness? take for a wit
ness Pilate himself, who gave sentence upon
Him, saying, Lfind no fault in this Alan ' : and
when he gave Him up, and had washed his

2. And wonder not that the whole world
was ransomed ; for it was no mere man, but
the only-begotten Son of God, who died on its
behalf. Moreover one man's sin, even Adam's,
had power to bring death to the world ; but ;/
by the trespass of the one death reigned over the
world, how shall not life much rather reign by
the righteousness of the One 3 f And if because
of the tree of food they were then cast out of
paradise, shall not believers now more easily
enter into paradise because of the Tree of
Jesus?
If the first man formed out of the
earth brought in universal death, shall not He
who formed him out of the earth bring in
If
eternal

being Himself the

Life ?

life,

1 Gal. vi. if.

» Cf. Athanas. (tie Ixciarn. i 18, 49).
3 Kom. v. 17, 18.

4 i Tim. ii. 6.
5 i Cor. i. 18, 33.
1 John i. 29.
9 x Pet. ii. 32, quoted from Isa. liii. 9.

8 Cf Cat. i. 3 ; xvii. 35, 36.

* Ex. xii. 33
z Luke xxiii. 14.

LECTURE XIII.

hands, he said, I am innocent of the blood of this
just person
There is yet another witness of
the sinlessness of Jesus,- the robber, the first
. man admitted into Paradise ; who rebuked his
fellow, and said, " We receive the due reward of
our deeds; but this man hath done nothing
amiss 3; for we were present, both tliou and
I, at His judgment."

4. Jesus then really suffered for all men ;
for the Cross was no illusion 4, otherwise our
redemption is an illusion also.
His death was
not a mere shows, for then is our salvation
also fabulous.
If His death was but a show,
they were true who said, We remember that
that deceiver said, while He was yet alive, After
three days I rise again 6.
His Passion then
was real : for He was really crucified, and we
are not ashamed thereat ; He was crucified,
and we deny it not, nay, I rather glory to
For though I should now deny
speak of it.
it, here is Golgotha to confute me, near
which we are now assembled ; the wood of
the Cross confutes me, which was afterwards
distributed piecemeal from hence to all the
I confess the Cross, because I know
world 1.
of the Resurrection ; for if, after being cruci
fied, He had remained as He was, I had not
perchance confessed it, for I might have con
cealed both it and my Master ; but now that
the Resurrection has followed the Cross, I am
not ashamed to declare it.

5. Being then in the flesh like others, He
was crucified, but not for the like sins.
For
He was not led to death for covetousness,
since He was a Teacher of poverty ; nor was
He condemned for concupiscence, for He
Himself says plainly, Whosoever shall look upon
a woman to lust after her, hath committed
adultery with her already 9; not for smiting or
striking hastily, for He turned the other cheek
also to the smiter; not for despising the Law,
for He was the fulfiller of the Law ; not for
reviling a prophet, for it was Himself who was
proclaimed by the Prophets ; not for defrauding
any of their hire, lor He ministered without
reward and freely; not for sinning in words, or
deeds, or thoughts, He wlto did no sin, neither
was guile found in His mouth ; who when He
was reviled, reviled not again; when He suf-

• Matt, xxvii. 243 Luke xxiii. 41.

* I "vrts.

The Benedictine
Cf. Cat xiii. 30, 31.
Editor remarks, "We know not whence Cyril took the notion
that the two robbers were present at the trial of Jesus." He may
have inferred from the words «v ru ai'Ty Kpi'part that the sentence
of crucifixion was pronounced on them at the same time as on
Jesus.
Cf. Ignnt. Smym. \ i \ "He suffered truly, as
also He raised Himself truly: not as certain unbelievers say,
that He suffered in semblance (to &gki\v avrov ir«irov€fyai)." See
I 37, below.
Athanas, c. Afiollinar. f 3: •'Supposing the
exhibition and the endurance of the Passion to be a mere show
8 Matt. v. a8.

7 Cf. iv. xo J x. 19.

Matt, xxvii. 63.

u ro<7i<M8ns.

fered, threatened not*; who came to His pas
sion, not unwillingly, but willingly;
yea, if
any dissuading Him say even now, Be it far
from Thee, Lord, He will say again, Get thee
behind Me, Satan l.

6. And wouldest thou be persuaded that
He came to His passion willingly? others,
who foreknow it not, die unwillingly ; but He
spake before of His passion : Behold, the Son
ofman is betrayed to be crucified*. But knowest
thou wherefore this Friend of man shunned
not death ? It was lest the whole world should
perish in its sins.
Behold, we go up to Jeru
salem, and the Son of man shall be betrayed,
and shall be crucified 3 / and again, He stedfastly
set Hisface to go to Jerusalem *. And wouldest
thou know certainly, that the Cross is a glory
to Jesus?
Hear His own words, not mine.
Judas had become ungrateful to the Master of
the house, and was about to betray Him.
Having but just now gone forth from the
table, and drunk His cup of blessing, in return
for that draught of salvation he sought to shed
righteous blood. He who did eat of His bread,
was lifting up his heel against Him s / his hands
were but lately receiving the blessed gifts6, and
presently for the wages of betrayal he was
plotting His death. And being reproved, and
having heard that word, Thou hast said
he
then said Jesus, The hour
again went out :
is come, that the Son of man should be glori
fied 8.
Seest thou how He knew the Cross to
be His proper glory? What then, is Esaias
not ashamed of being sawn asunder*, and
shall Christ be ashamed of dying for the
world ? Now is the Son of man glorified K Not
that He was without glory before : for He was
glorified with the glory which was before the
foundation ofthe world*. He was ever glorified
as God ; but now He was to be glorified in
wearing the Crown of His patience. He gave
not up His life by compulsion, nor was He
put to death by murderous violence, but of
His own accord.
Hear what He says : I have
poiver to lay denvn My life, and I have power to
take it again 3/1 yield it of My own choice to
My enemies ; for unless I chose, this could

5 Ps. xli. 9.

i Matt. xvi. 39, 99,

9 i Pet. ii. 39, 33,
9 lb. xxvi 3.
3 lb. xx. 18.
4 Luke ix. 5.
6 "rav (vKoyias. The word has this meaning in Chrysostom
and Cyril of Alexandria also ; afterwards it came to signify con
secrated bread, distinct from that of the Eucharist.
Vid. Bing
ham. Antiq. xv. 4, 8 3." (R. W. C.)
Ti e custom 01 sending the bread of the Eucharist was for
bidden in the latter part of the 4th century by the Synod of
Laodicea, Canon 14 :
At Easter the Host shall no more be sent
Bp. Hefele (Councils II.
into foreign dioceses as eulogiae."
p. 308) says-" It was a custom in the ancient Church, not indeed
to consecrate, but to bless those of the several breads of the same
form laid on the altar which were not needed for the Communion,
and to employ them partly for the maintenance of the Clergy,
and partly for distributing them tp those of the faithful who did
not communicate at the Mass." See Euscbius (hist. Ecclts. V.
24), with the note thereon in this Series.
9 See Cat. ii. 14,
3 lb. x. 18.
1 Johnxiii. 31.
note4>

7 Matt. xxvi. 25.

8 John xii. 33.

3 lb. xvii. J.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

not be. He came therefore of His own set
purpose to His passion, rejoicing in His noble
deed, smiling at the crown, cheered by the
salvation of mankind ; not ashamed of the
Cross, for it was to save the world.
For it
was no common man who suffered, but God in
man's nature, striving for the prize of His
patience.

Read the Lamentations ;

7. But the Jews contradict this*, ever ready,
as they are, to cavil, and backward to believe;
so that for this cause the Prophet just now
read says, Lord, who hath believed our report 5 1
Persians believe6, and Hebrews believe not;
they shall see, to whe n He was not spoken of,
and they that have not heard shall understand 1,
while they who study these things shall set at
nought what they study.
They speak against
us, and say, "Does the Lord then suffer?
What ? Had men's hands power over His sove
in
reignty ?"
those Lamentations, Jeremias, lamenting you,
wrote what is worthy of lamentations. He saw
your destruction, he beheld your downfall, he
bewailed Jerusalem which then was; for that
ivhich nmv « 8 shall not be bewailed ; for that
Jerusalem crucified the Christ, but that which
Lamenting then he
now is worships Him.
says, The breath 0/ our countenance, Christ the
Lord was taken in our corruptions'*. Am I then
stating views of my own? Behold he testifies
of the Lord Christ seized by men. And what
is to follow from this ?
Tell me, O Prophet.
He says, Of whom we said, Under His shadow
we shall live among the nations '. For he signi
fies that the grace of life is no longer to dwell
in Israel, but among the Gentiles.

for

8. But since there has been much gainsaying
by them, come, let me, with the help of your
prayers, (as the shortness of the time may
allow,) set forth by the grace of the Lord some
few testimonies concerning the Passion.
For
the things concerning Christ are all put into
writing, and nothing is doubtful, lor nothing
is without a text.
All are inscribed on the
monuments of the Prophets ; clearly written,
not on tablets of stone, but by the Holy Ghost.
Since then thou hast heard the Gospel speak
ing concerning Judas, oughtest thou not to

4 There is so close a resemblance between the remainder of
this Lecture and the explanation of the same Article of the Creed
by Rurinus, that " I have no doubt," says the Benedictine Editor,
' that Rufinus drew front Cyril's fountains."
Cf. Rutin, de Sym
bols, ft 19.
5 Isa. lii. 15.
° Cf. Acts ii. 9 : Parthians and Medes and Elamites. These
Jewish converts of the day of Pentecost would naturally be the
rirsl heralds of the Gospel in their respective countries. On the
dispersion of the Apostles. " P.irlhia, according to tradition, was
al.oltcd to Thomas as his field of l.ibour" (Euseb. Hist. Eccl.
III. 1 ; cf. 1. 13). An earlier notice of the tradition is found in
the Clementine Recognitions, L. IX. c. 29, where the PseudoClement professes to have received a letter from " Thomas, who is
preaching the Gospel among them."

7 Rom. xv. si, quoted from Isaiah, us.
9 Lam. iv. 20 : The breath oj our nostrils, the attainted 0/ the

8 Gal. iv. 25.

Lord, was taken tn theirpits.

1 Ibid.

receive the testimony to it ? Thou hast heard
that He was pierced in the side by a spear ;
oughtest thou not to see whether this also is
written ? Thou hast heard that He was cruci
fied in a garden ; oughtest thou not to see
whether this also is written ? Thou hast heard
that He was sold for thirty pieces of silver ;
oughtest thou not to learn what prophet spake
this ? Thou hast heard that He was given
vinegar to drink ;
learn where this also is
written.
Thou hast heard that His body was
laid in a rock, and that a stone was set over
it ; oughtest thou not to receive this testimony
also from the prophet ? Thou hast heard that
He was crucified with robbers ; oughtest thou
not to see whether this also is written ? Thou
hast heard that He was buried ; oughtest thou
not to see whether the circumstances of His
burial are anywhere accurately written? Thou
hast heard that He rose again ; oughtest thou
not to see whether we mock thee in teaching
these things ? For our speech and our preaching
is not in persuasive words ofman's wisdom''. We
stir now no sophistical contrivances ; for these
become exposed ; we do not conquer words
with words 3, for these come to an end ; but we
preach Christ Crucified*, who has already been
preached aforetime by the Prophets.
But do
thou, I pray, receive the testimonies, and seal
And, since they are
them in thine heart.
many, and the rest of our time is narrowed
into a short space, listen now to a few of the
more important as time permits ; and having
received these beginnings, be diligent and seek
Let not thine hand be
out the remainder.
only stretched out to receive, but let it be also
ready to worK s. God gives all things freely.
For if any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of
God whogiveth 5(bi"), and he shall receive. May
He through your prayer grant utterance to us
who speak, and faith to you who hear.

9. Let us then seek the testimonies to the
Passion of Christ :
for we are met together,
not now to make a speculative exposition of
the Scriptures, but rather to be certified of the
things which we already believe. Now thou
hast received from me first the testimonies
concerning the coming of Jesus; and concern
ing His walking on the sea, for it is written,
Thy way is in the sea 6. Also concerning divers

• I Cor. it.

4. The simple style of the New Testament is
defended by Ongen, c. Celsutn, iii. 68, and in many other pas
sages.3 Cyril alludes to the same proverb in the Homily on the
Paralytic, c. 14 :
11 Word resists word, but a deed is irrcsisiibl.-."
The Jerusalem Editor refers to Gregory Nazianzen (Tom. II.
p. 596): .Voyw iraAatct was Aoyof.

4 1 Cor. i. 23.
5 £cclu5. iv. 31 : Let not thine hand be stretched <mt to
receive, and shut when tkon shpttldest repay. The p.issage is
quoted in the Didacht, c. iv., Barnab. E/isl. c. xix. , and Constit.
Afost. VII. 11.
6 Ps. lxxvii. 19. The Benedictine Editor, with no authority

5(t" ) James i. 5.

LECTURE XIII.

8S

cures thou hast on another occasion received
11. But now I have to seek the exact solu
testimony. Now therefore I begin from whence
tion of this seeming discrepancy.
For they
the Passion began.
Judas was the traitor,
who make light of the prophets, allege that the
and he came against Him, and stood, speaking
Prophet says on the one hand, And I cast them
words of peace, but plotting war.
Concerning
into the house of the Lord, into the foundry, but
him, therefore, the Psalmist says, My friends
the Gospel on the other hand, And they gave
and My neighbours drew near against Me, and
themfor the potter'sfield*). Hear then how they
stood i. And again, Their words were softer than
are both true.
For those conscientious Jews
Hail, Master 9 / yet he
oil, yet be they spears 8.
forsooth, the high priests of that time, when
was betraying his Master to death ; he was not
they saw that Judas repented and said, / have
abashed at His warning, when He said, Judas,
sinned, in that I have betrayed innccen' blood,
betrayest thou the Son of Man with a kiss 1 / for
reply, What is that to us, see t/iou to /hut1.
Is
what He said to him was just this, Recollect
it then nothing to you, the crucifiers ? but
thine own name ; Judas means confession''; thou
shall he who received and restored the price
hast covenanted, thou hast received the money,
of murder see to it, and shall ye the murderers
make confession quickly. O God, pass notinoi see to it? Then they say among them
over My praise in silence ; for the mouth of the
selves, // is not lawful to cast them into the
wicked, and the mouth of the
deceitful, are
treasury, because it is the price of blood2.
Out
opened against Me; they have spoken against
of your own mouths is your condemnation ;
Me with a treacherous tongue, they have com
if the price is polluted, the deed is polluted
passed Ale about also with words of hatred*.
also ; but if thou art fulfilling righteousness in
Cut that some of the chief-priests also were
crucifying Christ, why receivest thou not the
present, and that He was put in bonds before
price of it? But the point of inquiry is this:
the gates of the city, thou hast heard before,
how is there no disagreement, if the Gospel
if thou rememberest the exposition of the
says, the potter's field, and the Prophet, the
Psalm, which has told the time and the place ;
foundry i Nay, but not only people who are
how they returned at evening, and hungered like
goldsmiths, or brass-founders, have a foundry,
but potters also have foundries for their clay.
dogs, and encompassed the city*.
For they sift off the fine and rich and useful earth
from the gravel, and separate from it the mass
of the refuse matter, and temper the clay first
with water, that they may work it with ease
into the forms intended. Why then wonderest
thou that the Gospel says plainly the potter's
field, whereas the Prophet spoke his prophecy
like an enigma, since prophecy is in many
places enigmatical ?

10. Listen also

for the thirty pieces

of
silver. And I zvill say to them, If it be good
in your sight, give me my price, or refuse*, and
the rest.
One price is owing to Me from you
for My healing the blind and lame, and I
receive another ; for thanksgiving, dishonour,
Seest thou how the
and for worship, insult.
Scripture foresaw these things?
And they
weighed for My price thirty pieces of silver b.
How exact the prophecy ! how great and un
erring the wisdom of the Holy Ghost !
For
he said, not ten, nor twenty, but thirty, exactly
as many as there were.
Tell also what be
comes of this price, O Prophet ! Does he who
received it keep it ? or does he give it back ?
and after he has given it back, what becomes
of it? The Prophet says then, And I took
the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them into the
house of the Lord, into thefoundry
Compare
the Gospel with the Prophecy : Judas, it says,
repented himself, and cast dmvn the pieces of silver
in the temple, and departed*.
but the Latin version by Grodecq, inserts a quotation of Job iz. 8 :
Who walketh on the sea, as on a pavement. Cf. xi. 33.

7 Ps. xxxviii. 11.
8 lb. lv. 21.
z Luke xxii. 48.
9 Matt- xxvi. 40.
> Cf. Phil. Jucf. de Plantations AW, II

8 33 : "And his
name was called Judah, which being interpreted is "confession
In Gen. xlix. 8 the name is differently interpreted :
to the Lord."
"Jiidah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise." The root
ha.» both senses "t<* conf-ss," and "to praise," which are closely
allied, since to "confess" is to "give God the glory" (Josh,
vii. 19).
3 Ps. cix. 1-3.
* Ps. lix. 6. The exposition was probably given in a sermon
preached to the whole congregation, not in th<-se Lectures.
S Zech. xi. u.
6 lb.
* Matt, xxvii. 3, 5.

1 lb. xi. 13.

«

12. They bound Jesus, and brought Him
into the hall of the High-priest. And wouldest
thou learn and know that this also is written ?
Esaias says, Woe unto their soul, for they have
taken evil counsel against themselves, saying, Let
us bind the Just, for He is troublesome to us 3.
And truly, Woe unto their soul! Let us see
Esaias was sawn asunder, yet after
how.
this the people was restored.
Jeremias was
cast into the mire of the cistern, yet was
the wound of the Jews healed ; for the sin
was less, since it was against man.
But
when the Jews sinned, not against man, but
against God in man's nature, Woe unto their
soul!-Let us bind the Just; could He not
then set Himself free, some one will say ;
He, who freed Lazarus from the bonds of
death on the fourth day, and loosed Peter

a lb. t». 6.
9 Matt, xxvii. 3. 7.
1 lb. v. 4.
3 Isa. iii. 9 : (R.V.) they have rewarded evil unto themselves.
Say ye 0/ the righteous, that it shall be well -with him.
In the
Septuagint, from which Cyril quotes, there is an evident inleipolation of Wisdom ii. 12 : Let us lie in waitfor the righteo-u*;
because he is not/or our turn (5vo-vptlOTOy, as in Cyril).

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

from the iron bands of a prison ?
Angels
stood ready at hand, saying, Let us burst their
bands in sunder*; but they hold back, because
Again, He
their Lord willed to undergo it.
was led
the
Elders ; thou hast already the testimony* to
this, The Lord Himself will come into judgment
with the ancients of His people, and with the
princes thereof

the judgment-seat before

to

13. But the High-priest having questioned
Him, and heard the truth, is wroth ; and the
wicked officer of wicked men smites Him ;
and the countenance, which had shone as
the sun, endured to be smitten by lawless
Others also come and spit on the
hands.
face of Him, who by spittle had healed the'
man who was blind from his birth. Do ye
thus requite the Lord ? This people is foolish
and unwise6. And the Prophet greatly won
says, Lord, who hath believed our
dering,
report t 1 for the thing is incredible, that God,
the Son of God, and the Arm oj the Lord8,
should suffer such things.
But that they who
are being saved may not disbelieve, the Holy
Ghost writes before, in the person of Christ,
who says, (for He who then spake these things,
was afterward Himself an actor in them,) I
gave My back to the scourges ; (for Pilate, when
lie had scourged Him, delivered Him to
be
crucified'9 ;) and My cheeks to smitings ; and My
face L turned not away from the shame of
spittings ; saying, as it were, "Though knowing
before that they will smite Me, I did not even
turn My cheek aside ; for how should I have
nerved My disciples against death for truth's
sake, had I Myself dreaded this?"
I said,
He that loveth his life shall lose it1: if I had
loved My life, how was I to teach without
practising what I taught?
First then, being
Himself God, He endured to suffer these
things at the hands of men ; that after this,
we men, when we surfer such things at the
hands of men for His sake, might not be
ashamed.
Thou seest that of these things
also the prophets have clearly written before
Many, however, of the Scripture testi
hand.
monies I pass by for want of time, as I said
before ; for if one should exactly search out all,
not one of the things concerning Christ would
be left without witness.

14. Having been bound, He came from
Caiaphas to Pilate,-is this too written? yes;
And having bound Him, they led Him away as
a present to the king ofJarim*. But here some

5 Isa. iii. 14.
* Ibid.

« Dent, xxxii. 6.
» Isa. L 6 ; Matt, xxvii. aS.

4 Ps. ii. 3.
Msi.liii. i.
1 John xii. 35.
■ Hosea x. 6 : (R. V.) // also shall be carried unto Assyria
for a present to kingJareb.
This passage is applied in the same
manner to Luke xxili. 7 by Justin M. (Trrftk. 0 103), Tettullian
(.-. Matcion. iv. 42), and Ruhnus (de Syinboio, t ai), who adds,-
And rightly docs the Prophet add the name 'Jarun,' which

sharp hearer will object, "Pilate was not a king,"
(to leave for a while the main parts of the
question,) " how then having bound Him, led
But
they Him as a present to the king?"
read thou the Gospel ; When Pilate heard that
He was of Galilee, he sent Him to Herod 3 • for
Herod was then king, and was present at Jeru
salem. And now observe the exactness of the
| Prophet ; for he says, that He was sent as
a present ; for the same day Pilate and Herod
were made friends together, for before they were
at enmity*.
For it became Him who was on the
eve of making peace between earth and heaven,
to make the very men who condemned Him
the first to be at peace ; for the Lord Himself
was there present, who reconciles s the hearts of
the princes of the earth.
Mark the exactness
of the Prophets, and their true testimony.

15. Look with awe then at the Lord who was
judged. He suffered Himself to be led and car
ried by soldiers.
Pilate sat in judgment, and
He who sitteth on the right hand of the Father,
stood and was judged6.
The people whom H*
had redeemed from the land of Egypt, and
ofttimes from other places, shouted against
Him, Away with Him, away with Him, crucify
Himi.
Wherefore, O ye Jews? because He
healed your blind ? or bec.iuse He made your
lame to walk, and bestowed His other benefits?
So that the Prophet in amazement speaks of
this too, Against whom have ye opened your
mouth, and against whom have ye let loose your
tongue*? and the Lord Himself says in the
Prophets, Mine heritage became unto Me as
a Iton in the forest ; it gave its voice against
Me ; therefore have L htiied it 9.
I have not
refused them, but they have refused Me ; in
consequence thereof I say, L haveforsaken My
house l.

16. When He was judged, He held His
peace ; so that Pilate was moved for Him,
and said, Hearest Thou not what these witness
against Thee * ?
Not that He knew Him who
was judged, but he feared his own wife's dream
which had been reported to him. And Jesus
The Psalmist says, And J
held His peace.
became as a man that heareth not ; and in
70/iose mouth are no reproofs*; and again, But
I was as a deaf man and heard not; and as
a dumb man that openeth not his mouth*. Thou

menns 'a wild vine,' for Herod was ... a wild vine, i.e. of an
alien stock."
For the vaiious interpretations of the name see the
Commentaries on Hosea v. ,3, and x. 6; Schrader, Cuneijonn
Inscriptions, II. i 439, Driver, Introduction to O. T. Literature,
P- a83-

Sept.) is forbidden by the context.

ef the peopU 0/ the earth.
(6
•
stand."

3 Luke xxiii. 6, 7.
5 Job xii. a4 : (k.V.) He takctk away the heart 0/the chiefs
The rendering "who reconciles"
6 Some MSS. have ijrttxxfTo or ij^etxeTO. "He submitted to
7 josh. xix. 15.
9 Jer. xii. 8.
3 Pa. xxxviiL 14.

a Matt, xxviu 13.

< Ibid. xxm. la.

4 I Lid. v. 13.

6 Isa. kii. 4.

« Ibid. v. 7.

i woji

•

LECTURE XIII.

hast before heard concerning thiss, if thou remeraberest.

17. But the soldiers who crowd around
mock Him, and their Lord becomes a
sport to them, and upon their Master they
When they looked on Me, they
make jests.
shaktd their heads 6.
Yet the figure of kingly
state appears ; for though in mockery, yet they
bend the knee. And the soldiers before they
crucify Him, put on Him a purple robe, and
set a crown on His head; for what though
it be of thorns ?
Every king is proclaimed by
soldiers ; and Jesus also must in a figure be
crowned by soldiers ; so that for this cause
the Scripture says in the Canticles, Go forth,
0 ye daughters of Jerusalem, and look upon
King Solomon in the crown wherewith His
mother crowned Him 7. And the crown itself
was a mystery ; for it was a remission of sins,
a release from the curse.

18. Adam received the sentence, Cursed is
the ground in thy labours ; thorns and thistles
shall it bring forth to thee3.
For this cause
Jesus assumes the thorns, that He may cancel
for this cause also was He
the sentence;
buried in the earth, that the earth which had
been cursed might receive the blessing instead
At the time of the sin, they
of a curse.
clothed themselves with fig-leaves ;
for this
cause Jesus also made the fig-tree the last of
His signs.
For when about to go to His
passion, He curses the fig- tree, not every figtree, but that one alone, for the sake of the
figure ; saying, No more let any man eatfruit of
thee*; let the doom be cancelled. And because
they aforetime clothed themselves with figleaves, He came at a season when food was
not wont to be found on the fig-tree. Who
knows not that in winter-time the fig-tree bears
no fruit, but is clothed with leaves only ? Was
Jesus ignorant of this, which all knew? No,
but though He knew, yet He came as if seek
ing; not ignorant that He should not find,
but shewing that the emblematical curse ex
tended to the leaves only.

19. And since we have touched on things
connected with Paradise, I am truly astonished
at the truth of the types.
In Paradise was
'he Fall, and in a Garden was our Salvation.
From the Tree came sin, and until the Tree
In the evening, when the Lord
sin lasted.
walked in the Garden, they hid themselves1 ;
and in the evening the robber is brought by
the Lord into Paradise.
But some one will
say to me, " Thou art inventing subtleties ;

5 " Perhaps in tome Homily " (Ben. Ed.).
7 Cant. iii. n.
8 Gen. iii, 17, 18. By mistaking one letter in the Hebrew, the
in thy labours" instead of "tor thy

* P«. cut. «5-

Seventy give the meaning
»kc."

9 Mark xi. 1

1 Gen. iii. 8.

shew me from some prophet the Wood of the
Cross ; except thou give me a testimony from
a pfophet, I will not be persuaded. Hear then
from Jeremias, and assure thyself ; I was like
a harmless lamb led to be slaughtered ; did I not
knmv it 3 7 (for in this manner read it as a ques
tion, as I have read it ; for He who said, Ye
know that after two days comes the passover,
and the Son of Man is betrayed to be crucified 3,
did He not know ?) Iwas like a harmless lamb
led to be slaughtered ; did I not know it?
(but
what sort of lamb ?
let John the Baptist inter
pret it, when he says, Behold the Lamb of God,
They
that taketh away the sin of the world*.)
devised against Me a wicked device, sayings,-
(He who knows the devices, knew He not the
result
of them t And what said they ?)-
Come, and let us place a beam upon His bread6-
(and if the Lord reckon thee worthy, thou
shalt hereafter learn, that His body according
to the Gospel bore the figure of bread ;)-
Come then, and let us place a beam upon His
bread, and cut Him off out of the land of the
living ;- (life is not cut off, why labour ye for
nought?)-And His name shall be remembered
no more.
Vain is your counsel ; for before the
sun His JVame? abideth in the Church, And
that it was Life, which hung on the Cross,
Moses says, weeping, And thy life shall be
hanging before thine eyes ; and thou shalt be
afraid day and night, and thou shalt not trust
thy life*. And so too, what was just now read
as the text, Lord, who hath believed our report t
20. This was the figure which Moses com
pleted by fixing the serpent to a cross, that
whoso had been bitten by the living ser
serpent,
pent, and looked to
might be saved by believing'.
Does then
the brazen serpent save when crucified, and
shall not the Son of God incarnate save
when crucified also ? On each occasion life
For in the time
comes by means of wood.

the brasen

S Jer. xi. 19.

• Jcr. xi. 19 : / was like a tame'(K.V. gentle) lamb that it
led to the slaughter; and I knew not that they /tad devised
Cyril's interrogative rendering is not ad
devices against Me.
missible.
3 Matt. xxvi. 3.
4 John i. 20.
6 Ibid. R.V. Let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof.
The word rendered fruit is literally bread. The phrase is evi
dently proverbial. The Hebrew word which means " destroy " is
Hence arose the
misinterpreted by ifi^iXufiev in the Greek.
fanciful application of the passage to the Cros3 laid on the body of
Christ to be borne by Him. Justin M. (Trypk. lxxii.) charges
the Jews with having recently cut out the passage hecause of the
supposed reference to Christ.
Tcrtutlian (adv. Judtros, c. 10)
writes: "Of course on His body that 'wood' was put ;
for so
Christ has revealed, calling His body 'bread.'" He gives the
same interpretation elsewhere (gdv. Marxion. III. 19; IV. 40).
Cf. Cyprian (Testintonia ad Quirinum, Lib. II. 15); Athanas.
{de Incarn. % 33).
7 Ps. lxxii. 17.
9 Num. xxi. 9; John iii. 14. The Jerusalem Editor asks.
" How did Moses complete the figure by fixing the serpent to
a cross? First he set up the wood and fixed it in the earth al
a post: then by putting the brazen serpent athwart (n-Xayiw,
he formed a figure of the Cross."
Cf. Harnab. Epist. c. xii. ;
Justin M. (Afiol. i. c. 60) ; Iren. {Hares. IV. c. a) ; Tertull. ^aiv.
Judteos, c to).

8 Deut. xxviii. 66.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

of Noe the preservation of life was by an ark
of wood.
In the time of Moses the sea, on
beholding the emblematical rod, was abashed at
him who smote it ; is then Moses' rod mighty,
and is the Cross of the Saviour powerless?
But I pass by the greater part of the types, to
keep within measure.
The wood in Moses'
case sweetened the water; and from, the side
of Jesus the water flowed upon the wood.

21. The beginning of signs under Moses
was blood and water ; and the last of all Jesus'
signs was the same.
First, Moses changed the
river into blood ; and Jesus at the last gave
forth from His side water with blood.
This
was perhaps on account of the two speeches,
his who judged Him, and theirs who cried out
against Him ; or because of the believers and
the unbelievers. For Pilate said, Iam innocent,
and washed his hands in water; they who
cried out against Him said, His blood be upon
us 1 .■ there came therefore these two out of His
side; the water, perhaps, for him who judged
Him ; but for them that shouted against Him,
the blood. And again it is to be understood
in another way ; the blood for the Jews, and
the water for the Christians : for upon them as
plotters came the condemnation from the blood ;
but to thee who now believest, the salvation
For nothing has been done
which is by water.
Our fathers who have
without a meaning.
written comments have given another reason
For since in the Gospels the
of this matter.
power of salutary Baptism is
twofold, one
which is granted by means of water to the
illuminated, and a second to holy martyrs, in
persecutions, through their own blood, there
came out of that saving Side blood and water2,
to confirm the grace of the confession made
for Christ, whether in baptism, or on occasions
of martyrdom.
There is another reason also
The woman, who
for mentioning the Side.
was formed from the side, led the way to sin ;
but Jesus who came to bestow the grace of
pardon on men and women alike, was pierced
in the side for women, that He might undo
the sin.

22. And whoever will inquire, will find other
reasons also ; but what has been said is enough, j
because of the shortness of the time, and that
the attention of my hearers may not become
And yet we never can be tired of
sated.
hearing concerning the crowning of our Lord,

1 Matt. xx\ii. 34, 35.
• Jolin xix.

34.

10.

Cf. Cat. iii.

Origen IIn Lit. Jutfic.
Hoin..vii. 82): ' It is the Baptism of blood alone that can render
Cf. Origen {in
us purer than the Baptism ot water has done."
Aw. Matt. Tom. xvi. 6): "If Baptism promises remission of sins,
as we have received concerning Baptism in water and the Spirit,
and if one who has endured the B:iptism of Martyrdom receives
remission of sins, then with good reason marivrdom may he called
For a summary of the '' Patristic Interpretation "
a Baptism "
ol the passage, see Bp. Wcstcott. Stcaktrs Commentary ')

and least of all in this most holy Golgotha.
For others only hear, but we both see and
handle.
Let none be weary ; take thine armour
against the adversaries in the cause of the Cross
itself ; set up the faith of the Cross as a trophy
against the gainsayers.
For when thou art
going to dispute with unbelievers concerning
the Cross of Christ, first make with thy hand
the sign of Christ's Cross, and the gainsayer
will be silenced.
Be not ashamed to confess
the Cross ; for Angels glory in it, saying, We
know zvhomye seek, Jesus the Crucified \ M ightest thou not say, O Angel, " I know whom ye
But, " I," he says with
seek, my Master ?"
For the
boldness, " I know the Crucified."
Cross is a Crown, not a dishonour.

23. Now let us recur to the proof out of
the Prophets which I spoke of. The Lord
was crucified ; thou hast received the testi
Thou seest this spot of Golgotha !
monies.
Thou answerest with a shout of praise, as if
See that thou recant not in time
assenting.
of persecution.
Rejoice not in the Cross in
time of peace only, but hold fa*st the same
faith in time of persecution also ; be not in
time of peace a friend of Jesus, and His foe in
time of wars.
Thou receivest now remission
of thy sins, and the gifts of the King's spiritual
bounty ; when war shall come, strive thou
Jesus, the Sinless, was
nobly for thy King.
crucified for thee ; and wilt not thou be crucified
for Him who was crucified for thee ?
Thou
art not bestowing a favour, for thou hast first
received ; but thou art returning a favour, re
paying thy debt to Him who was crucified for
thee in Golgotha. Now Golgotha is interpreted,
" the place of a skull." Who were they then,
who prophetically named this spot Golgotha,
in which Christ the true Head endured the
Cross? As the Apostle says, Who is the linage
of the Invisible God ; and a little after, and He is
tie Head of the body, the Church*. And again,
The Head of every man is Christ* ; and again,
Who is the Head ofallprincipality andpower f>.
The Head suffered in "the place of the skull."
O wondrous prophetic appellation ! The very
name also reminds thee, saying, " Think not
of the Crucified as of a mere man ; He is the
Head of allprincipality andpoioer. That Head
which was crucified is the Head of all power,
and has for His Head the Father ; for the Head
of the man is Christ, and the Head of Christ is
God 7."

24. Christ then was crucified for us, who
was judged in the night, when it was cold, and
therefore a fire of coals9 was laid. He was
crucified at the third hour; andfrom the sixth

3 Matt;_xxviit. 5.
6 Col. ii. to.

4 Col. i. 15, 18.

7 1 Cor. xi. 3.

5 1 Cor. xi. 3.
8 John xviii. 18.

LECTURE XIII.

hour there was darkness until the ninth hour 9 ;
but from the ninth hour there was light again.
Are these things also written ? Let us inquire.
Now the Prophet Zacharias says, And it shall
tome to pass in that day, that there shall not be
light, and there shall be cold and frost one day ;
(the cold on account of which Peter warmed
himself;) And that day shall be known unto the
Lord* ; (what, knew He not the other days?
days are many, but this is the day of the Lord's
patience, which the Lord made* ;)-And that
day shall be known unto the Lord, not day, and
no! night : what is this dark saying which the
That day is neither day nor
Prophet speaks?
night ? what then shall we name it ?
The
Gospel interprets it, by relating the event.
It was not day ; for the sun shone not uni
formly from his rising, to his setting, but from
the sixth hour till the ninth hour, there was
The darkness therefore
darkness at mid day.
was interposed ; but God called the darkness
night*. Wherefore it was neither day nor night :
for neither was it all light, that it should be
called day ; nor was it all darkness, that it
should be called night ; but after the ninth
hour the sun shone forth.
This also the
Prophet foretels ; for after saying. Not day, nor
night, he added, And at evening time it shall be
light*. Seest thou the exactness of the prophets?
Seest thou the truth of the things which were
written aforetime?

25. But dost thou ask exactly at what hour
the sun failed 5? was it the fifth hour, or
the eighth, or the tenth?
Tell, O Prophet,
the exact time thereof to the Jews, who are
unwilling to hear ; when shall the sun go down ?
The Prophet Amos answers, And it shall come
to pass in that day, saith the Lord God, that
the sun shall go down at noon (for there was
darkness from the sixth hour ;) and the light
shall grow dark over the earth in
What sort of season is this, O Prophet, and
what sort of day ? And I will turn yourfeasts
into mourning ; for this was done in the days
of unleavened bread, and at the feast of the
Passover : then afterwards he says, And I will
make Him as the mourning of an Only Son, and
those with Him as a day ofanguish J ; for in the
day of unleavened bread, and at the feast,
their women were wailing and weeping, and
the Apostles had hidden themselves and were
in anguish.
this pro
Wonderful then
phecy.

the day

is

26. But, some one will say, " Give me yet

1 Zech. xiv. 6, 7.

• Matt xxvii. 45.
3 Gen. i. 5.
* Zech. xiv. 7.

• Ps. cxviii. 24.
Cf. Euseb. (Dem. Evang. x. 7) : " It was not
fay. became 01 the noon-tide darkness: and again it was not
Mint, because of the day which followed upon it. which he repre
sented by a sign in saving, at everting time there shall be light.

5 ffiAmr. See Cat. x. 19, note 2.
6 Arnot vtii. 9. Cf Ftueb. (Dem. Ev. x. 6).

Acta Pilatt. c. zi.

7 Amos viii. 10.

another sign ; what other exact sign is there
of that which has come to pass ?
Jesus was
crucified ; and He wore but one coat, and one
cloak : now His cloak the soldiers shared
among themselves, having rent it into four;
but His coat was not rent, for when rent it
would have been no longer of any use ; so
about this lots are cast by the soldiers ; thus
the one they divide, but for the other they
cast lots.
Is then this also written? They
know, the diligent chanters 8 of the Church,
who imitate the Angel hosts, and continually
sing praises to God : who are thought worthy
to chant Psalms in this Golgotha, and to say,
They parted My garments among them, and upon
My vesture they did cast lots?. The "lots" were
what the soldiers cast

Is

27. Again, when He had been judged before
Pilate, He was clothed in red ; for there they
this also
put on Him a purple robe.
written ? Esaias saith, Who is this that cometh
from Edom ? the redness of His garments is
from Bosof2 ; (who is this who in dishonour
weareth purple ? For Bosor has some such
meaning in Hebrew 3.) Why are Thy garments
red, and Thy raiment as from a trodden wine
press t But He answers and says, All day long
have L stretched forth Mine hands unto a dis
obedient and gainsayingpeople +.

It

is not my word, but it

28. He stretcned out His hands on the
Cross, that He might embrace the ends of
the world ; for this Golgotha is the very centre
of the earth.
is
a prophet who hath said, Thou hast wrought
earth s. He
salvation in the midst of the
stretched
forth human hands, who by His
spiritual hands had established the heaven ;
and they were fastened with nails, that His
manhood, which bore the sins of men, having
been nailed to the tree, and having died, sin
might die with it, and we might rise again in
righteousness.
For since by one man came
death, by One Man came also life 6 ; by One
Man, the Saviour, dying of His own accord :
for remember what He said, / have pozoer to
8 Synod of Laodicea, Can. xvi. 15: "Besides the appointed
singers, who mount the anjbo and sing from the book, others shall
Hcfele thinks that this was not intended
not sing in the Church."
to forbid the laity to take any part in the Church music, but only
See Bing.
to forbid those who were not cantors to take the lead.
ham, Antiquities, 111. c. 7: XIV. c. 1.
9 Ps. xxii 18, quoted in John xix 24.
1 xAijpos 6i \v a Aa\,'uK.

Bi-hop Hall. Contemplations. Book
IV. 32, speaks of the soldiers' *' barbarous sortitions" The tech
nic.- 1 term is " sortilege."
Cf. Evang. Pet. f 4 ; Justin M. Dial. 97.
3 Isa. Ixiii. 1, 2.
3 Bozrah means a " sheepfold," and is the name of a city in
Idumca.
Cyril's interpretation rests on a false derivation.
*' It is a commonplace in patristic literature
4 Isa. Ixv. 2.
that the Crucifixion was prefigured by Isa. Ixv. 2." (Dr. C Taylor,
Herrnas ami tlie Four Gospels, p. 40.) Cf. Barnab. Epist. c. xii. ;
Didackc xvi. ; Justin M. (Afioiog. I. c. 35 ; Tryplt. cc. 97, 114) ;
Tertull. (contra Jud. xii.); trente. IV. xxxiii. 12.
5 Ps. lxxiv. 12. The passage does not refer to Palestine espe
cially : " in the midst of the earth " is equivalent to " in the si^ht
of all nations."
Cf. Orac. Sibytl. vi-i. 702 : " He shall spread out
His hands, and span the whole world," quoted by Dr. Taylor,
" The Teaching," p. 103.

6 Rom. v. 12, 17.

go

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

lay down My life, and I have power to take it
again 7.

29. But though He endured these things,
having come for the salvation of all, yet the
people returned Him an evil recompense.
Jesus saith, / thirst*,--He who had brought
forth the waters for them out of the craggy
rock ; and He asked fruit of the Vine which
But what does the Vine?
He had planted.
This Vine, which was by nature of the holy
fathers, but of Sodom by purpose of heart ;-
(for their Vine is of Sodom, and their tendrils of
" Gomorrah') ;)-this Vine, when the Lord was
athirst, having filled a sponge and put it on
They gave Me
a reed, offers Him vinegar.
also gall for My meat, and in My thirst, they
gave Me vinegar to drink *. Thou seest the
clearness of the Prophets' description.
But
what sort of gall put they into My mouth ?
They gave Him, it says, wine mingled with
myrrh 2. Now myrrh is in taste like gall, and
very bitter.
Are these things what ye recom
pense unto the Lord ? Are these thy offerings,
O Vine, unto thy Master? Rightly did the
Prophet Esaias aforetime bewail you, saying,
My well-beloved had a vineyard in a hill in a
fruitful place; and (not to recite the whole)
/ waited, he says, that it should bring forth
grapes; I thirsted that it should give wine;
but it brought forth thorns* ; for thou seest the
crown, wherewith I am adorned. What then
shall I now decree ? / will command the clouds
that they rain no ratn upon it*.
For the clouds
which are the Prophets were removed from
them, and are for the future in the Church ; as
Paul says, Let the Prophets speak two or three,
and let the othersjudge 5 / and again, God gave
in the Church, some, Apostles, and some, Pro
phets 6.
Agabus, who bound his own feet and
hands, was a prophet.

30. Concerning the robbers who were cru
cified with Him, it is written, And He was
numbered with the transgi-essors 7. Both of them
were before this transgressors, but one was so
no longer.
For the one was a transgressor to
against salvation ; who,
the end, stubborn
though his hands were fastened, smote with
blasphemy by his tongue.
When the Jews
passing by wagged their heads, mocKing
the Crucified, and fulfilling what was written,
When they looked on Me, they shaked their
But the
heads*, he also reviled with them.

9 Dent, xxxii. 3*.
3 Isa. v. x, 2.

7 John x. 18.
1 Ps. lxix. ai.
* lb. v. 6.

• lb. ix. 28.
9 Mark xv. 23.
Cf. Tertull. adv. Marcion. III. c 23 ; cimtra
Jud. c. 13 : "The clouds being celestial benefits which were com
manded not to be forthcoming to the house of Israel ; for it 1 had
borne thorns^ whereof that house of Israel had wrought a crown
for Christ."
Constitt. Apost. VI. | 5 : " He has taken away Irom
them the Holy Spirit, and the prophetic rain, and has replenished
His Church with spiritual prace."
6 Eph. iv. 11.

7 Isa. liii. ia.

S 1 Cor. xiv. 29.
3 Ps. cix. 95.

other rebuked the reviler ; and it was to him
the end of life and the beginning of restoration ;
the surrender of his soul a first share in salva
tion. And after rebuking the other, he says,
Lord, remember me*; for with Thee is my
account. Heed not this man, for the eyes of
his understanding are blinded ; but remember
I say not, remember my works, for of
me.
Every man has a feeling
these I am afraid.
for his fellow-traveller;
I am travelling with
Thee towards death ; remember me, Thy
fellow-wayfarer.
I say not, Remember me
now, but, when Thou comest in Thy kingdom.

31. What power, O robber, led thee to the
light? Who taught thee to worship that de
spised Man, thy companion on the Cross?
0 Light Eternal, which gives light to them
that are in darkness !
Therefore also he justly
heard the words, Be of good cheer x ; not that
thy deeds are worthy of good cheer ; but that
the King is here, dispensing favours.
The
request reached unto a distant time ; but the
grace was very speedy.
Verily I say unto thee,
This day shalt thou be with Me in Paradise ;
because to-day thou hast heard My voice, and
hast not hardened thine heart".
Very speedily
1 passed sentence upon Adam, very speedily
I pardon thee. To him it was said, In the day
wherein ye eat, ye shall surely die3 ; but thou
to-day hast obeyed the faith, to-day is thy
salvation. Adam by the Tree fell away ; thou
by the Tree art brought into Paradise.
Fear
not the serpent ; he shall not cast thee out ;
for he is falle n from heaven *.
And I say not
unto thee, This day shalt thou depart, but,
Be of good
This day shalt thou be with Me.
courage : thou shalt not be cast out
Fear not
the flaming sword ;
it shrinks from its Lord 5.
O mighty and ineffable grace ! The faithful
Abraham had not yet entered, but the robber
enters6! Moses and the Prophets had not yet
entered, and the robber enters though a breaker
of the law.
Paul also wondered at this before
thee, saying, Where sin abounded, there grace
did much more abound
They who had borne
the heat of the day had not yet entered ; and
he of the eleventh hour entered.
Let none
murmur against the goodman of the house, for
he says, Friend, I do thee no wrong ; is it not

Bezae.

4 Luke x. 18.

S. Ambrose {Ps. cxix. Serm. xx. I 12) :

9 Luke xxiii. 40 ff._
1 Odpcrci. An addition to the text of Luke xxiii. 43 in Codex
a Ps. xcv. 7, 8.
3 Gen. it. 17.
** All
5 Gen. iii. 24.
who desire to return to Paradise must be tried by lire : for not in
vain the Scripture saiih, that when Adam and Eve were driven
out of their abode in Paradise, God placed at the gate of Eden
a flaming sword which turned every way."
« Cf. Iren. V. c. 5, i 1 ; Ath..n. (Expos. Fid. c i.) : " He
shewed us .... an entrance into Paradise from which Adam was a
cast out. and into which he entered again by means of the thief."
S. Leo {tie Pass. Dam. Serm. II. c.
1) : " Excedit humanam
conditioneni ista promissio : nec tain de ligno Cruris, quam de
throno edilur potestatis."

7 Rom. v. ao*

LECTURE XIII.

9'

lawfulfor Me to do what I will with Mine own 8 ?
The robber has a will to work righteousness,
but death prevents him ; I wait not exclusively
I am
for the work, but faith also I accept.
come who feed My sheep among the lilies'*, I am
come to feed them in the gardens.
I have
found a sheep that zoas lost10, but I lay it on My
shoulders ; for he believes, since he himself
has said, / have gone astray like a lost sheep 1 ;
Lord, remember me when Thou contest in Thy
kingdom.

32. Of this garden I sang of old to My spouse
in the Canticles, and spake to her thus. I am
come into My garden, My sister, My spouse1 ;
(now in the place where He was crucified was a
garden*;) and what takest Thou thence ? I have
gathered My myrrh; having drunk wine mingled
with myrrh, and vinegar, after receiving which,
He said, // is finished*.
For the mystery has
been fulfilled ; the things that are written have
been accomplished ; sins are forgiven.
For
Christ being come an High-Priest of the good
things to come, by tlie greater and more perfect
tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say,
not of this creation, noryet by the blood ofgoats
and calves, but by His oion blood, entered in once
for all into the holyplace, having obtained eternal
redemption ; for if the blood of bulls and op goats,
and the ashes of an heifer, sprinkling the defiled,
sanctifieth to the purifying oftheflesh, how much
more tlie blood op Christ ^1 And again, Having
therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the
holiest by the blood offesus, by a new and living
way, which He hath consecrated.for us, through
the veil, that is to say, His flesh 6. And because
His flesh, this veil, was dishonoured, there
fore the typical veil of the temple was rent
asunder, as it is written, And, behold, the veil
of the temple was rent in twain from the top to
the bottom'' ; for not a particle of it was left ; for
since the Master said, Behold, your house is
left unto you desolate 8, the house brake all in
pieces.

33. These things the Saviour endured, and
made peace through the Blood of His Cross, for
For we
things in heaven, and things in earth °.
were enemies of God through sin, and God
had appointed the sinner to die.
There must
needs therefore have happened one of two
things; either that God, in His truth, should
destroy all men, or that in His loving-kindness
He should cancel the sentence.
But behold
the wisdom of God ; He preserved both the
truth of His sentence, and the exercise of His
loving-kindness.
Christ took our sins in His
body on the tree, that we by His death might

* M«t. xx. I* 6T.
* Ps. cxix. 176.
* lh- 30.
7 Malt. xxviL jl.

9 Cant. vi. 3.
» Cant. v. 1.
8 lb. xxiii. 3B.

5 Heb. ix. 11.

*° Luke xv. 5, 6.
9 John xix. 41.
6 lb. x. 19.
9 Col. i. 20.

die to sin, and live unto righteousness \
Of no
small account was He who died for us ; He
was not a literal sheep ; He was not a mere
man ; He was more than an Angel ; He was
God made man.
The transgression of sinners
was not so great as the righteousness of Him
who died for them ; the sin which we commit
ted was not so great as the righteousness which
He wrought who laid down His life for us,-
who laid it down when He pleased, and took it
again when He pleased. And wouldest thou
know that He laid not down His life by
violence, nor yielded up the ghost against His
will ? He cried to the Father, saying, Father,
into Thy hands I commend My spirit ' ; I com
mend it, that T may take it again. And having
said these things, He gave up the ghost*; but
not for any long time, for He quickly rose
again from the dead.

34. The Sun was darkened, because of the
Sun of Righteousness*. Rocks were rent, be
cause of the spiritual Rock.
Tombs were
opened, and the dead arose, because of Him
who wasfree among the dead's / He sentforth His
prisoners out ofthepit wherein is no water 6. Be
not then ashamed of the Crucified, but be thou
also bold to say, He bearelh our sins, and endureth
grieffor us, and with His stripes we are healed i.
Let us not be unthankful to our Benefactor.
And again ; for the transgression of my people
was He led to death ; and T will give the wicked
for His burial, and the rich for His death%.
Therefore Paul says plainly, that Christ died
for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that
He was buried, and that He hath risen again the
third day according to the Scriptures 9.

35. But we seek to know clearly where
Is His tomb made
He has been buried.
Is it, like the tombs of kings,
with hands?
Is the Sepulchre
raised above the ground ?
made of stones joined together? And what is
laid upon it? Tell us,0 Prophets, the exact truth
concerning His tomb also, where He is laid,
and where we shall seek Him ?. And they say,
Look into the solid rock which ye have hewn '.
Look in and behold. Thou hast in the Gospels
In a sepulchre heivn in stone, which was hewn
out of a rock''. And what happens next ? What
kind of door has the sepulchre t Again another
Piophet says, They cut offAfy life in a dungeon
I, who am the Chief
and cast a stone upon Me.
corner-stone, the elect, the precious*, lie for a little
time within a stone - I who am a stone of
stumbling to the Jews, and of salvation to

• Luke xxiii. 46.

1 1 Pet. ii. 34.
3 Matt, xxvii. 5a
° Zech. ix. 11.
9 1 Cor. xv. 3.4.
a Matt, xxvii. 60 ; Mark xv. 46 ; Luke xxiii. 50.
3 Lam. Kii. 53: €*■ kimuf, "in a pit," or "well." C Jer.

5 Ps. lxxxviii. 5.
• lb. w. 8, 9.

* Mai. iv. a.
7 Isa. liii. 4, 5.

1 Isa. Ii. 1.

xxxvii. 16.

4 1 Pet. ii. 6.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

them who believe.
there
fore was planted in the earth, that the earth
which had been cursed might enjoy the bless
ing, and that the dead might be released.

The Tree of life

36. Let us not then be ashamed to confess
the Crucified.
Be the Cross our seal made
with boldness by our fingers on our brow, and
on everything ; over the bread we eat, and
the cups we drink ; in our comings in, and
goings out ; before our sleep, when we lie
down and when we rise up ; when we are in
the way, and when we are still 6.
Great is that
preservative ;
it is without price, for the sake
of the poor ; without toil, for the sick ; since
It is the Sign of
also its grace is from God.
the faithful, and the dread of d-evils : for He
triumphed over :hem in it, having made a shew
of them optplyi ; for when they see the Cross,
they are reminded of the Crucified ; they are
afraid of Him, who oruised the heads of the
dragon9. Despise not the Seal, because of the
freeness of the gift ; Dut for this the rather
honour thy Benefactor.

37. And if thou ever fall into disputation,
and hast not the grounds of proof, yet let Faith
remain firm in thee ; or rather, become thou
well learned, and then silence the Jews out of
the prophets, and the Greeks out of their own
fables. They themselves worship men who have
been thunderstricken0 : but the thunder when
it comes from heaven, comes not at random.
If they are not ashamed to worship men ihunderstricken and abhorred of God, art thou
ashamed to worship the beloved Son of God,
who was crucified for thee ?
I am ashamed to
tell the tales about their so-called Gods, and I
leave them because of time ;
let those who
know, speak.
And let all heretics also be
If any say that the Cross is an illu
silenced.
sion, turn away from him.
Abhor those who
say that Christ was crucified to our fancy 1 only;
for if so, and if salvation is from the Cross,
then is salvation a fancy also.
If the Cross is
fancy, the Resurrection is fancy also ; but if
Christ be not risen, we are yet in our sins'.
If
the Cross is fancy, the Ascension also is fancy;
and if the Ascension is fancy, then is ' the
second coming also
fancy, and everything is
henceforth unsubstantial.

38. Take therefore first, as an indestructible
foundation, the Cross, and build upon it the
other articles of the faith.
Deny not the
Crucified ; for, if thou deny Him, thou hast

5 Gen. ii. 9 ;

11 He
that hath not believed in Christ, nor hath understood that He is
the first principle and the Tree of Life. &c."

iii. aa. Methodius (SympM. ix. c 3) :

6 Cf. Cat. iv. 14, note 3 ; Etiseb. {Dem. Ev. ix. 14).
7 Col. ii. 15.
note a.
1 Kara tttavrairiav.
1 Cor. xv. 17.

» Ps. Ixxiv. 13.
9 See Cat. ri 11,
Cf. Ignat. Trail. 9, 10 ; Cat. iv. 9 ; xiii. 4.

many to arraign thee.
Judas the traitor will
arraign thee first ; for he who betrayed Him
knows that He was condemned to death by the
chief-priests and elders. The thirty pieces of
silver bear witness ; Gethsemane bears witness,
where the betrayal occurred; I speak not yet
of the Mount of Olives, on which they were
with Him at night, praying.
The moon in the
night bears witness ; the day bears witness,
and the sun which was darkened ; for it en
dured not to look on the crime of the con
spirators.
The fire will arraign thee, by which
Peter stood and warmed himself ; if thou deny
the Cross, the eternal fire awaits thee.
I speak
hard words, that thou may not experience
hard pains.
Remember the swords that came
against Him in Gethsemane, that thou feel not
the eternal sword. The house of Caiaphas*
will arraign thee, shewing bv its present desolat ion the power of Him who was erewhile
judged there. Yea, Caiaphas himself will rise up
against thee in the day of judgment , the very
servant will rise up against thee, who smote
Jesus with the palm of his hand ; they also
who bound Him, and they who led Him away.
Even
rise up against thee ;
and Pilate ; as if saying, Why deniest thou
Him who was slandered before us by the Jews,
and whom we knew to have done no wrong ?
For I Pilate then washed my hands. The false
witnesses shall rise up against thee, and the
soldiers who arrayed Him in the purple robe,
and set on Him the crown of thorns, and cruci
fied Him in Golgotha, and cast lots for His
Simon the Cyrenian will cry out upon
coat.
thee, who bore the Cross after Jesus.

Herod

shall

39. From among the stars there will cry out
upon thee, the darkened Sun ; among the
things upon earth, the Wine mingled
with
myrrh ; among reeds, the Reed ; among herbs,
the Hyssop ; among the things of the sea, the
Sponge ; among trees, the Wood of the Cross ;
- the soldiers, too, as I have said, who nailed
Him, and cast lots for His vesture; the soldier
who pierced His side with the spear ; the
women who then were present ; the veil of the

3 The house of Caiaphas and Pilate's Praetorium '9 41), and
Mount Zion itself (Cat. xvi. 18), on which they both stood, arc
described by Cyril as being in his time ruined and desolate.
F.usebius {Dem. Ev. VI II. 406), referring to the prophecy of
Micah (iii. 12), repeated by Jeremiah (xxvi. 18). that Zion shail
It plowed as ajield. and Jerusalem shall become Amps, testifies
that he bad seen with his own eyes the place being ploughed and
>own by strangers, and adds that in his own time the stones for
both public and private buildings were taken from the ruins.
Thi Bordeaux Pilgrim (333 a.d.) says. " It is evident where the
house of Caiaphas the Priest was ; and there is still the pillar at
this pillar is described by Jerome
which Christ was scourged: "
\Ep. 86) as suppoiting the portico of the Church which by his
Prudentius \circ. 400 A.D.) :-
time had been built on the spot.

" Impia blasphemi cecidit domus aha Caiphae ....
Vinctus in his Dominus stetit sedibus. atcjue columnar
Anncxus tergum dedit ut servile flagcllis.
Perstat adhuc, templumque gerit veneranda columna.**

(Benedictine Editor.)

LECTURE XIII.

temple then rent asunder; the hall of Pilate,
now laid waste by the power of Him who was
then crucified ;
Golgotha, which
this holy
stands high above us, and shews itself to this
day, and displays even yet how because of
Christ the rocks were then riven*; the sepulchre
nigh at hand where He was laid ; and the
stone which was laid on the door, which lies to
this day by the tomb ; the Angels who were
the women who worshipped
then present;
Him after His resurrection ; Peter and John,
who ran to the sepulchre ; and Thomas, who
thrust his hand into His side, and his fingers
into the prints of the nails.
For it was for our
sakes that he so carefully handled Him ; and
what thou, who wert not there present, wouldest
have sought, he being present, by God's Provi
dence, did seek.

40. Thou hast Twelve Apostles, witnesses
of the Cross ; and the whole earth, and the
world of men who believe on Him who hung
Let thy very presence here now per
thereon.
For
suade thee of the power of the Crucified.

4 Cf. Lucian. Antioch. ap- Rufin. Hiti. Sal. ix. c 6 ■ " Gol-

olhana rapes sub patibuli onere disrupta."

Cross

who now brought thee to this assembly ? what
soldiers?
With what bonds wast thou con
strained ? What sentence held thee fast here
now ? Nay, it was the Trophy of salvation,
of Jesus that brought you all
the
together.
It was this that enslaved the Per
sians, and tamed the Scythians ; this that gave
to the Egyptians, for cats and dogs and their
manifold errors, the knowledge of God ; this,
that to this day heals diseases ; that to this
day drives away devils, and overthrows the jug
gleries of drugs and charms.

41. This shall appear again with Jesus from
heaven s ; for the trophy shall precede the king :
thatseeing//i'w whom theypierced6, and knowing
by the Cross Him who was dishonoured, the Jews
may repent and mourn ; (but they shall mourn
tribe by tribe i, for they shall repent, when there
shall be no more time for repentance;) and
that we may glory, exulting in the Cross, wor
shipping the Lord who was sent, and crucified
for us, and worshipping also God His Father
who sent Him, with the Holy Ghost : To whom
be glory for ever and ever.

Amen.

S Cf. Oat. xv. ».

6 Zech. xii. 10.

1 lb. v. is.

LECTURE XIV,

On the words, And rose again from the dead on the third day, and ascended

into the Heavens, and sat on the right hand of the Father.

Now I make known unto you, brethren, the gospel which Ipreached unto you .
He hath been raised on the third day according to the Scriptures, &*c.

that

i Cor. xv. i -4.

Rejoice, O Jerusalem, and keep high festival,
Re
all ye that love Jesus ; for He is risen.
joice, all ye that mourned before
when ye
heard of the daring and wicked deeds of
the Jews :
for He who was spitefully en
treated of them in this place is risen again.
And as the discourse concerning the Cross
was a sorrowful one, so let the good tid
ings of the Resurrection bring joy to the
hearers.
Let mourning be turned into glad
ness, and lamentation to joy: and let our
mouth be filled with joy and gladness, because
of Him, who after His resurrection, said
For I know the sorrow of Christ's
Rejoice1.
friends in these past days ; because, as our
discourse stopped short at the Death and the
Burial, and did not tell the good tidings of the
Resurrection, your mind was in suspense, to
hear what you were longing for.

Now, therefore, the Dead is risen, He who
was free among the dead 3, and the deliverer of
the dead. He who in dishonour wore patiently
the crown of thorns, even He arose, and
crowned Himself with the diadem of His
victory over death.

2. As then we set forth the testimonies con
cerning His Cross, so come let us now verify
the proofs of His Resurrection also : since the
Apostle before us4 affirms, He was buried, and
has been raised on the third day according to the
Scriptures.
As an Apostle, therefore, has sent
us back to the testimonies of the Scriptures,
it is good that we should get full knowledge
of the hope of our salvation ;. and that we
should learn first whether the divine Scriptures
tell us the season of His resurrection, whether
it comes in summer or in autumn, or after
winter; and from what kind of place the

1 Is. Ixvi. to.
a Matt, xxviii. 9, "All hail." The usual greeting, Xa/ptre,
Rejoice."
3 Ps. Ixxxviii. 5 : Cast offamong the dead (R.V.) ; Cast away
(Margin).
4 Si

. i.e. in the text.

1 Cor xv. 4.

Saviour has risen, and what has been an
nounced in the admirable Prophets as the
name of the place of the Resurrection, and
whether the women, who sought and found
Him not, afterwards rejoice at finding Him ;
in order that when the Gospels are read, the
narratives of these holy Scriptures may not be
thought fables nor rhapsodies.

3. That the Saviour then was buried, ye
have heard distinctly in the preceding dis
course, as Isaiah saith, His burial shall be in
peace s ; for in His burial He made peace be
tween heaven and earth, bringing sinners unto
God : and, that the righteous is taken out of the
way of unrighteousness 6 .• and, His burial shall
be in peace : and, / will give the wickedfor His
burial i.
There is also the prophecy of Jacob
saying in the Scriptures, He lay down and
couched as a lion, and as a lion's whelp : who shall
rouse Him up* ? And the similar passage in
Numbers, He couched, He lay down as a lion,
and as a lion's whelp 9. The Psalm also ye have
often heard, which says, Attd Thou hast brought
me down into the dust of death1.
Moreover we
took note of the spot, when we quoted the
words, Look unto the rock, which ye have liewn *.
But now let the testimonies concerning His
resurrection itself go with us on our way.

4. First, then, in the nth Psalm He says,
For the misery of the poor, and the sighing oj the
needy, now will I arise, saith the Lord \ But
this passage still remains doubtful with some :
for He often rises up also in anger *, to take
vengeance upon His enemies.

Come then to the 15th Psalm, which says
distinctly : Preserve Me, O Lord, for in Thee

come (R.V.).

5 Is. Ivii. a : He entereth into peace (R.V.).
6 Is. Ivii. 1 : that the righteous is taken awnyfrom the evil to
7 Is. Uii. 9 : they made His grave with the wicked (R. V.).
8 Gen. xlix. 9.
9 Num. xxiv. 9.
■ cfl-r<r>7Fi<«ijcrdfL€0a, " noted for ourselves ; " Middle Voice. Is.
4 lb. vii. 6 : n Arise, O Lord, in Thine anger.
3 Ps. xii. 5.

li. 1 : quoted in Cat. xiii. 35.

1 Ps. xxii. 15.

LECTURE XIV.

have I put my trusts : and after this, their as
semblies of blood will I notjoin, nor make men
tion of their names between my lips 6 ; since they
have refused me, and chosen Caesar as their
king 7 : and also the next words, /foresaw the
Lord alway before Me, because He is at My right
hand, that I may not be moveds: and soon after,
Yea and even until night my reins chastened me 9.
And after this He says most plainly, For Thou
wilt not leave My soul in hell 1 / neither wilt Thou
suffer Thine Holy One to see corruption. He
said not, neither wilt Thou suffer Thine Holy
One to see death, since then He would not
have died; but corruption, saith He, I see not,
Thou hast made
and shall not abide in death.
Behold here is
known to Me the ways of life'1.
plainly preached a life after death.
Come
also to the 29th Psalm, I will extol Thee,
O Lord, for Thou hast lifted Me up, and hast
not made My foes to rejoice over Me3. What is
it that took place? Wert thou rescued from
enemies, or wert thou released when about
to be smitten ? He says himself most plainly,
O Lord, Thou hast brought up My -soul from
hell*. There he says, Thou wilt not leave, pro
phetically : and here he speaks of that which is
to take place as having taken place, Thou hast
brought up.
Thou hast saved Me from them
that go down into the pit*. At what time shall
Weeping shall continue for
the event occur?
the evening, andjoy cometh in the morning6 : for
in the evening was the sorrow of the disciples,
and in the morning the joy of the resurrection.
5. But wouldst thou know the place also ?
Again He saith in Canticles, / went down info
the garden of nuts 1 ; for it was a garden where
He was crucified 8.
For though it has now
been most highly adorned with royal gifts,
yet formerly it was a garden, and the signs
and the remnants of this remain. A garden \
enclosed, a fountain sealed?, by the Jews who
said, We remember that that deceiver said while
He was yet alive, After three days, I will rise :
command, therefore, that the sepulchre be made
sure ; and further on, So they went, and made
the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone with the
guard*. And aiming well at these, one saith,
But who
and in rest Thou shall judge them 2.

5 Ps. xvi. T.
6 lb. xvi. 4: "their drink-offerings of blood will I not offer."
The P.<d.nist abhors the bloody rites, and the very names of the
false gods.
Cyril applies to the Jews what the Psalmist
says concerning those that hasten after another god.

Quoting from memory, Cyril transposes these sen
R.V. in Sheol, Sept in Hades.
3 lb. xxx. 1.

7 John xix 15.
8 Ps. xvi. 8.
9 lb. 7.
x lb. 10.
a lb. 11.
4 lb. 3. WSf.from Sheol, Sept./>OT* Hivitt.
5 lb. 3.
6 lb. 5.
8 John xix. 41.
See Index, Golgotha.
1 Matt, xxvii. 63, 65.
• Job vii. 18 : .... try him every moment. Heb.

7 Cant. vi. 11.

9 Cant. iv. ta.

tences.

" a

is the fountain that is sealed, or who is inter
preted as being a well-spring of living water3 ?
It is the Saviour Himself, concerning whom
it is written, For with Thee is the fountain of
life*.

6. But what says Zephaniah in the person
of Christ to the disciples? Prepare thyself, be
rising at the dawn: all their gleaning is de
stroyed s .• the gleaning, that is, of the Jews, with
whom there is not a cluster, nay not even
a gleaning of salvation left ; for their vine is
See how He says to the disciples,
cut down.
Prepare thyself,
rise up at dawn: at dawn
expect the Resurrection.

And farther on in the same context of Scrip
ture He says, Therefore wait thou for Me, saith
the Lord, until the day of My Resurrection at
the Testimony 6. Thou seest that the Prophet
foresaw the place also of the Resurrection,
which was to be surnamed "the Testimony."
For what is the reason that this spot of Gol
gotha and of the Resurrection is not called,
like the rest of the Churches, a Church, but
a Testimony? Why, perhaps, it was because
of the Prophet, who had said, until the day of
My Resurrection at the Testimony.

7. And who then is this, and what is the
sign of Him that rises?
In the words of the
Prophet that follow in the same context, He
says plainly, For then will L turn to the peoples
a language i :
since, after the Resurrection,
when the Holy Ghost was sent forth the gift
of tongues was granted, thai they might serve
the Lord under one yoke1. And what other
token is set forth in the same Prophet, that
they should serve the Lord under one yoke 1
From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia they shall
Thou knowest what is
bring me offerings').
written
Ethiopian
in
eunuch came from beyond the rivers of Ethio
pia1. When therefore the Scriptures tell both
the time and the peculiarity of the place, when
they tell also the signs which followed the
Resurrection, have thou henceforward a firm
faith in the Resurrection, and let no one stir
Christ risen from the
thee from confessing
dead a.

Acts, when the

the

8. Now take also another testimony in the

4 Ps. xxxvi. q.

wink," as in Job xxi. 13, misinterpreted in both passages by the
LXX. as meaning " rest."

3 Cant. iv. 15.
5 Zeph. iii. 7 : they rose early and cot rupted all their doings.
The passage is wholly misunderstood by the Seventy, whom
S. Cyril follows.
For
6 Zeph. iii. 8 : until the day that I rise up to the prey.
•fyVi *° *** Pr*y* tne LXX. seem to have read "73?^, to the
About ten years before these Lecture* were de
testimony.
livered, EuaebtUk {Lift 0/ Conslanline, III. c. xxviii.), speak
ing of the discovery of the Holy Sepulchre, A.D. 336, calls it
" a te-timony to the Resurrection of the Saviour clearer than any
voire could give."

7 Zeph. iii. 9 : a pure language.
8 lb. to serz'e him with one consent (Marg. shoulder).
1 Acts viii. 27.
9 lb. v. 10.

* 3 Tim. it. 8.

<*5

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

87 th Psalm, where Christ speaks in the Pro
phets, (for He who then spake came afterwards
among us) : O Lord, God of My salvation, I
have cried day and night before Thee, and a little
farther on, / became as it were a man without
help, free among the dead 3.
He said not, I
became a man without help ; but, as it were
a man without help.
For indeed He was
crucified not from weakness, but willingly :
and His Death was not from involuntary
weakness. / was counted with them that go
down into the pit*. And what is the token?
Thou hast put away Mine acquaintancefarfrom
Me 5 (for the disciples have fled).
Wilt Thou
shew wonders to the dead6 i Then a little while
afterwards: And unto Thee have I cried, O
Lord; and in the morning shall my prayer come
before Theei.
Seest thou how they shew the
exact point of the Hour, and of the Passion,
and of the Resurrection ?

9. And whence hath the Saviour risen ? He
says in the Song of Songs : Rise up, come, My
neighbour* : and in what follows, in a cave ofthe
rock 9 1 A cave of the rock He called the cave
which was erewhile before the door of the
Saviour's sepulchre, and had been hewn out
of the rock itself, as is wont to be done here
in front of the sepulchres.
For now it is not
to be seen, since the outer cave was cut away
at that time for the sake of the present adorn
ment.
For before the decoration of the sepul
chre by the royal munificence, there was a cave
in the front of the rock
But where is the
rock that had in it the cave? Does it lie near
the middle of the city, or near the walls and
the outskirts? And whether is it within the
ancient walls, or within the outer walls which
were built afterwards? He says then in the
Canticles : in a cave of the rock, close to the outer
wall1.

10. At what season does the Saviour rise?
Is it the season of summer, or some other?
In the same Canticles immediately before the
words quoted He says, The winter is past, the
rain is past andgone ^ ; theflowers appear on the
Is not
earth ; the time of the pruning is come*.
then the earth full of flowers now, and are they

4 lb. v. 4.

3 lb. v. 8.

3 Ps. lxxxviii. 1, 4, 5.
T lb. v. 13.
6 lb. v. 10.
8 Cant. ii. 10 : Rise up. my lew, myfair one. and come away.
i See Index, Sepulchre.
9 v. 14 : in the clefts ofthe rock.
a Cant. ii. 14 : in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places
of the stairs. The Revised Version reads, in the covert of the
steep place.
In irap^Affcr, airopeveS] tavrip the LXX. have
imitated the pleonastic use of yj after verbs of motion, cor
responding to our idiom " Go away with you," and to the Dativus
See Gcsenius Lexicon on this use
Etkicus in Greek and Latin.
of

and Ewald, Introductory Grammar, | 217, 1. a.

3 Cant. ii. it.

4 Cant. ii. la : the singing of birds.

The Hebrew word
means cither "cutting," as in the LXX. tojutjs, Symmachus «\o5ti/trta>s, and R.V. Marg. "pruning," or as in A.V.
" singing."

not pruning the vines? Thou seest how he
said also that the winter is now past.
For
when this month Xanthicus* is come, it is
already spring. And this is the season, the
first month with the Hebrews, in which occurs
the festival of the Passover, the typical formerly,
but now the true.
This is the season of the
creation of the world : for then God said, Let
the earth bring forth herbage ofgrass, yielding
seed after his kind and after his likeness 6. And
now, as thou seest, already every herb is yield
ing seed. And as at that time God made the
sun and moon and gave them courses of equal
day (and night), so also a few days since was
the season of the equinox.

At that time God said, Let us make man
after our image and after our likeness''.
And
the image he received, but the likeness through
his disobedience he obscured.
At the same
season then in which he lost this the restor
ation also took place.
At the same season as
the created man through disobedience was
cast out of Paradise, he who believed was
through obedience brought in.
Our Salvation
then took place at the same season as the Fall :
when theflowers appeared, and the pruning ivas
come.

11. A garden was the place of His Burial,
and a vine that which was planted there : and
He hath said, L am the vine* I He was planted
therefore in the earth in order that the curse
which came because of Adam might be rooted
out
The earth was condemned to thorns and
thistles: the true Vine sprang up out of the
earth, that the saying might be fulfilled, Truth
sprang up out of the earth, and righteousness

5 Xanthicus is the name of the sixth month in the Macedonian
Calendar, corresponding nearly to the Jewish Nisan (Josc| hus,
Antiq. II. xiv. 6), and to the latter part of Lent and Easter.
On the tradition that the Creation took place at this season, see
S. Ambrose, Hexwmeron, I. c 4, i 13.

0 Gen. i. it : grass, the herbyielding seed.
The LXX. give an irregular construction,
Boravi|i/ voprou tnrttpov anepua.
1 Gen. i. 26. "The ancient Church very accurately distin
guished between tlituv (image) and o^iotMcrif (likeness), and the
Greek Church does the same in its Confession. The latter phrase
expresses man's destination, which is not to be regarded as carried
(Dorner, System of Christian
out at the moment of creation.
Doctrine, E.Tr. II. p. 78). The image lies in the permanent
capacities of man's nature (Gen. ix. 6 :
1 Cor. xi. 7 : Jas. iii. 9),
the likeness in their realisation in moral conformity with God
(opor/dttav 0tov, Ignatius, Magnes vi). " The image of God is a
comprehensive thing. . . . To this belongs man's intellective power,
his liberty of will, his dominion over the other creatures flowing
from the two former. These make up the to overtures, that part
of that divine image which is natural and essential to man, and
consequently can never be wholly blotted out, defaced, or ex
tinguished, but still remains even in man fallen. But beside these
the Church of God hath ever acknowledged, in the first man,
certain additional ornaments, and as it were complements of the
divine image, such as immortality, grace, holiness, righteousness,
whereby man approached more nearly to the similitude and like
ness of God. . These were (if I may so speak) the lively coloury
wherein the grace, the beauty, and lustre of the divine image
principally consisted ; these colours faded, yea, were defaced
(Bull, The State of
and blotted out by man's transgression.
Man before the Fall, Vol. ii. p. 114, Ox.).
Cf. Iren. (V. vi. « 1 ;
xvi. % a); Tertullian (de Raptismo, c. 5) ; Clem. Alex. [Exhort.
c. 12) ; Origen (c. Celt. IV. 30).
8 John xv. 1. The Benedictine Editor has a different punc
tuation : " and the vine which was planted there hath said.
And Jam he fine."

LECTURE XIV.

looked down from heaven °. And what will He
that is buried in the garden say ? Ihave gathered
My myrrh with My spices: and again, Myrrh
and aloes, with all chief spices '. Now these are
the symbols of the burying ; and in the Gospels
it is said, The women came unto the sepulchre
bringing the spices which they had prepared'' :
JVicodemus also bringing a mixture of myrrh and
aloes 3. And farther on it is written, I did eat
My bread with My honey * : the bitter before the
Passion, and the sweet after the Resurrection.
Then after He had risen He entered through
closed doors : but they believed not that it was
He : for they supposed that they beheld a spirit*.
But He said, Handle Me and see.
Put your
fingers into the print of the nails, as Thomas
required. And while they yet believed not for
joy, and wondered, He said unto them, Have ye
here anything to eat? And they gave Him
Seest
a piece of a broiled fish and honeycomb 6.
thou how thnt is fulfilled, / did eat My bread
with My honey.

12. But before He entered

through the
closed doors, the Bridegroom and Suitor i of
souls was sought by those noble and brave
women.
They came, those blessed ones, to
the sepulchre, and sought Him Who had been
raised, and the tears were still dropping from
their eyes, when they ought rather to have been
dancing with joy for Him that had risen. Mary
came seeking Him, according to the Gospel,
and found Him not: and presently she heard
from the Angels, and afterwards saw the Christ.
Are then these things also written ? He says
in the Song of Songs, On my bed I sought Him
whom my soul loved.
At what season ? By
night on my bed I sought Him Whom my soul
loved: Mary, it says, came while it was yet
dark. On my bed I sought Him by night, I
sought Him, and Ifound Him not*. And in the
Gospels Mary says, They have taken away my
Lord, and Iktioiv not where they have laid Him 9.
But the Angels being then present cure their
want of knowledge; for they said, Why seek
ye the living among the dead 1 ? He not only
rose, but had also the dead with Him when
He rose
But she knew not, and in her person
the Song of Songs said to the Angels, Saw ye
Him Whom my soul loved 1 It was but a little
that I passed from them (that is, from the two
Angels), until I found Him Whom my soul
loved. I held Him, and ivottld not let Him go 3.
13. For after the vision of the Angels, Jesus

9 Ps. Ixxxv. II.
" Cant. v. 1 ; iv. 14. Compare Cat. xiii. 39.
3 John xix. 39.
• Luke xxiv. 1.
4 Cant. v. 1 : my honeycomb tvith my honey.
6 lb. v. ^t.
5 Luke xxiv. 37.
7 6 Bepanrurtt- In connexion with

Bridegroom,** and " Him
whom my soul loveth '* the meaning " Suitor" is more appropriate
than " Physician.'*
1 Luke xxiv. 5.
9 John xx. 13.
3 Cant. iii. 3. 4.
VOL. VII.

8 Cant. iii. 1 : Joh. xx. 1.
a Matt, xxvii. 5a.

H

I came as His own Herald ; and the Gospel
says, And behold Jesus met them, saying, All
hail I and they came and took hold of Hisfeet*.
They took hold of Him, that it might be ful
filled, I will hold Him, and will not let Him go.
Though the woman was weak in body, her
spirit was manful. Many waters quench not
love, neither do rivers drown it* ; He was dead
whom they sought, yet was not the hope of the
Resurrection quenched. And the Angel says
to them again, Fear not ye ; I say not to the
soldiers, fear not, but to you 6 ; as for them, let
them be afraid, that, taught by experience,
they may bear witness and say, Truly this was
the Son of Godi ; but you ought not to be
afraid,for perfect love casteth outfears. Go, tell
His disciples that He is risen »; and the rest.
And they depart with joy, yet full of fear ; is
this also written?
yes, the second Psalm,
which relates the Passion of Christ, says, Serve
the Lord with far, and rejoice unto Him with
trembling*;-rejjice, because of the risen Lord ;
but with trembling, because of the earthquake,
and the Angel who appeared as lightning.

14. Though, therefore, Chief Priests and
Pharisees through Pilate's means sealed the
tomb ; yet the women beheld Him who was
risen. And Esaias knowing the feebleness of
the Chief Priests, and the women's strength of
faith, says, Ye women, who come from beholding,
come hither
for the people hath no understand
ing ;-the Chief Priests want understanding,
while women are eye-witnesses. And when
the soldiers came into the city to them, and
told them all that had come to pass, they said
to them, Say ye, His disciples came by night,
and stole Him away while we slept 3 ?
Well
therefore did Esaias foretell this also, as in
their persons, But tell us, and re/ate to us
another deceit*. He who rose again, is up, and
for a gift of money they persuade the soldiers ;
but they pe'rsuade not the kings of our time.
The soldiers then surrendered the truth for
silver ; but the kings of this day have, in their
piety, built this holy Church of the Resurrec
tion of God our Saviour, inlaid with silver and
wrought with gold, in which we are assem
bled 5 ; and embellished it with the treasures of
silver and gold and precious stones. And if
this come to the governor's ears, they say, we will
Yea, though ye persuade the
persuade him 6.
soldiers, yet ye will not persuade the world ;
for why, as Peter's guards were condemned
when he escaped out of the prison, were not

5 Cant. viiL 7.

4 Matt, xxviii. 9.
* Matt, xxviii. 5^ The emphatic u^cis is rightly interpreted
by Cyril as distinguUhing the women from the frightened sen
J Matt, xxvii. 54.
tinels.
8 1 John iv. 18.
9 Matt, xxviii. 7.
' Isa. xxvii 11: The women shtiil come, and set them o'iJire
3 Matt, xxviii. 13.
» Matt, xxxviii. it
5 Cf. Euseb. (Lift 0/Const. III. 36).

4 Isa. xxx. io.

Pa. it 11.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

they also who watched Jesus Christ con
demned? Upon the former, sentence was
pronounced by Herod, for they were ignorant
and had nothing to say for themselves ; while
the latter, who had seen the truth, and con
cealed it for money, were protected by the
Nevertheless, though but a few
Chief Priests.
of the Jews were persuaded at the time, the
world became obedient.
They who hid the
truth were themselves hidden ; but they who
received it were made manifest by the power
of the Saviour, who not only rose from the
dead, but also raised the dead with Himself.
And in the person of these the Prophet Osee
says plainly, After two days will He revive us,
and in the third day we shall rise again, and
shall live in His sight

15. But since the disobedient Jews will not
be persuaded by the Divine Scriptures, but
forgetting all that is written gainsay the Resur
rection of Jesus, it were good to answer them
thus : On what ground, while you say that
Eliseus and Elias raised the dead, do you
gainsay the Resurrection of our Saviour ?
Is
it that we have no living witnesses now out of
that generation to what we say ? Well, do you
also bring forward witnesses of the history of
that time. But that is written ;-so is this also
written : why then do ye receive the one, and
reject the other? They were Hebrews who
wrote that history ; so were all the Apostles
Hebrews : why then do ye disbelieve the
Jews8? Matthew who wrote the Gospel wrote
it in the Hebrew tongue f; and Paul the
preacher was a Hebrew of the Hebrews ; and
the twelve Apostles were all of Hebrew race :
then fifteen Bishops of Jerusalem were ap
pointed in succession from among the He
brews
What then is your reason for allowing
your own accounts, and rejecting ours, though
these also are written by Hebrews from among
yourselves.

16. But it is impossible, some one will say,
that the dead should rise ; and yet Eliseus
twice raised the dead,-when he was alive,
and also when dead. Do we then believe,
that when Eliseus was dead, a dead man who
was cast upon him and touched him, arose ;

7 Hos. vi. s.
8 Instead of tois 'IovSauuc the Jerusalem Editor adopts from
Cod. A. rots t£t'oif. " Your own countrymen," a better reading in
this place, if it had more support from MSS. The Latin in
Milles has only " Cur igitur non creditis?"
9 The statements of Papias, tremens, Origen, Eusebins, Epiphanius, and Jerome, concerning a Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew
are ably discussed by Br. Salmonj/ft/nMrW/fim to N. T. Lect. X.).
who comes to the conclusion that the Canonical Gospel was not
translated from Hebrew (Aramaic), but originally written in
Greek.
1 This statement may have been derived either from Eusebius
{Hist. Eccl. IV. c. 5), or from the " written records " (cyvpa^uy),
from which he had learned that "until the siege of the Jews
which took place under Adrian (135 A.D.), there were fifteen
bishops in succession there, all of whom are said to have been
of Hebrew descent." See the list of names, and the notes on the
passage in this Series.

and is Christ not risen ?
But in that case,
the dead man who touched Eliseus, arose, yet
he who raised him continued nevertheless
dead : but in this case both the Dead of whom
we speak Himself arose, and many dead were
raised without having even touched Him.
For
many bodies of the Saints which slept arose, and
they came out of the graves after His Resurrec
tion, and went into the Holy City'', (evidently
and appeared
this city, in which we now are
unto many.
Eliseus then raised a dead man,
but he conquered not the world ; Elias raised
a dead man, but devils are not driven away in
the name of Elias. We are not speaking evil
of the Prophets, but we are celebrating their
Master more highly ; for we do not exalt our
own wonders by disparaging theirs ; for theirs
also are ours ; but by what happened among
them, we win credence for our own.

17. But again they say, "A corpse then
lately dead was raised by the living ; but shew
us that one three days dead can possibly arise,
and that a man should be buried, and rise after
three days."
If we seek for Scripture testi
mony in proof of such facts, the Lord Jesus
Christ Himself supplies it
in the Gospels,
saying, For as Jonas was three days and three
nights in the whale's belly ; so shall the Son
of man be three days and three nights in the
heart of the earth*. And when we examine the
story of Jonas, great is the force 5 of the resem
blance.
Jesus was sent to preach repentance ;
Jonas also was sent : but whereas the one fled,
not knowing what should come to pass ; the
other came willingly, to give repentance unto
Jonas was asleep in the ship, and
salvation.
snoring amidst the stormy sea ; while Jesus
also slept, the sea, according to God's provi
dence 6, began to rise, to shew in the sequel the
might of Him who slept.
To the one they
Arise, call upon
said. Why art tlwu snoring?
thy God, that God may save ust ; but in the
other case they say unto the Master, Lord, save
us*. Then they said, Call upon thy God; here
they say, save Thou.
But the one says, Take
me, and cast me info the sea ; so shall the sea be
calm unto you 9 ; the other, Himself rebuked the
winds and the sea, and there was a great calm 8.
The one was cast into a whale's belly : but the
other of His own accord went down thither,
where the invisible whale of death is. And
He went down of His own accord, that death

■ Matt, xxvii. 52, 53.
3 The Archdeacon of Jerusalem, Photius Alexandrides, ob
serves that " by this parenthetic explanation Cyril perhaps wished
to refute the opinion which some favoured that these saints which
siept and were raised entered into the heavenly Jerusalem." See
Euseb. Dem. Evang. IV. 12.
5 "ivtpycia (Forte cVapyeia, Edit.]." This conjecture of the
Benedictine Editor is recommended by the very appropriate sense
"distinctness of the resemblance," bat seems to have no MS.
authority.
8 Matt. viii. 35, 36.
7 Jonah i. 6.

* Matt. xii. 40.

6 car' oUoroptay.
9 Jonah i. 12.

LECTURE XIV.

might cast up those whom he had devoured,
according to
that which is written, / will
ransom them from the power of the grave ; and
from the hand of death I will redeem them x.

that

And, seeing

18. At this point of our discourse, let us con
sider whether is harder, for a man after having
been buried to rise again from the earth, or for
a man in the belly of a whale, having come
into the great heat of a living creature, to
escape corruption.
For what man knows not,
that the heat of the belly is so great, that even
bones which have been swallowed moulder
away? How then did Jonas, who was three
days and three nights in the whale's belly,
the
escape corruption ?
nature of all men is such that we cannot
live without breathing, as we do, in air, how
did he live without a breath of this air for
three days ?
But the Jews make answer and
say, The power of God descended with Jonas
when he was tossed about in hell.
Does then
the Lord grant life to His own servant, by
sending His power with him, and can He not
grant it to Himself as well? If that is credible,
this is credible also ; if this is incredible, that
For to me both are alike
also is incredible.
worthy of credence.
I believe that Jonas
was preserved, for all things are possible with
God'; I believe that Christ also was raised
from the dead ; for I have many testimdnies
of this, both from the Divine Scriptures, and
from the operative power even at this day 3 of
Him who arose,-who descended into hell
alone, but ascended thence with a great
company ; for He went down to death, and
many bodies of the saints which slept arose*
through Him.

19. Death was struck with dismay on behold
ing a new visitantdescendinto Hades, notbound
by the chains of that place. Wherefore, O por
ters of Hades, were ye scared at sight of Him ?
What was the unwonted fear that possessed
you? Death fled, and his flight betrayed his
cowardice. The holy prophets ran unto Him,
and Moses the Lawgiver, and Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob ; David also, and Samuel,
and Esaias, and John the Baptist, who bore
witness when he asked, Art Thou He that
should come, or look we for another s 1
All the
Just were ransomed, whom death had swal
lowed ; for it behoved the King whom they
had proclaimed, to become the redeemer of
His noble heralds.
Then each of the Just
said, 0 death, where is thy victory ? O grave,
where is thy sting6 1 For the Conqueror hath
redeemed us.

..." Hosea xiii. 14.
3 Cf. Cat. iv. 13 j
• Matt. xix. 26.
*>u-35 lb. xi. 3.
*
6 1 Cor. xv. 55. On the opinion that the Patriarchs, Prophets,
and Righteous men were redeemed by Christ in Hades, compare

4 Matt, xxvii. 5a.

20. Of this our Saviour the Prophet Jonas
formed the type, when he prayed out of the belly
of the whale, and said, / cried in my affliction,
and so on ; out of the belly of helli, and yet he
was in the whale ; but though in the whale, he
says that he is in Hades ; for he was a type
of Christ, who was to descend into Hades.
And after a few words, he says, in the person of
Christ, prophesying most clearly, My head went
down to the chasms of the mountains* ; and
What
yet he was in the belly of the whale.
mountains then encompass thee?
I know, he
says, that I am a type of Him, who . is to
be laid in the Sepulchre hewn out of the rock.
And though he was in the sea, Jonas says, /
went doivn to the earth, since he was a type of
Christ, who went down into the heart of the
earth. And foreseeing the deeds of the Jews
who persuaded the soldiers to lie, and told
them, Say that they stole Him away, he says, By
regarding lying vanities they foi sook their own
mercy
For He who had mercy on tliem came,
and was crucified, and rose again, giving His
own precious blood both for Jews and Gen
tiles ; yet say they, Say that they stole Him
away, having regard to lying vanities1.
But
concerning His Resurrection, Esaias also says,
He who brought up from the earth the great
Shepherd of the sheep 1 ; he added the word,
great, lest He should be thought on a level
with the shepherds who had gone before Him.
21. Since then we have the prophecies, let
faith abide with us.
Let them fall who fall
through unbelief, since they so will; but thou
hast taken thy stand on the rock of the faith in
the Resurrection.
Let no heretic ever per
suade thee to speak evil of the Resurrection.
For to this day the Manichees say, that the
resurrection of the Saviour was phantom-wise,
and not real, not heeding Paul who says, Who
ivas made of the seed of David according to the
flesh; and again, By the resurrection ofJesus
Christ our Lordfrom the dead'\ And again he
aims at them, and speaks thus, Say not in

Irenseus tfferr. I. xxvii. $ 3 ; IV. xxvii. jt a), Clem. Alex. {Stromal.
vi. c 6), Ori§en {In Genes. Horn. xv. $ 5).

tains : the earth with her bars closed upon meJor ever.

7 Jonah iL 2.
8 lb. v. 6: (R.V.)/ went down to the bottoms 0/ the moun
9 V. 8.
1 By tying vanities are meant in the original " vain idols."
fl Isa.lxiii. 11 ;(R.V.), // here is He that brought them up outof
the sea with the shepherds ( Marg. shepherd) 0/Hisjlock '! Cyril s
reading, ex ttjc yijs instead 01 ex Tije floAxcroTjs is found in the
Alexandrine MS. of the Septuagint.
Athanasius [Ad Serapion,
Ep. i. 12) has the same reading and interpretation as Cyril.
By
" the shepherds " are probably meant Moses and Aaron : cf. Ps.
lxxvii. 20: Who
leddest Thy people like sheep by the hand of
Moses and Aaron.
Heb. xiii. 20: jVow the God of peace, that brought again
from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of'the sheep.
The word " great " is added by the Author of the Epistle i>
&c.
the Hebrews not by Isaiah.
Cyril in his incomplete quotation of v. 4
makes 'li\aov XptcrroO tow K. rifi. depend on drnvrdtrruf. The
right order and construction is given in R.V., who was declared
to be the Son o/God . ... by the resurrection 0/ the dead ; el""
Jesus Christ our Lord.

3 Rom. i. 3, 4.

IOO

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven; or,
who shall descend into the deep 1
that is, to
bring up Christ from the dead * ; and in like
manner warning as he has elsewhere written
again, Remember Jesus Christ raised from the
dead 5 / and again, And if Christ be not risen,
then is our preaching vain, and your faith is
also vain.
Yea, and we are found false wit
nesses of God ; because we testified of God that
He raised up Christ, whom He raised not up 6.
But in what follows he says, But now is Christ
risen from the dead, the first fruits of them that
are asleep ' /-And He was seen of Cephas, then
of the twelve; (for if thou believe not the one
witness, thou hast twelve witnesses;) then He
was seen of abovefive hundred brethren at once* ;
(if they disbelieve the twelve, let them admit
the five hundred ; ) after that He was seen of
fames 9, His own brother, and first Bishop of
Seeing then that such a Bishop
this diocese.
originally1 saw Christ Jesus when risen, do not
thou, his disciple, disbelieve him.
But thou
sayest that His brother James was a partial
witness ; afterwards He ivas seen also of me''
Paul, His enemy ; and what testimony is
doubted, when an enemy proclaims it?
"I,
who was before a persecutor*, now preach the
glad tidings of the Resurrection."

22. Many witnesses there are of the Saviour's
resurrection.-The night, and the light of the
full moon ; (for that night was the sixteenth < ; )
the rock of the sepulchre which received Him;
the stone also shall rise up against the face of
the Jews, for it saw the Lord ; even the stone
which was then rolled away5, itself bears witness
to the Resurrection, lying there to this day.
Angels of God who were present testified of
the Resurrection of the Only-begotten : Peter
and John, and Thomas, and all the rest of the
Apostles ; some of whom ran to the sepulchre,
and saw the burial-clothes, in which He was
wrapped before, lying there after the Resur
rection ; and others handled His hands ana
His feet, and beheld the prints of the nails ;
and all enjoyed together that Breath of the
Saviour, and were counted worthy to forgive
sins in the power of the Holy Ghost. Women

8 lb. 5, 6.

la Tim. ii. 8.

4 Rom. x. 6, 7.
7 lb. v. 20.
9 lb. 7.

* i Cor. xv. 14, 15.
This appearance of Christ to James is not men
JnTome{Catalog. Script. Eccles. p. 170 D)
tioned in the Gospels.
mentions a tradition that James had taken an oath that he would
eat no bread from the hour in which he had drunk the Cup of the
Lord, until he should see Him rising from the dead.
Wherefore
the Saviour immediately after He had risen appeared to James
and commanded him to eat.
1 For toiovtov rotntf eiruritoirov irp*»Torvir«>c iioKroj Codd.
Roe, Casaub. have tov miwv irpwrorvirou iwicntoiTov ISovrot,
which gives the better sense-" since therefore the primary
Bishop saw, &c." On the meaning of irapoixi'a, and the extent
of a primitive Diocese, see Bingham. IX. c. 3.
3 1 Tim. i. 13.

■ x Cor. xv. 8.
4 If the Crucifixion took place on the nth of Nisan. the follow
5 Cf. Cat. xiii. 39.

ing night would begin the 15th, and the next night the i6tb.

too were witnesses, who took hold of His feet,
and who beheld the mighty earthquake, and
the radiance of the Angel who stood by : the
linen clothes also which were wrapped about
Him, and which He left when He rose ; -the
soldiers, and the money given to them ; the
spot itself also, yet to be seen ; -and this
house of the holy Church, which out of the
loving
affection to Christ of the Emperor
Constantine of blessed memory, was both
built and beautified as thou seest.

23. A witness to the resurrection of Jesus
is Tabitha also, who was in His name raised
from the dead6; for how shall we disbelieve
that Christ is risen, when even His Name
raised the dead? The sea also bears witness
to the resurrection of Jesus, as thou hast heard
before
The draught of fishes also testifies,
and the fire of coals there, and the fish laid
Peter also bears witness, who had
thereon.
erst denied Him thrice, and who then thrice
confessed Him ; and was commanded to feed
His spiritual 8 sheep. To this day stands Mount
Olivet, still to the eyes of the faithful all but
displaying Him Who ascended on a cloud,
and the heavenly gate of His ascension.
For
from heaven He descended to Bethlehem, but
to heaven He ascended from the Mount of
Olives'; at the former place beginning His
conflicts among men, but in the latter, crowned
after them.
Thou hast therefore many wit
nesses ; thou hast this very place of the Resur
rection ; thou hast also the place of the As
cension towards the east; thou hast also for
witnesses the Angels which there bore tes
timony ; and the cloud on which He went up,
and the disciples who came down from that
place.

24. The course of instruction in the Faith
would lead me to speak of the Ascension also;
but the grace of God so ordered '
it, that
thou heardest most fully concerning it, as far
as our weakness allowed, yesterday, on the

8 rotfri.

* Acts ix. 41.
7 See 1 17, above.
9 St. Luke (xxiv. 50) describes the Ascension as taking place
at Bethany, but the tradition, which Cyril follows, had long since
fixed the scene on the summit of the Mount of Olives, a mile
nearer to Jerusalem ; and here the Empress Helena had built the
Church ot the Ascension (Euscbius, Lift 0/ Constantine, III. 43 ;
There is nothing in Cyril's
Demonstr. Evang. VI. xviii. 26).
language to warrant the Benedictine Editor's suggestion that he
ailudes to the legendtaccording to which the marks of Christ's feet
were indelibly impressed on the spot from which He ascended.
In the next generation St. Augustine seems to countenance the
miraculous story {In /oh. Evang. Tract xlvii.): 11 There are His
footsteps, now adored, where last He stood, and whence He
ascended into heaven." The supposed trace of one foot is still
shewn on Mount Olivet ; " the other having been removed by the
Turks is now to be found in the Chapel of S. Thecla, which is
in the Patriarch's Palace " (Jerusalem Ed.X Compare Stanley,
Sinai and Palestine, c. xiv. ;
Dictionary of Bible, Olive*,
Mount of.
In this word, as also in the phrase below, ear'
ot«ovop.iay rijt Oeiac xaptroc, Cyril refers to the order of reading
the Scriptures as part of a dispensation established by Divine
grace.

1 ifKotun^trt.

LECTURE XIV.

Lord's day; since, by the providence of divine
grace, the course of the Lessons 2 in Church
included the account of our Saviour's going up
into the heavens 3 ■ and what was then said was
spoken principally for the sake of all, and for the
assembled body of the faithful, yet especially
for thy sake*.
But the question is, didst thou
attend to what was said ? For thou knowest that
the words which come next in the Creed teach
thee to believe in Him " Who rose again
THE THIRD DAY, AND ASCENDED INTO HEAVEN,
AND SAT DOWN ON THE RIGHT HAND OF THE
Father."
I suppose then certainly that thou
rememberest the exposition ; yet I will now
again cursorily put thee in mind of what was
then
distinctly
Remember what is
written in the Psalms, God is gone up with
a shout*; remember that the divine powers
also said to one another, Lift up your gates, ye
Princes6, and the rest ; remember also the Psalm
which says, He ascended on high, He led cap
tivity captive i ; remember the Prophet who said,
Who buildeth His ascension unto heaven s; and
all the other particulars mentioned yesterday
because of the gainsaying of the Jews.

said.

25. For when they speak against the ascension
of the Saviour, as being impossible, remember
the account of the carrying away of Habakkuk :
for if Habakkuk was transported by an Angel,
being carried by the hair of his head', much
rather was the Lord of both Prophets and
Angels, able by His own power to make His
ascent into the Heavens on a cloud from the
Mount of Olives.
this thou
mayest call to mind, but reserve the pre-emi
nence for the Lord, the Worker of wonders ;
for the others were borne up, but He bears
up all things.
Remember that Enoch was
translated1; but Jesus ascended: remember
what was said yesterday concerning Elias, that
Elias was taken up in a chariot of fire * ; but
that the chariots of Christ are ten thousand-fold
even thousands upon thousands*: and that Elias
was taken up, towards the east of Jordan ; but

Wonders like

9 avaymnrnaTwv, a term including the portions of Scripture
(fffpuroirtu) appointed for the Epistle and Gospel as well as the
daily lessons, from the Old and New Testaments.
.
3 The section Luke xxiv. 36-53, which in the Eastern Church
« the Gospel for Ascension Day, is also one of the " eleven
morning Gospels of the Resurrection (<vavy*'Aia avatrraaini
«*»*W), which were read in turn, one every Sunday at Matins."
Dictionary 0/ Chr. Antiq. " Lectionary. " This Lecture being
delivered on Monday, the Section in question had been read on
the preceding day.
4 MaAitTTa u.iv .
6 Ps. xxiv. 7 : Lift up, O gates, yonr heads. The order of the
' Ps. lxviii. 18.' On the reading ai-e'0t], found in a few MSS.
" Amos ix. 6 : (R.V.) // is He that buiUeth His chambers in
Marg. ascensions, or sphetes.

Hebrew word* misled the Greek Translators.
of the Septuagint, see Tischendorfs note on Eph. iv. 8.
w ktaytn.
Sept. ri|» d( ajSaate avrov.

5 bel and the Dragon, v. 33 : Compare Ezck. viii. 3.
3 2 Kings ii. XX.
1 He!), xi. 5.
3 Ps. lxviii. 17: xiAtetocr tvthjvovvTuiv.
The Hebrew means
literally " thousands of repetition," i.e. many thousands : tHHivtiv,
to "bound."

(A.V.J His stories,

. r£a»p<ru>s AV.

5 Ps. xlvii. 5.

.

that Christ ascended at the east of the brook
Cedron : and that Elias went as into heaven* ;
but Jesus, into heaven : and that Elias said
that a double portion in the Holy Spirit should
be given to his holy disciple ; but that Christ
granted to His own disciples so great enjoy
ment of the grace of the Holy Ghost, as not
only to have It in themselves, but also, by the
laying on of their hands, to impart the fellow
ship of It to them who believed.

26. And when thou hast thus wrestled against
the Jews,-when thou hast worsted them by
parallel instances, then come further to the
pre-eminence of the Saviour's glory ; namely,
that they were the servants, but He the Son of
God. And thus thou wilt be reminded of His
pre-eminence, by the thought that a servant of
Christ was caught up to the third heaven.
For
if Elias attained as far as the first heaven, but
Paul as far as the third, the latter, therefore,
has obtained a more honournble dignity.
Be
not ashamed of thine Apostles ; they are not
inferior to Moses, nor second to the Prophets ;
but they are noble among the noble, yea,
For Elias truly was taken up
nobler still.
into heaven ; but Peter nas the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, having received the words,
shalt loose on earth shall
Whatsoever thou
be loosed in heaven s.
Elias was taken up only
to heaven ; but Paul both into heaven, and
into paradise6 (for it behoved the disciples
of Jesus to receive more manifold grace), and
heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful
for man to utter.
But Paul came down again
from above, not because he was unworthy to
abide in the third heaven, but in order that
after having enjoyed things above man's reach,
and descended in honour, and having preached
Christ, and died for His sake, he might re
But I
ceive also the crown of martyrdom.
pass over the other parts of this argument,
of which I spoke yesterday in the Lord's-day
congregation ; for with understanding hearers,
a mere reminder is sufficient for instruction.

27. But remember also what I have often
said 1 concerning the Son's sitting at the right

4 Sept. wc etc tof ovpavov.

In x Mace. ii. 58 the MSS vary
between e»s and us, but the latter (says Fritzsche) "is an altera,
tion made to agree with a Kings ii. 11.
But there the leference is
to the intended exaltation of Elijah into heaven, and therefore uf
is rightly used (Kiihner, Gramtn. § 604. note ; Jelf, S 626, Obs. 1),
while here the thine; is referred to as an accomplished historical
/act." The distinction here drawn by Cyril is therefore hyper
critical, as is seen below in 8 26, wheie he writes, 'HKias p.iv yap
dpeArj(/>eh) eis ovpavov.
5 Matt. xvi. 19.
7 See Cat. iv. 7 ; xi. 17. The clause, Ka't Katitaavra cx Sefiup
tou IlaTpos, does not occur in the original form of the Nicene
Creed, but ts found in the Confession of faith contained in Const.
Apoxt. c. 41, in the four Eusebian Confessions of Antioch (341, 2
A.D.), and in the Macrostichos (344 A.D.). An equivalent clause
is found in the brief Confession of Hippclylus (circ. 220 A.o.)
Contra Hares. Noeti, c. 1 : " Kal ovra tv 6<itq too llarpos," and
in Tcrtullian, De Virgin. Velanii. c. I : " Kegula quidem Fidei
sedentem
una omnino est, sola iinmobilis ct irreformabilis
nunc ad dextram Paths : " de /'ra,scriptione,c. 13: " Regula tsi

6 2 Cor. xit. a, 4.

IQ2

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

hand of the Father ; because of the next sen
tence in the Creed, which says, " And as
cended into Heaven, and sat down at the
Let US not
RIGHT HAND OF THE FATHER."
curiously pry into what is properly meant by
the throne ;
for it is incomprehensible : but
neither let us endure those who falsely say,
that it was after His Cross and Resurrection
and Ascension into heaven, that the Son began
For
to sit on the right hand of the Father.
the Son gained not Histhronebyadvancement8;
but throughout His being (and His being is by
an eternal generation?) He also sitteth together
with the Father. And this throne the Prophet
the incarnate
Esaias having beheld before
coming of the Saviour, says, / saw the Lord
sitting on a throne, high and lifted up *, and the
rest.
For the Father no man hath seen at any
time *, and He who then appeared to the Prophet
The Psalmist also says, Thy
was the Son.
throne is prepared of old ; Thou artfrom ever
lasting*. Though then the testimonies on this
point are many, yet because of the lateness of
the time, we will content ourselves even with
these.

28. But now I must remind you of a few
things out of many which are spoken concern
ing the Son's sitting at the right hand of the
For the hundred and ninth Psalm
Father.
says plainly, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit
Thou on My right hand, until L make Thine
enemies Thy footstool*.
And the Saviour, con
firming this saying in the Gospels, says that
David spake not these things of himself, but
from the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, saying,
LLcnv then doth David in the Spirit call LLim
Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit
And
Thou on My right hand* ? and the rest.
in the Acts of the Apostles, Peter on the day
of Pentecost standing with the Eleven6, and
discoursing to the Israelites, has in very words
cited this testimony from the hundred and
ninth Psalm.

29. But 1 must remind you also of a few
other testimonies in like manner concerning
the Son's sitting at the right hand of the Fa
For in the Gospel according to Matthew
ther.
it is written, Nevertheless, L say unto you, ILenceforth ye shall see the Son of Man sitting on the
right hand of power t, and the rest : in accord
ance with which the Apostle Peter also writes,
By the Resurrection ofJesus Christ, who is on
the right hand of God, having gone into heaven 8.

autem fidci .... sedissc ad dextcram Patris : " adversus Praxean,
c. »: " sederc ad dextcram P.-itris."

8 «'x irpoxoinjs.
9 a^' ovntp iujiv, (fort Si Jul ytymfBtlf^ In both clauses tarty
is emphatic.
1 Is. vi. 1.
* Ps. ex. I.
7 Matt. xxvi. 64.

a Joh. i. 18.
5 Matt. xxii. 43.

3 Ps. xciii. a.
6 Acts ii. 34.

Cf. Cat. x. 5, note 8.

* 1 Pet. iii. 22.

And the Apostle Paul, writing to the Romans,
says, // is Christ that died, yea rather, that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of
God">. And charging the Ephesians, he thus
speaks, According to the working of LLis mighty
p07fer, which He wrought in Christ when He
raised Him from tlu dead, and set Him at His
own right hand1; and the rest. And the
Colossians he taught thus, Lfye then be risen
with Christ, seek the things above, where Christ
is seated at the right hand of God''. And in the
Epistle to the Hebrews he says, When He
had made purification of our sins, He sat down
on the right hand of the Majesty on high
And again, But unto which of the Angels hath
He said at any time, Sit thou at My right hand,
until L make thine enemies thyfootstool* ? And
again, But He, when He had offered one sacrifice
for all men, for ei<er sat down on the right hand
of God ; from henceforth expecting till His ene
mies be made Hisfootstool*. And again, Looking
untoJesus, the author and perfectcr of ourfaith ;
Who for thejoy that was set before Him endured
the Cross, despising shame, and is set down on
the right hand of the throne of God6.

30. And though there are many other texts
concerning the session of the Only-begotten
on the right hand of God, yet these may suffice
us at present ; with a repetition of my remark,
that it was not after His coming in the flesh ?
that He obtained the dignity of this seat ; no,
for even before all ages, the Only-begotten
Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, ever
possesses the throne on the right hand of the
Father. Now may He Himself, the God of
all, who is Father of the Christ, and our Lord
Jesus Christ, who came down, and ascended,
and sitteth together with the Father, watch
over your souls ; keep unshaken and unchanged
your hope in Him who rose again ; raise you
together with Him from your dead sins unto His
heavenly gift ; count you worthy to be caught
up in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the airs,
in His fitting time; and, until that time arrive
of His glorious second advent, write all your
names in the Book of the living, and having
written them, never blot them out (for the
names of many, who fall away, are blotted out) ;
and may He grant to all of you to believe
on Him who rose again, and to look for Him
who is gone up, and is to come again, (to
come, but not from the earth ; for be on your
guard, O man, because of the deceivers who
are to come;) Who sitteth on high, and is
I here present together with us, beholding the

9 Rom. viii. 34.
1 Eph. 1. 19, 90.
4 lb. p. 13.
3 Hcb. i. 3.
6 lb. xii. 2. On Cyril's omission of Mark xvi. 19. see Westcott and Hort.
8 I Thess. iv. 17.
Cf. § 27.
? Til* iv<rapKOv irapovo-tap.

9 Col. iii. 1.
S lb. x. 12.

-

LECTURE XIV.

order of each, and the steadfastness of his faith
For think not that because He is now absent
in. the flesh, He is therefore absent also in the
Spirit. He is here present in the midst of us,
listening to what is said of Him, and beholding
thine inward thoughts, and trying the reins and

luarts 1 /-who also is now ready to present
those who are coming to baptism, and all of
you, in the Holy Ghost to the Father, and to
say, Behold, I and the children whom God hath
given Aft':-To whom be glory for ever.
Amen.

* Col. ii. 5.

< Ps. vii. 9.

■ Isa- viii. 18; Heb. ii. 13.

■

LECTURE XV.

On the clause, And shall come in glory to judge the quick and the dead; op
whose kingdom there shall be no end.

Daniel vii. 9- 14.
J beheld till thrones were placed, and one that was ancient ofdays did sit, and then, Isaid in a vision
ofthe night, and behold one like unto the Son of Man came it'ith the clouds of heaven, 6rc.

1. We preach not one advent only of Christ,
but a second also, far more glorious than the
former.
For the former gave a view of His
patience ; but the latter brings with it the
crown of a divine kingdom.
For all things,
for the most part, are twofold in our Lord
Jesus Christ : a twofold generation ; one, of
God, before the ages ; and one, of a Virgin,
at the close of the ages : His descents two
fold ;
one, the unobserved, like rain on a
fleece* ; and a second His open coming, which
is to be.
In His former advent, He was
wrapped in swaddling clothes in the man
in His second, He covereth Himself
ger ;
ivith light as with a garment*.
In His first
coming, He endured the Cross, despising shame* ;
in His second, He comes attended by a host
of Angels, receiving glory4. We rest not then
upon His first advent only, but look also for
His second. And as at His first coming we
said, Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of
the Lords, so will we repeat the same at His
second coming ;
that when with Angels we
meet our Master, we may worship Him and
say. Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of\
the Lord.
The Saviour comes, not to be
judged again, but to judge them who judged
Him ; He who before held His peace when
judged 6, shall remind the transgressors who did
those daring deeds at the Cross, and shall say,
These things hast thou done, and I kept silence
Then, He came because of a divine dispensa
tion, teaching men with persuasion ; but this
time they will of necessity have Him for their
King, even though they wish it not.

2. And concerning

these two comings,
Malachi the Prophet says, And the Lord whom
ye seek shall suddenly come to His temple 8 / be
hold one coming. And again of the second

1 Ps. lxxii. 6. See xii. 9; and S to, below.
3 Heb. xii. 2.
2 Ps. civ. 2.
4 Cyril's contrast of the two Advents seems to be partly borrowed
from Justin M. {Afiol. i. 52; Tryfik. 110).
See also Tertullian
{Adv. Judaeos, c. 14) ; Hippolytus {De Antickristo, 44).

5 Matt. xxi. 9 ; xxiii. 39.
■«3-
' lb. >

1 Pi. L al.

8 Mai. iii. x-3.

coming he says, And the Messenger of the
covenant whom ye delight in. Behold, He cometh,
saith 9 the Lord Almighty. But who shall abide
the day of His coming 1 or who shall stand when
He appeareth ? Because He cometh in like a re
finer's fire, and like fullers' herb ; and He shall
sit as a refiner and purifier.
And immediately
after the Saviour Himself says, And I will
draw near to you in judgment ; and I will be a
swift witness against the sorcerers, and against
the adulteresses, and against those who swear
falsely in My Name ', and the rest.
For this
cause Paul warning us beforehand says, If any
man buildeth on thefoundation gold, and silver,
and precious stones, wood, hay, stubble; every
man's work shall be made manifest ; for the day
shalldecuire it, because it shall be revealed infire1.
Paul also knew these two comings, when writing
to Titus and saying, The grace of God hath
appeared which bringeth salvation unto all men,
instructing us that, denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, and godly,
and righteously in thispresent world ; lookingfor
the blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of the
great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ 3. Thou
seest how he spoke of a first, for which he
gives thanks ; and of a second, to which we
look forward.
Therefore the words also of the
Faith which we are announcing were just now
delivered thus 4 ; that we believe in Him, who
also ASCENDED INTO THE HEAVENS, AND SAT

4 vvv irnpfSfSffij.

9 The Benedictine Editor by omittingAe'yet, obtains the sense,
He comelk, even the Lord Almighty. But Aryei is supported by
the MSS. of Cyril, as well as by the Septuagint and Hebrew.

1 Mai. iii. 5.
2 1 Cor. iii. 12.
3 Titus ii. xx. The Benedictine Editor adopts tou £am}pof
instead of ij trwnffptoc, against the authority of the best MSS.
of Cyril.
Cyril means that at the beginning of this
present Lecture he had delivered to the Catechumens those ar
ticles of the Creed which he was going to explain. Compare Cat.
xviii. ax. where we sec that Cyril first announces (virayycAAv)
the words which the learners repeat after him (airayytAAw).
The clause, Whose Kingdom shall have no end, was not
contained in the original form of the Creed of Nicara. A.D. 325. but
its substance is found in many earlier writings. Compare Justin M.
( ' ryph. t 4*5 : nal avroi; ivriv ij atwwos 0a<riAcia) ; Const. Apost.
vii. 41 ; the Eusebian Confessions 1st and 4th of Antioch. and the
Macrostich, a.d. 341, 342, 344.
Bp. Bull asset ts that the Creed of
Jerusalem, containing this clause, was no other than the ancient
Kastern Creed, first directed against the Gnostics of the Sub'
Apostolic age {Judicium Eccl. Calkol. vi. 16).

LECTURE XV.

DOWN ON THE RIGHT HAND OF THE FATHER,
AND SHALL COME IN GLORY TO JUDGE QUICK
AND DEAD ; WHOSE KINGDOM SHALL HAVE NO
END.

3. Our Lord Jesus Christ, then, comes from
heaven ; and He comes with glory at the end
of this world, in the last day.
For of this
world there is to be an end, and this created
For since cor
world is to be re-made anew s.
ruption, and theft, and adultery, and every
sort of sins have been poured forth over the
earth, and blood has been mingled with blood6
in the world, therefore, that this wondrous
dwelling-place may not remain fdled with
iniquity, this world passeth away, that the
fairer world may be made manifest
And
wouldest thou receive the proof of this out of
Listen to Esaias,
the words of Scripture ?
saying, And the lieaven shall be
rolled to
gether as a scroll; and all the stars shall fall,
as leaves from a vine, and as leaves fall from a
fig-tree i.
The Gospel also says, The sun shall
be darkened, and the moon shall not give her
light, and the stars shallfallfrom heaven 8. Let
us not sorrow, as if we alone died ; the stars
also shall die ; but perhaps rise again. And
the Lord rolleth up the heavens, not that He
may destroy them, but that He may raise them
up again more beautiful.
Hear David the
Prophet saying, Thou, Lord, in the beginning
didst lay the foundations of the earth, and the
heavens are the work of Thy hands ; they shall
perish, but Thou remainesf>. But some one will
say, Behold, he says plainly that they shall
Hear in what sense he says, they shall
perish.
perish ;
it is plain from what follows ; And
they all shall wax old as doth a garment; and
as a vesture shalt Thou fold them up, and they
shall be changed.
For as a man is said to
" perish," according to that which is written,
Behold, how the righteous perisheth, and no man
layeth it to heart ', and this, though the resur
rection is looked for ; so we look for a resur
rection, as it were, of the heavens .also.
The
sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon
into blood". Here let converts from the Manichees gain instruction, and no longer make
those lights their gods ; nor impiously think,
that
this sun which shall be darkened is
Christ 3. And again hear the Lord saying,
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but My

5 The Benedictine Editor suggests that Cyril "is tefiiting
those who said that the Universe was to perish utterly, an opinion
which seems to be somehow imputed to Origen by Methodius,
or Pioclus, in Epiphanitis {iiterts. Ixiv. 31, 32)-" On Origen's
much controverted opinions concerning lite beginning and end
of the world, see HueL Origettiana, II. 4-6'. and Bp. Wotcott,
Dictionary ofChristian Biography, "Origen,'' pp. 137, 138.

* Hos. iv. 2.
7 Is. xxxiv. 4.
9 Pi. cii. 25, 26; Heb. i. 10-12.
* Joel u. 31.

8 Matt. xxiv. 29.
3 Cat. vi. 13 ; xi. 21.

' Is lvii. 1.

words shall not pass away*; for the creatures
are not as precious as the Master's words.

For

4. The things then which are seen shall
pass away, and there shall come the things
which are looked for, things fairer than the
present ; but as to the time let no one be
curious.
is not for you, He says, to
know times or seasons, which the Father hath
put in His own power*. And venture not thou
to declare when these things shall be, nor on
the other hand supinely slumber.
For he
saith, Watch, for in such an hour as ye expect
not the Son of Man cometh 6.
But since it was
needful for us to know the signs of the end,
and since we are looking for Christ, there
fore, that we may not
die deceived and
be led astray by that false Antichrist, the
Apostles, moved by the divine will, address
themselves by a providential arrangement to
the True Teacher, and say, Tell us, when shall
these things be, and what shall be the sign of Thy
coming, and of the end of tlie world">7 We look
for Thee to come again, but Satan trans
forms himself into an Angel of light ; put us
therefore on our guard, that we may not wor
ship another instead of Thee.
And He,
opening His divine and blessed mouth, says,
Take heed that no man mislead you. Do you
also, my hearers, as seeing Him now with
the eyes of your mind, hear Him saying the
same things to you ; Take heed that no man
mislead you.
And this word exhorts you
all to give heed to what is spoken. ; for it is
not a history of things gone by, but a pro
phecy of things future, and which will surely
come.
Not that we prophesy, for we are un
worthy ; but that the things which are written
will be set before you, and the signs declared.
Observe thou, which of them have already
come to pass, and which yet remain ; and
make thyself safe.

5. Take heed that no man mislead you : for
many shall come in My name, saying, I am
Christ, and shall mislead many.
This has
happened in part : for already Simon Magus
has said this, and Menander8, and some others
of the godless leaders of heresy; and others
will say it in our days, or after us.

6. A second sign. And ye shall hear of
wars and rumours of wars ».
Is there then at
this time war between Persians and Romans
for Mesopotamia, or no ?
Does nation rise up
against nation and kingdom against kingdom,
or no ? And there shall be famines and pesti-

S Acts i. 7.

7 lb. ww 3 and 4.

• Matt. xxiv. 42, 44 :
t Matt. xxiv. 35.
lb. v. 3.
9 \tatt. xxiv. 6. The war with Sapor II., King of Persia,
which broke out immediately on the death of Con.itantine, and
continued throughout the rci^n of Constantius. was raging fiercely
al the date of these Lectures, the great battle of Sti,gara> being
fought in the year 348 A.D.

* Cat. vi. 14. t6.

io6

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

lences and earthquakes in divers places.
These
things have already come to pass ; and again,
And fearful sights from heaven, and mighty
storms1.
Watch therefore, He says ; forye know
not at what hour your Lord doth come

3 Matt. xxiv. 42.

7. But we seek our own sign of His coming ;
we Churchmen seek a sign proper to the
Church 3. And the Saviour says, And then shall
many be offended, and shall betray one another,
If thou hear that
and shall hate one another ♦.
bishops advance against bishops, and clergy
against clergy, and laity against laity even unto
blood, be not troubled s; for it has been written
before.
Heed not the things now happening,
but the things which are written ; and even
though I who teach thee perish, thou shalt
not also perish with me ; nay, even a hearer
may become better than
his teacher, and
he who came last may be first, since even
those about the eleventh hour the Master re
If among Apostles there was found
ceives.
of
treason,
dost thou wonder that hatred
brethren is found among bishops?
But the
sign concerns not only rulers, but the people
also ; for He says, And because iniquity shall
abound, the love of the many shall wax cold6.
1 Luke xxi. 11. Jerome in the Ckronicon mentions a great
earthquake in 346 A.D., by which Dyrrachium was destroyed, and
Rome and other cities of Italy greatly injured (Ben. Ed.).
Cyril substitutes xci/iuvec for tnj^fta, the better reading in
Luke xxi. 11.
3 cKicA^TtairTiicof, when applied to persons, means cither, as
here, an orthodox member of the Church in contrast to a heretic,
pagan, or Jew (Origen. in Job xx. 6), or more particularly a Cleric
as opposed to a layman (Cat. xvii. 10).
4 Matt. xxiv. 10.
S. Cyril here describes the state of the Church, when ortho
doxy was for a while trodden under foot, its maintained per
secuted, and the varieties of Arianism, which took its place, were
quairelling for the ascendancy. Gibbon quotes two passages, one
from a pagan historian of the day, another from a Father of the
Church, which fully bear out S. Cyril's words. What made the
state of things still more deplorable, was the defection of some
of the orthodox party, as Marcellus, into opposite errors ; while
the subsequent secessions of Apollinaris and Lucifer show what
lurking disorders there were withiu it at the time when S. Cyril
wrote.
(Vict. in/r. 9.) The passages referred to are as follows:
' The Christian Religion,' says Ammianus, ' in itself plain and
simple, he (Constantius) confounded by the dotage of superstition.
Instead of reconciling the pat ties by the weight of his authority,
he cherished and propagated, by vain disputes, the differences
which his vain curiosity had excited. The highways were covered
with troops of Bishops, galloping from every side to the assem
blies, which they called synods ; and while they laboured to
reduce the whole sect to their own particular opinions, the public
establishment of the posts was almost ruined by their hasty and
S. Hilary of Poictiers thus
repeated journeys.'
speaks of Asia Minor, the chief seat of the Arian troubles :
'It is a thing equally deplorable and dangerous, that there
are as many creeds as opinions among men, as many doc
trines as inclinations, and as many sources of* blasphemy as
there arc faults among us ; because we make creeds arbitrarily,
and explain them as arbitrarily.
The Homoousion is rejected
and received and explained away by successive synods. The
partial or total resemblance of the Father and of the Son is
a subject of dispute for these unhappy divines. Every year, nay,
every moon, we make new creeds to describe invisible mysteries.
We repent of what we h.ive done, we defend those who repent, we
anathematize those whom we defended. We condemn either the
doctrine of others in ourselves, or our own in that of others ;
and reciprocally tearing one another to pieces, we have been the
Gibbon's trans
cause of each other's 1 uin,' ad Constant, ii 4,5.
lations are used, which, though diffuse, are faithful in their
matter. What a contrast do these descriptions present to Athanasius' uniform declaration, that the whole question was really
settled at Nica:a, and no other synod or debate was necessarv !
-(R.W.C.). Compare, for example, the account of the seditions
in Antioch and in Constantinople, in Socrates, Ecctcs. Hist. i. 34 ",
i., 12-14, and Athanas. Hist. Arinnorum, passim.

Hist. xxi. 16.

6 Matt. xxiv. 13.

Will any then among those present boast
that he entertains
friendship unfeigned to
wards his neighbour? Do not the lips often
kiss, and the countenance smile, and the eyes
brighten forsooth, while the heart is planning
guile, and the man is plotting mischief with
words of peace ?

standing in

9. And what comes to pass after

8. Thou hast this sign also : And this Gospel
of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world
for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the
end come''. And as we see, nearly the whole
world is now filled with the doctrine of Christ.
this ?
He says next, When t/ierefore ye see the abom
ination of desolation, which was spoken of by
Daniel the Prophet,
the Holy
Place, let him that readeth understand 9. And
again, Then if any man shall say unto you,
Lo, here is the Christ, or, Lo, there; believe
Hatred of the brethren makes room
it not 9.
next for Antichrist ;
for the devil prepares
beforehand the divisions among the people,
that he who is to come may be acceptable to
them.
But God forbid that any of Christ's
servants here, or elsewhere, should run over to
the enemy ! Writing concerning this matter, the
Apostle Paul gave a manifest sign, saying, For
that day shall not come, except tliere comefirst the
[falling away, and the man of sin be revealed, the
son of perdition, who opposeth and exalteth him
self against all that is called God, or that is wor
shipped ; so that he sitteth in the temple of God,
shelving himself that he is God.
Remember ye
not that when Iwasyet with you, I toldyou these
things ? And nowye know that which restraineth,
to the end that he maybe revealed in his own season.
For the mystery of iniquity doth already work,
only there is one that restraineth now, until he be
taken out of the way. And then shall the lawless
one be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus shall slay
with the breath of His mouth, and shall destroy
with the brightness of His coming.
Even him,
whose coming is after the working of Satan,
with all power and signs and lying wonders,
and with all deceit of unrighteousness for them
Thus wrote Paul, and
that are perishing
now is the falling away.
For men have
fallen away from the right faith ' ; and some
preach
identity of the Son with the
Fathers, and others dare- to say that Christ

the

9 lb.

• lb. v. 15.
7 Matt. xxiv. 14.
■ 2 Thess. ii. 3-10.
« The prediction was supposed by earlier Fathers to refer to
a personal Antichrist, whom they expected to come speedilv.
Sec
Justin M. (Trypk. i 110: 6 rift awocTatriae ardpuiroc ; ib. % 32 :
He who is to speak blasphemous and daring things against the
Cyril in
Most High is already at the doors."
this passage regards the heresies of his time as the apostasy in
general, but looks also for a personal Antichrist : (§§11, 12).
3 vtonuTopia. On this contemptuous name for Sabellianism,
see Cat. iv. 8 ; xi. 16. The Third (Eusebian) Confession, or Third
of Antioch, a.d. 341, anathematizes any who hold the doctrines of
Marcellus of Ancyra or Sabellius, or Paul of Samosata (Athan.
tie Synodis. f 24, note 10, p. 462, in this Series, and Mr. Robert*

Iren. Htrr. V. 25.

LECTURE XV.

was brought into being out of nothing'*. And
formerly the heretics were manifest ; but now
the Church is filled with heretics in disguise5.
For men have fallen away from the truth, and
Is it a plausible discourse ?
have itching ears6.
all listen to it gladly. Is it a word of correction ?
all turn away from it. Most have departed from
right words, and rather choose the evil, than
desire the good 1.
This therefore is the falling
away, and the enemy is soon to be looked for :
and meanwhile he has in part begun to send
forth his own forerunners8, that he may then
come prepared upon the prey.
Look therefore
to thyself, O man, and make safe thy soul. The
Church now charges thee before the Living
God ; she declares to thee the things concern
ing Antichrist before they arrive.
Whether
they will happen in thy time we know not, or
whether they will happen after thee we know
not ; but it is well that, knowing these things,
thou shouldest make thyself secure beforehand.
10. The true Christ, the Only-begotten Son
of God, comes no more from the earth.
If any
come making false shows' in the wilderness, go
not forth ; if they say, Lo, here is the Christ, Lo,
there, believe it not '.
Look no longer down
wards and to the earth ; for the Lord descends
from heaven ; not alone as before, but with
many, escorted by tens of thousands of Angels ;
nor secretly as the dew on the fleece 2 ; but
shining forth openly as the lightning.
For He
hath said Himself, As the lightning cometh out
of the east, and shincth even unto the west, so
shall also the coming of the Son of Man be 3 /
and again, And they shall see the Son of Afan
coming upon the clouds with power and great

glory, and He shall sendforth His Angels with a
great trumpet'* ; and the rest.

1 1. But as, when formerly He was to take
man's nature, and God was expected to be
born of a Virgin, the devil created prejudice
against this, by craftily preparing among idolworshippers 5 fables of false gods, begetting
and begotten of women, that, the falsehood
having come first, the truth, as he supposed,
might be disbelieved ; so now, since the true
Christ is to come a second time, the adver
sary,
taking occasion by6 the expectation
of the simple, and especially of them of the
circumcision, brings in a certain man who
is a magician ?, and most expert in sorceries
and enchantments of beguiling craftiness ; who
shall seize for himself the power of the Roman
empire, and shall falsely style himself Christ ;
by this name of Christ deceiving the Jews, who
are looking for the Anointed8, and seducing
those of the Gentiles by his magical illusions.
12. But this aforesaid Antichrist is to come
when the times of the Roman empire shall have
been fulfilled, and the end of the world is now
There shall rise up together
drawing near'.
ten kings of the Romans, reigning in different
parts perhaps, but all about the same time ;
and after these an eleventh, the Antichrist,
who by his magical craft shall seize upon
the Roman power; and of the kings who
reigned before him, three he shall humble
and the remaining seven he shall keep in sub
jection to himself.
At first indeed he will put
on a show of mildness (as though he were
a learned and discreet person), and of sober
ness and benevolence 2 : and by the lying

son's Prolegomena , p. xliv.).
In the Ecthesis, or Statement of
Fitith, 8 2. Athanasius writes : " Neither do we hold a Son-Father,
as do the Sabellians, calling Him of one but (a sole and t) not the
same essence, and thus destroying the existence of the Son." As
to Marceilus, see Athanasius, Hist. Arian. 8 6 (p. 271), and the
letter of Julius in the Apologia c. Arian. 8 32 (p. 116) : also notes
3, 4 on § 27 below.
* See Athanasius, De Synod. 8 15 : "Anus and those with him
thought and professed thus :
' God made the Son out of nothing,
and called Him His Son : " ' and Expos. F'idei. 8 2 : " We do not
regard as a creature, or thing made, or as made out of nothing,
God the Creator of all, the Son of God, the true Being from the
true Being, the Alone from the Alone, inasmuch as the like glory
and power was eternally and conjointly begotten of the father. '
The 4th (Enscbian) Confession, or 4th of Antioch, a.d. 342, ends
thus: "Those who say that the Son was from nothing, .... the
Catholic Church regards as aliens."
5 Athan. Aitvtrsus Arinnos, Or. i. 1: "One heresy and that
the last which has now risen as forerunner of Antichrist, the
Arian as it is called, considering that other heresies, her elder
sisters, have been openly proscribed, in her craft and cunning
affects to array herself in Scripture language, like her father the
devil, and is forcing her way back into the Church's paradise. Sec."
The supposed date of this Oration is 8 or 10 years later than that
of Cyril's Lectures.
1 A reading supported by the best MSS. and approved by the
Benedictine Editor gives a different sense, "and rather choose
10 seem than resolve to be," inverting the proverb " esse quam
videri."
8 In the passage quoted above in note 5 the Arian heresy is
called a *' forerunner ' (rrpd£pop.o$) of Antichrist.
9 $ayratrtoKOTr*tv. a rare word, rendered " Irantic " in Ecclus.
iv. 30: its more precise meaning seems to be "making a false
show," which is here applied to a false Christ, and again in 8 '4
If the father of lies who makes a vain show of false miracles.
2 pj. lxxii. 6.

.Cf. 8 ii note 1.

6 3 Tim. iv. 3.

1 Matt. xxiv. 23.
3 Matt. xxiv. 27.

4 Matt. xxiv. v. 30.
5 iv et5wAoAaTpetiy may mean either "in idol-worship," or
" among idolaters, ' the abstract being used for the concrete, as in
Rom. iii. 30 : £unnuim vtp*.TOiii\v.
6 itpiidtov, " provision for a joumey," is here equivalent in
meaning 10 daiopfnj, " a starting point,' or favourable occasion."
7 Antichrist is described by Hippolytus (De Ckristo et Antichristo, 8 57. as " a son of the devil, and a vessel of Satan," who
will rule and govern "after the manner of the law of Augustus, by
whom the Roman empire was established, sanctioning everything
thereby." Cf. Iren. liter. V. 30,8 3 ; Dictionary of Christian Bio
graphy, Antichrist : " The sharp precision with which St. Paul had
pointed to ' the man of sin,' ' tlte lawless one.' ' the adversary,"
' the son of perdition,' led men to dwell on that thought rather
than on the many ijreucioxptoTOt of whom Christ Himself had
spoken."
8 tov ' ll\eim.u«Vov, Aquila's rendering of rPttTTS, adopted by
the Jews in preference to rbv XpitrroV, from haired of the name
Hippolytus, ubi supra. 8 6: " The Saviour
Christ or Christian.
came into the world in the Circumcision, and he (Antichrist) will
coine in the same manner:" ib. 8 14: "As Christ springs from
the tribe of Judah, so Antichrist is to spring from the tribe of
Dan." This expectation was grounded by Hippolytus on Gen.
xlix. 17.
9 The fourth kingdom in the prophecy of Daniel (vii. 7, 23) was
generally understood by early Christian writers to he the Roman
Empire ; and its dissolution was to be speedily followed by the
See 8 *3 below; Irenscus, V. 26; and Hip
end of the world.
polytus, ubi supra, 88 to, 28.

1 Dan. vii. 24 : and he shallput doiun three kings (R.V.). _
2 The Jerusalem Editor quotes as irom Hippolytus a similar
description of Antichrist (8 23): "In his first steps he will he
gentle, loveable, quiet, pious, pacific, hating injustice, detesting
Hut the treatise is a forgery
gifts, not allowing idolatry, «c.'
of unknown date, apparently much later than CyriL

io8

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

signs and wonders of his magical deceit 3 hav
ing beguiled the Jews, as though he were the
expected Christ, he shall afterwards be charac
terized by all kinds of crimes of inhumanity
and lawlessness, so as to outdo all unrighteous
and ungodly men who have gone before him ;
displaying against all men, but especially against
us Christians, a spirit murderous and most cruel,
merciless and crafty ♦. And after perpetrating
such things for three years and six months only,
he shall be destroyed by the glorious second
advent from heaven of the only-begotten Son
of God, our Lord and Saviour Jesus, the true
Christ, who shall slay Antichrist with the breath
of His mouth s, and shall deliver him over to
the fire of hell.

13. Now these things we teach, not of our own
invention, but having learned them out of the
divine Scriptures used in the Church6, and chiefly
from the prophecy of Daniel just now read ; as
Gabriel also the Archangel interpreted it, speak
ing thus : The fourth beast shall be a fourth
kingdom upon earth, which shall surpass all king
doms 1. And that this kingdom is that of the
Romans, has been the tradition of the Church's
interpreters.
For as the first kingdom which
became renowned was that of the Assyrians,
and the second, that of the Medes and Persians
together, and after these, that of the Macedon
ians was the third, so the fourth kingdom now
is that of the Romans 8. Then Gabriel goes on
to interpret, saying, His ten horns are ten kings
that shall arise ; and another king shall rise up
after them, who shall surpass in wickedness all
who were before him'* ; (he says, not only the
ten, but also all who have been before him ;)
and he shall subdue three kings ; manifestly out
of the ten former kings: but it is plain that
by subduing three of these ten, he will be
come the eighth king; and he shall speak words
against the Most High io. A blasphemer the

3 Iren. V. 28, | 2 : "Since the demons and apostate spirits are
at his service, he tnrough their means performs wonders, by which
he leads the inhabitants of the earth astray."
4 Iren. V. 25,8 4: " He shall remove his kingdom into that city
(Jerusalem), and shall sit in the Temple of God, leading astray
those who worship him as if he were Christ."
According to the genuine treatise of Hippolytus Antichrist was
to restore the kingdom ot the Jews (De Antickristo, § 25), to
collect the Jews out of every country of the Dispersion, making
them his own, as though they were his own children, and pro
mising to restore their country, and establish again their kingdom
and nation, in order that he may be worshipped by them as God
(8 54), and he will lead them on to persecute the saints, i.e. the
Christians (§ 56). Compare the elaborate description of Anti
christ and his cruelty in Lactantius, Div. /rut. vii. 17 ; Epit. % 71.
Cf. Cat. iv. 35, 36, where Cyril distin
guishes the Scriptures as icai Iv 'ExxAijcrt'a fiera irappqtriat ayayiymfKOuev from ocra iy 'ExKAijaiaic uf} acaytpwiTKCTat.
7 Dan. vii. 23: (k.V .) shall be diverseJrom all the kingdoms.
8 Irenaius (V. 26) identifies the fourth kingdom with " the
empire which now rules." Hippolytus, de Antickristo, | 25 : " A
fourth beast dreadful and terrible : it had iron teeth and claws
0/brass. And who are these but the Roman*?"

Cf. Iren. V. 25, 8 3 : Hippol. 8 64.

5 2 Thess. it. 8.
6 tKicXrj<ria^ofityuyt

9 Dan. vii. 24.
10 Dan. v. 25. Dean Church compares Rev. xvii. xi : And the
beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is 0/ the
seven, andgoeth into perdition.

See also Iren. V. 26, { 1.

man is and lawless, not having received the
kingdom from his fathers, but having usurped
the power by means of sorcery.

14. And who is this, and from what sort of
U^Twse
Interpret to us, O Paul.
working ?
coming, he says, is after the working of Satan,
with allpower and signs and lying wonders
im
plying, that Satan has used him as an instrument,
working in his own person through him ; for
knowing that his judgment shall now no longer
have respite, he wages war no more by his min
isters, as is his wont, but henceforth by himself
more openly a. And with allsigns andlyini> won
ders ; for the father of falsehood will make a
show 3 of the works of falsehood, that the multi
tudes may think that they see a dead man raised,
who is not raised, and lame men walking, and
blind men seeing, when the cure has not been
wrought.

15. And again he says, Who opposeth and
exalteth himself against all that is called God, or
that is worshipped ; (against every God ; Anti
christ forsooth will abhor the idols,) so that he
seateth himself in the temple of God*. What
temple then ? He means, the Temple of the
Jews which has been destroyed.
For God for
bid that it should be the one in which we are !
Why say we this ? That we may not be supposed
to favour ourselves. For if he comes to the
Jews as Christ, and desires to be worshipped
by the Jews, he will make great account of the
Temple, that he may more completely beguile
them ; making it supposed that he is the man
of the race of David, who shall build up the
Temple which was erected by Solomon
And
Antichrist will. come at the time when there
shall not be left one stone upon another in the
Temple of the Jews, according to the doom
pronounced by our Saviour6; for when, either

1 2 Thess. ii. 9.

Cf. Epiiome, Ixxi.

Lactantius (a.d. 300 circ), Div, Inst. vii. 17 :
" That king .... will also be a prophet of lies ; and he will con
stitute and call himself God, and will order himself to be wor
shipped as the Son ot God ; and power will be given him to do
signs and wonders, by the sight 01 which he may entice men to
adore him."
3 " Vid. Iren. Heer. V. 26, 2," (R.W.C.). The passage is
quoted by Eusebius (licet. Hist. iv. 18), from a lost work of
Justin M. Against Alnrcion: "Justin well said that before the
coming of the Lord Satan never dared to blaspheme God, as not
yet knowing his own condemnation, because it was stated by the
prophets in parables and allegories. But alter our Lord s advent
having learnt plainly from His words and those of the Apostles
that everlasting fire is prepared for him
be by means of such
men as these blasphemes the Lord who brings the judgnieut upon
him, as being already condemned."
S. Cyril seems to expect that Antichrist will be an incarnation
of Satan, as did Hippolytus (de Antickr. % 6): "The Saviour
appeared in the form of man, and he too will come in the form of
a man."
See above. | 10, note 9, and the equivalent
phrase in 8 17 : <njutiuy xai TipaTwr aVrract'ac iCttxyvw.

3 ^aKratfLOxoirci.
4 2 Thess. ii. 4.
5 See 8 12, notes 3, 4, and Hippolytus, ubi supra I " The
Saviour raised up and shewed His holy flesh like a temple ; and
he will raise a temple of stone in Jerusalem."
" Cyril wrote this
before Ju^an'a attempt to rebuild the Jewish Temple " (R.W.C.).
Cyril refers the whole prophecy to the time
of Christ's second coming at the end of the world, not regarding
the destruction of Jerusalem and its Temple by Titus as ful
filling any part of the prediction.

6 Matt. xxiv. 2.

LECTURE XV.

decay of time, or demolition ensuing on pretence |
of new buildings, or from any other causes, shall
have overthrown all the stones, I mean not
merely of the outer circuit, but of the inner shrine
also, where the Cherubim were, then shall he
come with all signs and lying wonders, exalting
himself against all idols ; at first indeed making
a pretence of benevolence, but afterwards dis
playing his relentless temper, and that chiefly
against the Saints of God.
For he says, /
beheld, and the same horn made war with the
:aints 1 ; and again elsewhere, there shall be a
time of trouble, such as never was since tlure was
a nation upon earth, even to that same time6.
Dreadful is that beast, a mighty dragon, un
conquerable by man, ready to devour ; con
cerning whom though we have more things to
speak out of the divine Scriptures, yet we will
content ourselves at present with thus much, in
order to keep within compass.

16. For this cause the Lordknowingthegreatness of the adversary grants indulgence to the
godly, saying, Then let them which be in Judaa
flee y the mountains'*.
But if any man is con
scious that he is very stout-hearted, to en
counter Satan, let him stand (for I do not
despair of the Church's nerves), and let him
say, Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ and the rest 1 7
But, let those of us
who are fearful provide for our own safety ;
and those who are of a good courage, stand
fast : for then shall be great tribulation, such as
hath not been from the beginning of the world
until now, no, nor ever shallbe *.
But thanks be
to God who hath confined the greatness of
that tribulation to a few days; for He says,
But for the eleefs sake those days shall be
shortened 3 ; and Antichrist shall reign for three
years and a half only. We speak not from
for he
apocryphal books, but from Daniel ;
says, And they shall be given into his hand until
a time and times and half a time*. A time
is the one year in which his coming shall for
a while have increase ; and the times are the
remaining two years of iniquity, making up
the sum of the three years ; and the half a
time is the six months. And again in another
place Daniel says the same thing, And he sware

3 lb. v. 22.

7 Dan. vii. ax. Here again Cyril follows Hippolytus, | 35 :
"And under this (horn) was signified none other than Antichrist.
* lb. xii. 1.
1 Rom. viii. 35.
9 Matt. xxiv. 16.
* Matt. xxiv. at.
* Dan. vii. 25. By " apocryphal " books Cyril probably means
all such as were not allowed to be read in the public services
of the Church : see Cat. iv. 33. note 3 ; and Bp. Wcstcott's note
on the various meanings of the word <rir6Kf>v<poc, Hist, of the
Canon, P. III. c. x. That the Apocalypse of St. John is included
under this term by Cyril, appears probable from the following
reasons suggested by the Benedictine Editor.
(1) It is not men
tioned in the list of the Canonical Scriptures in iv. 36.
(a) The
earlier writers whom Cyril follows in this Lecture, Ircnaeus, Htrr.
V.. 16, i 1, and Hippolytus, De Antichruto, i 34, combine the
testimony of the Apocalypse with that of .Daniel. The omission
in Cyril therefore cannot have been accidental.

I by Him that liveth for ever that it shall be for
a time, and times, and half a time*. And some
peradventure have referred what follows also to
this ; namely, a thousand two hundred and ninety
days 6 ; and this, Blessed is he that endureth
and cometh to the thousand three hundred and
five and thirty days?.
For this cause we must
hide ourselves and flee ; for perhaps we shall
not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son
of Man be come 8.

Martyrs

For the

17. Who then is the blessed man, that shall
at that time devoutly witness for Christ?
For
I say that the Martyrs of that time excel all
martyrs.
hitherto have
wrestled with men only; but in the time of
Antichrist they shall do battle with Satan in
his own person0. And former persecuting kings
only put to death ; they did not pretend to
raise the dead, nor did they make false shows 10
But in his time there
of signs and wonders.
shall be the evil inducement both of fear and
of deceit, so that if it be possible the very
elect shall be deceived'.
Let it never enter
into the heart of any then alive to ask, " What
For by what power does
did Christ more ?
this man work these things ?
Were it not
God's will, He would not
have allowed
them."
The Apostle warns thee, and says
beforehand, And for this cause God shall
send them a working of error ; (send, that is,
shall allmu to happen ;) not that they might
make excuse, but that they might be condemned 2.
Wherefore ?
They, he says, wlw believed not
the truth, that is, the true Christ, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness, that is, in Antichrist.
But as in the persecutions which happen from
time to time, so also then God will permit
these things, not because He wants power to
hinder them, but because according to His
wont He will through patience crown His
own champions like as He did His Prophets
and Apostles ; to the end that having toiled
for a little while they may inherit the eternal
kingdom of heaven, according to that which
Daniel says, And at that time thy people shall
be delivered, every one that shall be found written
in the book (manifestly, the book of life) ; and
many of them that sleep in the dust of tlie earth
shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to
shame and everlasting contempt ; and they that
be wise shall shine as the brightness of thefirma
ment ; and of the many righteous
as tlie stars
for ever and ever.
5 Dan. xii. 7.
6 lb. v. xx.
8 Matt. x. 23.
9 auToTrpocrwirwc. See above, I 14, note 9. Some MSS. read
to See above, I 14, note 3.
' 2 Thess. ii. 11, 12 : (R.V.) That they all might be judged.
Cyril has KaTautpifltotri
3 Dan. xii. 1,2: (R.V.)they that turn many to righteousness.
Cyril follows the rendering of the Septuagint, inb Tutv iuccu'w.
tw froAAMv, which gives no proper construction.

airix-poo-wnec, "face to face," as in xii. 32, avTtirporoiroc.
1 Matt. xxiv. 24.

7 lb. v. xa.

I IO

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

1 8. Guard thyself then, O man ; thou hast
the signs of Antichrist; and remember them
not only thyself, but impart them also freely
If thou hast a child according to the
to all.
llesh, admonish him of this now ; if thou hast
begotten one through catechizing «, put him
also on his guard, lest he receive the false one
as the True.
For the mystery of iniquity doth
already work*. I fear these wars of the nations6;
I fear the schisms of the Churches ; I fear the
mutual hatred of the brethren.
But enough on
this subject ; only God forbid that it should be
fulfilled in our days ; nevertheless, let us be
on our guard. And thus much concerning
Antichrist.

19. But let us wait and look for the Lord's
com irrg" "upon ~the" ctonds -from -heaven.
Then
shalNs^ngelic trumpets soundj^ the dead in
Christ sHaO-ritefirst ly--thtTgTidTy persons who
are alive shall be caught up in the clouds, re
ceiving as the reward of their labours more than
human honour, inasmuch as theirs was a more
than human strife ; according as the Apostle
Paul writes, saying, For the Lord Himself shall
descendfrom heaven with a shout, with the voice
of the Archangel, and with the trump of God ;
and the dead in Christ shall rise first.
Then
we which are alive and remain shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord
in the air ; and so shall we ever be with the
Lord9.

. and remember thy Creator .

20. This coming of the Lord, and the end
of the world, were known to the Preacher;
who says, Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth,
Therefore remove anger 1 from
and the rest 9 ;
thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh ;
.
. or ever the
.
evil days come2
or ever the sun, and the
light, and the moon, and the stars be darkened*,
. - .
. and they that look out of the windows be
(signifying the faculty of sight;)
darkened'';
or ever the silver cord be loosed ; (meaning the
assemblage of the stars, for their appearance
vis like silver ;) and theflower ofgold be broken s ;
(thus veiling the mention of the golden sun ;
for the camomile is a well-known plant, having
many ray-like leaves shooting out round it;)

.

5 a Thess. ii. 7.

7 1 Thess. iv. 16.

4 Compare i Cor. iv. 15 : /begatyou through thegospel.

Clem.
Alex. Strom, in. c. 15 : fy 61a Tij« oAiftiovc xarnxijaciuf ytvyijoaj/Tt
KfiTtu tic pur66s.
8 lb. vv. 16, 17.
* See above, M 6, 7.
9 Eccles. xi. 9. The Preacher's description of old age and
4eath is interpreted by Cvril of the end of the world, as it had
been a century before by Gregory Thaumaturgus, in his para
phrase of the book.
Marg. Or. vexation, Or, provo
3 lb. v. a.
cation.

1 lb. v. ni (R.V.) sorrow.
* lb. xii. 1.
4 lb. v. 3.
5 lb. v. 6. According to the usual interpretation death is here
represented by the breaking of a chain and the lamp which hangs
Cf. Delitzsch, and Speaker's Commentary, in loc. for
from iL
other interpretations.
to avStfiior nv \pv<ri6v (Sept.\ by which Cyril understood
camomile' (av&pu's), mere probably meant a pattern of flowers
embossed on the vessel of gold : vid. Xenoph. A nab. V. 4, | 32 :
« uTiyM' vovv <u/d<'^ic, " damasked WithJtowers."

and they shall rise up at the voice of the spar
row, yea, they shall look awayfrom the height, and
terrors shall be in the way 6. What shall they
see ? Then shall they see the Son of man coming
on the clouds of heaven ; and they shall mourn
tribe by tribe t. And what shall come to pass
when the Lord is come ? The almond tree shall
blossom, and the grasshopper shall grow heavy,
and the caper-berry shall be scattered abroad*.
And as the interpreters say, the blossoming
almond signifies the departure of winter ; and
our bodies shall then after the winter blossom
with a heavenly flower'. And the grasshopper
shall grow in substance (that means the winged
soul clothing itself with the body ',) and the
caper-berry shall be scattered abroad (that is,
the transgressors who are like thorns shall
be scattered 2).

a 1. Thou seest how they all foretell the
coming of the Lord. Thou seest how they
know the voice of the sparrow. Let us know what
sort of voice this is.
For the Lord Himself
shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of
God 3. The Archangel shall make proclamation
and say to all, Arise to meet the Lord *. And fear
ful will be that descent of our Master.
David
says, God shall manifestly come, even our God,
and shall not keep silence ; afire shallburn before
Him, and a fierce tempest round about Him, and
the rest'.
The Son of Man shall come to the
Father, according to the Scripture which was
just now read, on the clouds of heaven, drawn
by a stream offire 6, which is to make trial of
Then if any man's works are of gold,
men.
he shall be made brighter ; if any man's course
of life be like stubble, and unsubstantial, it
shall be burnt up by the fire
And the Father
shall sit, having His garment white as snow,
and the hair of His head like pure wool*.
But
this is spoken after the manner of men; where
Because He is the King of those who
fore?

6 Eccles. xii. 5.

6 Eccles. xii. 5. Cyrilmeans rightly that the aged shrink from
a giddy height, and fi in imaginary dangers of the road. For the
voice 0/the sparrow, see below, f 21, note 4.

For other interpretations see Delitzsch.

7 Matt. xxiv. 30: Zech. xii. 12.
9 "Dr. Thomson {The Land and the Book, p. 319.) sayi
of the almond tree,
It is the type of old age, whose hair is
white " (Speaker's Commentary).
1 The step, once as active as a grasshopper, or locust, shall
grow heavy and slow.
■ The caper-berry (xamrapic) shalt'./ail'.i.e. no longer stimulate
But iia<rvc8a<r0»/<r*Tai (Sept. Cyril) means that the old
appetite.
man shall be like a caper-berry which when fully ripe bursts
its husks and scatters its seeds: so R.V. (Margin): The caperberry shall burst.
"The
transgressors are case out of the way, like a black and despicable
caper-plant."
3 1 Thess ii. 16.
4 Compare the spurious Apocalypse of John : " And at the
voice of the bird every plant shall arise: that is. At the voice
of the Archangel all the human race shall arise" (English Trs.
According to the Talmud the meaning
Ante-Sic. Lior. p. 496).
is, " Even a bird awakes him " (Delitzsch).
5 Ps. 1. 3. (
• Dan. vii. 13, 10.
7 1 Cor. iit. i», 13. On ivwoirmov, see Index. On dojciuao-.
rtKOv, compare The Teaching of the Apostles, x 16 : " Then all
created mankind shaVl come to the Are ot testing (6oKtu.aatas), aod
many shall be offended and perish."

Greg. Thaumat. Metaphr. Eccles.

8 Dan. vii. 9.

LECTURE XV.

in

have norbeen defiled with sins ; for, He says,
/ will make your sins white as snow, and as
wool 9, which is an emblem of forgiveness of
But the Lord
sins, or of sinlessness itself.
who shall come from heaven on the clouds, is
He who ascended on the clouds ;
for He
Himself hath said, And they shall see the Son of
Man coming on the clouds of heaven, with power
and great glory *.

22. But what is the sign of His coming?
lest a hostile power dare fo counterfeit
it.
And then shall appear, He says, the sign of the
Son of Man in heaven 2. Now Christ's own true
sign is the Cross ; a sign of a luminous Cross
shall go before the King 3, plainly declaring
Him who was formerly crucified: that the Jews
who before pierced Him and plotted against
Him, when they see it, may mourn tribe by
tribe*, saying, "This is He who was buffeted,
this is He whose face they spat on, this is
He whom they bound with chains, this is He
whom of old they crucified, and set at nought 5.
Whither, they will say, shall we flee from the
face of Thy wrath?"
But the Angel hosts
shall encompass them, so that they shall not
be able to flee anywhere.
The sign of the
Cross shall be a terror to His foes ; but joy to
His friends who have believed in Him, or
preached Him, or suffered for His sake. Who
then is the happy man, who shall then be
found a friend of Christ ? That King, so great
and glorious, attended by the Angel-guards,
the partner of the Father's throne, will not
despise His own servants.
For that His Elect
may not be confused with His foes, He shall send
forth His Angels with a great trumpet, and they
shallgather togetherHis electfrom thefourwinds6.
He despised not Lot, who was but one; how
then shall He despise many righteous ? Come,
ye blessed of My Fatheri, will He say to them
who shall then ride on chariots of clouds, and
be assembled by Angels.

23. But some one present will say, " I am
a poor man," or again, " I shall perhaps be
found at that time sick in bed ; "
or, " I
am but a woman, and I shall be taken at
Be of
the mill : shall we then be despised ? "

» lb.

» Is. i. 18.
> Matt. xxiv. 30.
3 Cat. xiii. 4t. In the letter to Constantius, three or four years
later than this Lecture. Cyril treats the appearance at that time of
1 luminous Cross in the sky as a fulfilment of Matt. xxiv. 30 : but
ad Constantium, $ 6) that our Lord's pre
he there adds
diction "was both fulfilled at that present time, and shall again
fulfilled more largely." On the opinion that "the sign of
the Son of Man in heaven " should be the Cross, see Suicer,
It is not improbable that the earliest trace
Thesaurus, Sravpoc.
of this interpretation is found in The Tracking of the Apostles,
1 16 : "Then shall appear the signs of the Truth : the first the
sirn of a (cross) spreading out (e*treToo-e»c) in heaven."

* Zech. xii. 12.
P Cf. Barnab. Efiist. c. vii. : " For they shall see Him in that
cay wearing the long scarlet robe about His flesh, and shall say,
hoot this He, whom once we crucified, and set at nought, and
tpai upon (al. and pierced, and mocked)?"

' Matt. xxiv. 31.

7 lb. xxv. 34.

good courage, O man ; the Judge is no re
specter of persons ; He will notjudge according
to a man's appearance, nor reprove according to
his speech 8. He honours not the learned before
the simple, nor the rich before the needy.
Though thou be in the field, the Angels shall
take thee ; think not that He will take the
landowners, and leave thee the husbandman.
Though thou be a slave, though thou be poor,
be not any whit distressed ; He who took the
form of a servant"> despises not servants.
Though thou be lying sick in bed, yet it
is written, Then shall two be in one bed; the
Though
one shall be taken, and the other left '.
thou be of compulsion put to grind, whether
thou be man or woman2; though thou be in
fetters s, and sit beside the mill, yet He who
by His might bringeth out them that are bound ■»,
will not overlook thee. He who brought forth
Joseph out of slavery and prison to a kingdom,
shall redeem thee also from thy afflictions into
the kingdom of heaven. Only be of good cheer,
only work, only strive earnestly ;
for nothing
shall be lost. Every prayer ofthine, every Psalm
every alms-deed,
thou singest is recorded;
every fast is recorded ; every marriage duly
observed is recorded ; continence s kept for
God's sake is recorded ; but the first crowns
in the records are those of virginity and purity;
But as
and thou shalt shine as an Angel.
thou hast gladly listened to the good things, solisten again without shrinking to the contrary.
Every covetous deed of thine is recorded ;
thine every act of fornication
is recorded,
thine every false oath is recorded, every blas
phemy, and sorcery, and theft, and murder.
All these things are henceforth to be recorded,
if thou do the same now after having been
baptized ; for thy former deeds are blotted out.
24. When the Son of Man, He says, shall
come in Hts glory, and all the Angels with
Him 6.
Behold, 0 man, before what multitudes
thou shalt come to judgment. Every race of
mankind will then be present. Reckon, there
fore, how many are the Roman nation; reckon
how many the barbarian tribes now living,
and how many have died within the last
hundred years ; reckon how many nations
have been buried during the last thousand
years ; reckon all from Adam to this day.
Great indeed is the multitude; but yet it is

1 Luke xvii. 34.

eyes, nor reprove after the hearing ofhis ears.

» Is. xi. 3: (R.V.) He shall tut judge after the sight »/ his
9 Phil. ii. 7.
3 The Jerusalem MS. (A) alone haft the true reading ireoac,
which is confirmed by ireircjimcVoi'C in the quotation following,
instead of iroifiac, which is quite inappropriate, and evidently
an itacism.
This special
reference of the word to widowhood is to some extent confirmed *iy
tl £*« ovk cyxparevovrat, and is rendered highly
1 Cor. vii. 9 :
probable by Cyril's separate mention of marriage and virginity.

5 'EyKparcto. "Id est viduitas" (Ben. Ed.).

2 lb. f. 35.

4 Ex. xi. 5.

6 Matt. xxv. 31.

I 12

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

little, for the Angels are many more. They are
the ninety and nine sheep, but mankind is the
single one i. For according to the extent of uni
versal space, must we reckon the number of its
inhabitants. The whole earth is but as a point
in the midst of the one heaven, and yet contains
so great a' multitude ; what a multitude must
the heaven which encircles it contain ? And
must not the heaven of heavens contain un
imaginable numbers 8 ? And it is written, Thou
sand thousands ministered unto Him. and ten
thousand times ten thousand stood before Him 9;
not that the multitude is only so great, but be
cause the Prophet could not express more than
So there will be present at the judg
these.
ment in that day, God, the Father of all, Jesus
Christ being seated with Him, and the Holy
Ghost present with Them ;
and an angel's
trumpet shall summon us all to bring our deeds
Ought we not then from this time
with us.
forth to be sore troubled?
Think it not a
slight doom, O man, even apart from punish
ment, to be condemned in the presence of so
many.
Shall we not choose rather to die
many deaths, than be condemned by friends ?
25. Let us dread then, brethren, lest God
condemn us ; who needs not examination or
proofs, to condemn.
Say not, In the night I
committed fornication, or wrought sorcery, or
did any other thing, and there was no man by.
Out of thine own conscience shalt thou be
judged, thy thoughts the meanwhile accusing or
else excusing, in the day when God shalljudge the
secrets of men «.
The terrible countenance of
the Judge will force thee to speak the truth ;
or rather, even though thou speak not, it will
convict thee.
For thou shalt rise clothed with
thine own sins, or else with thy righteous deeds.
And this has the Judge Himself declared,
-for it is Christ who judges-^/kr neither doth
the Father judge any man, but he hath given
all judgment unto the Son', not divesting Him
self of His power, but judging through the Son ;
the Son therefore judgeth by the will 3 of the
Father ; for the wills of the Father and of the
Son are not different, but one and the same.
What then says the Judge, as to whether thou
shalt bear thy works, or no ? And before Him
shall theygather all nations*: (for in the presence
of Christ every knee must bmv, of things in heaven,
and things in earth, and things under the earth s . )

7 Matt; xviii. la ; Luke xr. 4.

Ambrose, Expos, in Luc. VII.
sio: "Rich is that shepherd of whose flock we are but the
one hundredth part. Of Angels and Archangels, of Dominions.
Powers, Thrones, and others He hath countless flocks, whom He
hath left upon the mountains." Cf. Gregor. Nyss. Contra Eunom.
Or. xii.
8 There is much variation in the reading and punctuation
of this passage.^ I have followed the text adopted by the Jeru
salem Editor with Codd. A. Roe. Casaub. and Grodecq, in pre
ference to the Benedictine text, with which the Editor himself
is dissatisfied.
1 Rom. ii. 15, 16.
3 mvimti.

9 Dan. vii. 10.
a John v. 12.

4 Matt. xxv. 31.

5 Phil. ii. 10.

Cat. xi. <*.

and He shall separate them one from another, as
the shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats.
How does the shepherd make the separation ?
Does he examine out of a book which is a
sheep and which a goat ? or does he distinguish
by their evident marks? Does not the wool show
the sheep, and the hairy and rough skin the
goat ? In like manner, if thou hast been just
now cleansed from thy sins, thy deeds shall be
henceforth as pure wool ; and thy robe shall
remain unstained, and thou shalt ever say, /
have put off my coat, how shall Iput it on*? By
thy vesture shalt thou be known for a sheep.
But if thou be found hairy, like Esau, who was
rough with hair, and wicked in mind, who for
food lost his birthright and sold his privilege,
thou shalt be one of those on the left hand.
But God forbid that any here present should
be cast out from grace, or for evil deeds be
found among the ranks of the sinners on the
left hand !

26. Terrible in good truth is the judgment,
and terrible the things announced. The king
dom of heaven is set before us, and everlasting
fire is prepared. How then, some one will say,
are we to escape the fire ? And how to enter
into the kingdom ? I was an hungred, He says,
andye gave Me meat.
Learn hence the way;
there is here no need of allegory, but to fulfil
what is said. J was an hungred, andye gave Ale
meat; I was thirsty, andye gave Me drink ; I
was a stranger, andye took Me in ; naked, and
ye clothed Me ; I was sick, andye visited Me ; I
was in prison, and ye came unto Me
These
things if thou do, thou shalt reign together
with Him ; but if thou do them not, thou shalt
be condemned.
At once then begin to do
these works, and abide in the faith ; lest, like
the foolish virgins, tarrying to buy oil, thou be
shut out Be not confident because thou merely
possessest the lamp, but constantly keep it
burning.
Let the light of thy good works
shine before men 8, and let not Christ be blas
phemed on thy account. Wear thou a gar
ment of incorruption 9, resplendent in good
works ; and whatever matter thou receivest
from God to administer as a steward, administer
Hast thou been put in trust with
profitably.
Hast thou been
riches ? Dispense them well.
entrusted with the word of teaching ?
Be a
Canst thou attach the
good steward thereof.
souls of the hearers 1 ? Do this diligently.

8 Matt. v. 16.-

6 Cant. V. 3. Compare Cat. iii. 7 ; xx. (Mystag. ii.) s.
7 Matt. xxv. 35.
9 The prayer lor the Catechumens in the Apostolic Con.ttitutions, viii. 6, contains a petition that God would "vouchsafe
to them the laver of regeneration, and the garment of incorruption,
which is the true life."
According ,to
1 vpotTQtivox.
some MSS. the sentence would run thus: "Hast thou /been
entrusted with the word of teaching? Be a good steward jjbf thy
Ift)o this
hearers' souls.
diligently."

Hast tiiou power to rule (a-poffrijitu) T

Cf. Acts ii. 41 :

wpotrtTtlhitrav.

/

LECTURE XV.

There are many doors of good stewardship. .
Only let none of us be condemned and cast
out ; that we may with boldness meet Christ
the Everlasting King, who reigns for ever.
For He doth reign for ever, who shall be
judge of quick and dead, because for quick and
dead He died.
And as Paul says, For to this
end Christ both died and lived again, that He
might be Lord both of the dead and living'1.

27. And shouldest thou ever hear any say
that the kingdom of Christ shall have an end,
abhor the heresy ;
it is another head of the
dragon, lately sprung up in Galatia. A certain
one has dared to affirm, that after the end of 1
the world Christ shall reign no longer 3 ; he has <
also dared to say, that the Word having come •
forth from the Father shall be again absorbed 1
into the Father, and shall be no more * ; utter- ;
ing such blasphemies to his own perdition.
For he has not listened to the Lord, saying,
The Son abideth for ever s. He has not listened
to Gabriel, saying, And He shall reign over
the house ofJacobfor ever, and of His kingdom
there shall be no end6.
Consider this text.
Heretics of this day teach in disparagement of >
Christ, while Gabriel the Archangel taught the
eternal abiding of the Saviour ; whom then
wilt thou rather believe ? wilt thou not rather
give credence to Gabriel ?
Listen to the testi
mony of Daniel in the text? ; I saw in a vision
oj the night, and behold, one like the Son of Man
came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the
Ancientmof days
And to Him was given >
the honour, and the dominion, and the king- ■

dom : and allpeoples, tribes, and languages shall
serve Him ; His dominion is an everlasting
dominion, which shall not pass away, and His
These things
kingdom sliall not be destroyed*.
rather hold fast, these things believe, and cast
away from thee the words of heresy ; for thou
hast heard most plainly of the endless king
dom of Christ.

28. The like doctrine thou has also in the
interpretation of the Stone, which ua: cut out of
a mountain without hands, which is
Christ
according to the flesh? ; And His kingdom sha.ll
not be left to another people.
David also says in
one place, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and
ever1 ; and in another place, Thou, Lord, in
the beginning hast laid the foundations of the
earth, &>c, they
shall perish, but Thou remainest, cW. ; but Thou art the same, and
Thy years shall not fail1 : words which Paul
has interpreted of the Son 3.

29. And wouldest thou know how they who
teach the contrary ran into such madness?
They read wrongly that good word of the
Apostle, For He must reign, till He hath put all
enemies under His feet*; and they say, when
His enemies shall have been put under His
feet, He shall cease to reign, wrongly and
foolishly alleging this.
For He who is king
before He has subdued His enemies, how shall
He not the rather be king, after He has gotten
the mastery over them.

.

30. They have also dared to say that the
Scripture, When all things shall be subjected
unto Him, then shall the Son also Himself be
subjected unto Him that subjected all things unto
a Rom. xiv. 9.
Him 5, -that this Scripture shews that the Son
3 Marcellus, Bishop of Ancyra, and his pupil Photinus, are
i
anathematized in the Creed called MaxpoVTtxof as holding that
Shall
also shall be absorbed into the Father.
Christ first became " Son of God when He took our flesh from the
ye then, O most impious of all men, ye the
Virgin. .
. For they will have it that then Christ began His .
Kingdom, and that it will have an end after the consummation i
creatures of Christ, continue ? and shall Christ
Svich are the disciples of Marcellus and
ofallan-i the judgment.
perish, by whom both you and all things were
Scotinus 01 Galatian Ancyra, ftc" See Newman on Atbanasius,
■
di Synedis, 8 26, (5), notes a and b. Compare the description
But
Such a word is blasphemous.
made ?
of Marcellus in the Letter of the Oriental Bishops who had withdrawn from the Council of Sardica to Philippopolis (a.d. 344).
further, how shall all things be made subject
,
"There has aiisen in our days a certain Marccllus of Galatia,
By perishing, or by abiding?
unto Him?
the most execrable pest o) all heretics, who with sacrilegious mind,
\
and impious mouth, and wicked argument seeks td set bounds to
Shall then the other things, when subject to
the perpetual, eternal, and timeless kingdom of our Lord Christ,
the Son. abide, and shall the Son, when sub
saying that He began to reign four hundred years since, and
'
shall end at the dissolution of the present world" (Hilar. Pictav.
For He shall
ject to the Father, not abide ?
SxOfert Hist. Fragm. iii. !.
be subjected, not because He shall then begin
* "The person meant by Cyril, though he withholds the name, 1
.
is Marcellus of Ancyra ; who having written a book against the
to do the Father's will (for from eternity He
Arian Sophist Asterius to explain the Apostle's statement concern
,
ing the subjection of the Son to the Father, was thought to be
doth always those things that please Him 6), but
renewing the here-y of Paul of Samosata. On this account he was ,
because, then as before, He obeys the Father,
'
reproveu by the Bishops at the Council of Jerusalem, A. D. 335, for
■
holding false opinions, and being ordered to recant his opinions
yielding, not a forced obedience, but a self-
-
promised 10 burn his book. Afterwards he applied to Constantine,
chosen accordance ; for He is not a servant,
t
by whom he was remitted to the Council ot Constantinople, A.D.
336, and deposed by the Bishops. As however he was acquitted by .
that He should be subjected by force, but a
the Councils of Rome, A.D 342, and of Sardica, A. D. 347, it became
;
a nutter of di pute whether he was really heretical. .. . From the
Son, that He should comply of His free choice
fragments of his books transcribed by Eusebius, you may possibly
and natural love.
'
acquit him of the Sabcllian heresy and the confusion of the
Father and the Son. but certainly not of the heresy concerning
the end of Christ's kingdom, and the abandonment by the Word
of the human nature which He assumed for our sake ; so express
arc his words recorded by Eusebius in the beginning of the 2nd
Rook Centra Marcellum, pp. 50, 51." (Ben. Ed.) Cf. Diet.
p. 341 ; and note 3 on % g
Chr. Biogr. "Eusebius of Oaesarea,'
above.
? TrjK iropovcroj'.

> Ps xlv. 6.
9 lb. ii. 4s ; Rom. ix. 5.
4 t Cor. xv. 25.
3 Heb. i. 10-12.
Theodoret. Comment, in Ffist. i. ad Cor.
xv. 23 : " This passage the followers of Ari us and hunoinius carry
continually on their tongue, thinking in this way to disparage the
•
dignity of the Only-begoltcu."

» Dan. vii. 13, 14.
2 lb. cii. 25-27.
1 Cor. xv. v. 28.

5 John viii. 35.

6 John viii. 29.

6 Luke L 33.
VOL. VII.

"4

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

31. But let us examine them; what is the
meaning of " until " or " as long as? " For with
the very phrase will I close with them, and
Since they have
try to overthrow their error.
dared to say that the words, //// He hath put
His enemies under Hisfeet, shew that He Him
self shall have an end, and have presumed to
set bounds to the eternal kingdom of Christ,
and to bring to an end, as far as words go,
His never-ending sovereignty, come then, let
us read the like expressions ■ in the Apostle:
Nevertheless, death
reigned from Adam till
Moses 7.
Did men then die up to that time,
and did none die any more after Moses, or
after the Law has there been no more death
among men? Well then, thou seest that the
word " unto " is not to limit time ; but that
Paul rather signified this, -" And yet, though
Moses was a righteous and wonderful man,
nevertheless the doom of death, which was ut
tered against Adam, reached even unto him, and
them that came after him ; and this, though
they had not committed the like sins as Adam,
by his disobedience in eating of the tree."

.

32. Take again another similar text. For un
. when Moses is read, a vail lieth
til this day .
Does until this day mean
upon tJuir heart 8.
only "until Paul?"
Is it not until this day
present, and even to the end? And if Paul
the Corinthians, For we came even
say
as far as unto you in preaching the Gospel of
Christ, having hope when your faith increases
to preach the Gospel in the regions beyondyou 9,
thou seest manifestly that as far as implies not
In
the end, but has something following it.

to

14.

7 Rom. v.

"a^pi from axpoc, as pfap* trom hijkov,
p.ajcp£f" (L. and Sc.).
It is not always possible to mark this
distinction in translation : cf. Lobeck, Phrynichus, p. 14 ; Vigcr,
Dt Idiot. Gr. p. 419.
* a Cor. iii. 14, 15.

9 lb. x. 14, ij, 16.

what sense then shouldest thou remember that
Scripture, //'// He hath put all enemies under
Hisfeet 1 / According as Paul says in another
place, And exhort each other daily, while it is
called to-day 2 ; meaning, " continually." For as
we may not speak of the "beginning of the
days" of Christ, so neither suffer thou that
any should ever speak of the end of His
kingdom.
For it is written, His kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom 3.

33. And though I have many more testimonies
out of the divine Scriptures, concerning the*kingdom of Christ which has no end for ever, I will be
content at present with those above mentioned,
because the day is far spent But thou,0 hearer,
worship only Him as thy King, and flee all
heretical error. And if the grace of God per
mit us, the remaining Articles also of the Faith
shall be in good time declared to you.
And
may the God of the whole world keep you all in
safety, bearing in mind the signs of the end,
and remaining unsubdued by Antichrist. Thou
hast received the tokens of the Deceiver who
is to come ; thou hast received the proofs of
the true Christ, who shall openly come down
from heaven. Flee therefore the one, the False
one ; and look for the other, the True. Thou
hast learnt the way, how in the judgment thou
mayest be found among those on the right
hand ; guard that which is committed to thee *
concerning Christ, and be conspicuous in good
works, that thou mayest stand with a good
confidence before the Judge, and inherit the
kingdom of heaven: - Through whom, and
with whom, be glory to God with the Holy
Ghost, for ever and ever.

Amen.

< x Cor. xy. if.

* Heb. iii. 13.
4 1 Tim. vi. ao*

I Dan. vii. 14, 27.

LECTURE XVI.

On the Article, And in one Holy Ghost, the Comforter, which spake

in the Prophets.

i Corinthians xii.

i, 4.

Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not haveyou ignorant.

Now there

are diversities ofgifts, but the same Spirit, &rc.

1. Spiritual in truth is the grace we need, in
order to discourse concerning the Holy Spirit ;
not that we may speak what is worthy of Him,
for this is impossible, but that by speaking the
words of the divine Scriptures, we may run our
course without danger. For a truly fearful thing
is written in the Gospels,where Christ has plainly
said, Whosoever shall speak a word against the
Ho'y Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither
in this world, nor in that which is to come1.
And there is often fear, lest a man should
receive this condemnation, through speaking
what he ought not concerning Him, either from
ignorance, or from supposed reverence. The
Judge of quick and dead, Jesus Christ, de
clared that he hath no forgiveness ; if therefore
any man offend, what hope has he?

2. It must therefore belong to Jesus Christ's
grace itself to grant both to us to speak
without deficiency, and to you to hear with
for discretion is needful not to
discretion ;
them only who speak, but also to them that
hear, lest they hear one thing, and misconceive
another in their mind.
Let us then speak
concerning the Holy Ghost nothing but what
is written ; and whatsoever is not written, let
The Holy
us not busy ourselves about it.
Ghost Himself spake the Scriptures ; He has
also spoken concerning Himself as much as
He pleased, or as much as-we could receive.
Let us therefore speak those things which He
has said ; for whatsoever He has not said, we
dare not say.

3. There is One Only Holy Ghost, the
Comforter; and as there is One God the
Father, and no second Father ;-and as there
is One Only-begotten Son and Word of God,
who hath no brother ;-so is there One Only

1 Matt xii. 33.

He it

Holy Ghost, and no second spirit equal in
honour to Him. Now the Holy Ghost is a
a Being divine and
Power most mighty,
unsearchable ;
living and in
for He is
telligent, a sanctifying principle of all things
is
made by God through Christ.
who illuminates the souls of the just; He was
in the Prophets, He was also in the Apostles
in the New Testament.
Abhorred be they
who dare to separate the operation of the
There is One God, the Fa
Holy Ghost !
ther, Lord of the Old and of the New Tes
tament : and One Lord, Jesus Christ, who
was prophesied of in the Old Testament,
and came in the New ; and One Holy Ghost,
who through the Prophets preached of Christ,
and when Christ was come, descended, and
manifested Him

9 At the end of this section there follows in the Coislin MS.
a long interpolation consisting of two parts. The former is an
extract taken word for word from Gregory of Nyssa. Oratio
Catechetica, ii. c, which may be read in this series : 'AAA ut 6eo0
Advo** oxov<raiTf$ .... avvSpoiiov tvovtrav rjj £ovA»j<r«t tijc
Svyafitv. Of the second passage the Benedictine Editor says:
" I' have not been able to discover who is the author. No one
can assign it to our Cyril, although the doctrine it contains is
in full agreement with his: but he explains all the same points
more at large in his two Lectures (xvi. xvii.). The passage is very
ancient and undoubtedly older than the eleventh century, which is
Therefore in the controversy ol the
the date of the Cod. Coislin.
Latins against the Greeks concerning the Procession of the Holy
Ghost it is important to notice what is taught in this passage, and
also brought forward as a testimony by S. Thomas (Aquinas),
that "The Holy Ghost is of the Godhead of the Father and the
Son (ex Patris et Filii divinitate existerc)." To me indeed these
words seem to savour altogether not ol the later but of the more
ancient theology of the Greeks, and to be earlier than the con
troversies of the Greeks against the Latins."
This second passage is as follows :-
11 For the Spirit of God is good. And Thy good Spirit, says
David, shall lead me in the land qfrighteousness.
This then is
the Spirit of God in which we believe : the blessed Spirit, the
eternal, immutable, unchangeable, ineffable: which rules and
reigns over all productive being, both visible and invisible natures :
which is Lord both of Angels and Archangels, Powers, Prin
cipalities, Dominions, Thrones: the Creator of all being, en
throned with the glory of the Father and the Son, reigning without
beginning and without end with the Father and the Son, beiore
the created substances : Who sanctifies the ministering spirits
sent forth /or the sake of those who are to inherit salvation :
Who came down upon the holy and blessed Virgin Mary, of whoir

I 3

n6

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

the worship inseparable.

4. Let no one therefore separate the Old from
the New Testament 3 ; let no one say that the
Spirit in the former is one, and in the latter
since thus he offends against the
another ;
Holy Ghost Himself, who with the Father
and the Son together is honoured, and at the
time of Holy Baptism is included with them
in the Holy Trinity.
For the Only-begotten
Son of God said plainly to the Apostles, Go ye,
and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing
them into the name of the Father, and of the
Our hope is in
Son, and of the Holy Ghost*.
Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost.
We
preach not three Gods s ;
let the Marcionites
be silenced ; but with the Holy Ghost through
The Faith is
One Son, we preach One God.
indivisible ;
We
neither separate the Holy Trinity, like some ;
nor do we as Sabellius work confusion6.
But we know according to godliness One
Father, who sent His Son to be our Saviour ;
we know One Son, who promised that He
would send the Comforter from the Father ;
we know the Holy Ghost, who spake in the
Prophets, and who on the day of Pentecost
descended on the Apostles in the form of fiery
tongues, here, in Jerusalem, in the Upper
Church of the Apostles 1 ; for in all things the
choicest privileges are with us.
Here Christ
came down from heaven ; here the Holy Ghost
came down from heaven. And in truth it
were most fitting, that as we discourse con
cerning Christ and Golgotha here in Golgotha,
so also we should speak concerning the HolyGhost in the Upper Church ; yet since He
who descended there jointly partakes of the
glory of Him who was crucified here, we here

3 Cf- Cat. iv. 33; vii. 6.

was born Christ according to the flesh ; came down also upon the
Lord Himself in bodily form of a dove in the river Jordan : Who
came upon the Apostles on the day of Pentecost in form of fiery
tongues ; Who gives and supplies all spiritual gifts in the Cliurch,
Who I'KOCKEDETH from the Fathek : Who is of the Godhead
of the Father and the Son ; Who is of one substance with the
Father and the Son, inseparable and indivisible."
Irenanis, Hcrres. III. xxi. 4; IV.
ix. x.
In Euscbius, E.H. V. 13. Rhodon says that Apelles attri
buted the prophecies to an adverse spirit, and rejected them as
false and self-contradictory.
Similar blasphemies against the holy
Prophets are imputed to Manes by F.piphanius (Harts. Ixvi. 30).
* Matt, xxvi.i. in. The same text is used with much force by
S. Basil (De Spir. S. cap. xxiv.),
See Newman's notes on Athanasiu.-,
5 Cat. xi. 4, note 3.
lb. Or. III. xxv. 9; lb. xxvit. 3.
Contra Arian.JJr, 1. viii. 1 ;
Marcion's doctrine of three first principles (rpiW apx**v Aoyos)
See also Terlull.
is discussed by Epiphanius (Hai'es. xlil. 6, 7).
Contra Mnrcion. 1. 15 ; Euseb. Hist. Ecclts. V. 13.

6 ffvvaXw^v, iv. 8 ; xi. 16 ; xv. 9.
7 Cat xvii. 13.

Epiphanius (De Mensuris et Pondtr. c. 14):
"And he (Hadrian) found the city all levelled to the ground, except
a few houses, and the Church of God which was small : where the
Disciples, on their return after the Saviour was taken up from the
Mount of Olives, went up into the upper chamber : for there it
Cf. Stanley, Sinai and Pateshad been built, that is on Sion."
tine, c. xiv. 3 : " Within the precincts of that Mosque (of the
Tomb of David) is a vaulted Gothic chamber, which, contains
within its four walls a greater confluence of traditions than any
other place of like dimensions in Palestine.
It is startling to hear
that this is the scene of the Last Supper, of the meeting after the
Resurrection, o. the miracle of Pentecost, of the residence and
death ot the Yii0iu, ol the burial of Stephen."

speak concerning Him also who descended
there : for their worship is indivisible.

5. We would now say somewhat concerning
the Holy Ghost ; not to declare His substance
with exactness, for this were impossible ; but
to speak of the diverse mistakes of some con
cerning him, lest from ignorance we should
fall into them ; and to block up the paths of
error, that we may journey on the King's one
highway. And if we now for caution's sake
repeat any statement of the heretics, let
it
recoil on their heads, and may we be guilt
less, both we who speak, and ye who hear.

6. For the heretics, who are most profane
in all things, have sharpened their tongue * against
the Holy Ghost also, and have dared to utter
impious things ; as Irenseus the interpreter has
written in his injunctions against heresies9. For
some of them have dared to say that they
were themselves the Holy Ghost ;-of whom
the first was Simon *, the sorcerer spoken of in
the Acts of the Apostles ; for when he was
cast out, he presumed to teach such doctrines :
and they who are called Gnostics, impious
men, have spoken other things against the
Spirit 3, and the wicked Valentinians 3 again
something else ; and the profane Manes dared
to call himself the Paraclete sent by Christ*.
Others again have taught that the Spirit is
different in the Prophets and in the New
Testaments
Yea, and great is their error, or
rather their blasphemy. Such therefore abhor,
and flee from them who blaspheme the Holy
Ghost, and have no forgiveness.
For what
fellowship hast thou with the desperate, thou,
who art now to be baptized, into the Holy
Ghost also6?
If he who attaches himself to a
thief, and consenteth with him, is subject to
punishment, what hope shall he have, who
offends against the Holy Ghost?

7. Let the Marcionists also be abhorred,
who tear away from the New Testament the
sayings of the Old'.
For Marcion first, that
most impious of men, who first asserted three
Gods 8, knowing that in the New Testament are

title of

8 Ps. cxi. 3.
9 Irenztus is called "the interpreter" in the same general
sense as other ecclesiastical authors (Cat. xiii. 21 ;
xv. 20),
on account of his Irequent comments upon the Scriptures. The
full
his work was A Reflation and Subversion 0/
7).
KnfKvledge falsely so called (Euseb. Hist. Eccles. V. c.
Cyril's expression (iv rots rrpoo-rayriacrr) is sufficiently appropriate
to tile hortatory purpose profes*ed by Ircna.-us in his preface.
But the Benedictine Editor thinks that the word TtpoaidyiAAirx
may be an interpolation arising from the following words v-poc
rdv .... The meaning would then be " in his writ.ngs Against
Heresies," the usual short title of the work.
2 lrenarus (I. xxix. | 4; XXX, | i\

1 Cat. vi. 14. note 10.
4 Cat. vi. 25.
3 lb. I. ii.
5 Cat. iv. 33.
6 i.e. as well as into the Father and the Son.
7 See Di:t. Christ. Biography, Marcion, p. 283 ; and Tertullian (Adv. Marcion. IV. 6):
His whole aim centres in this
that he may establish a diversity between the Old and New
Testaments, so that his own Christ may be separate from the
Cn-ator, as belonging to the riv.nl god. and as alien from the I.aw
and the Prophets.

5, 6.
See i 3, note 3, above.

* Cf. § 4, note 5, above.

LECTURE XVI.

contained testimonies of the Prophets concern
ing Christ, cut out the testimonies taken from
the Old Testament, that the King might be left
without witness. Abhor those above-mentioned
Gnostics, men of knowledge by name, but
fraught with ignorance ; who have dared to
say such things of the Holy Ghost as I dare
not repeat.

8. Let the Cataphrygians 9 also be thy abhor
rence, and Montanus, their ringleader in evil,
and his two so-called prophetesses, Maximilla
and Priscilla.
For this Montanus, who was
out of his mind and really mad (for he would
not have said such things, had he not been
mad), dared to say that he was himself the
Holy Ghost,-he, miserable man, and filled
with all uncleanness and lasciviousness ;
for
it suffices but to hint at this, out of respect for
the women who are present. And having taken
possession of Pepuza, a very small hamlet of
Phrygia, he falsely named it Jerusalem ; and cut
ting the throats of wretched little children, and
chopping them up into unholy food, for the
purpose of their so-called mysteries *,-(where
fore till but lately in the time of persecution,
we were suspected of doing this, because these
Montanists were called, falsely indeed, by the
common name of Christians ;)-yet he dared
to call himself the Holy Ghost, filled as he
was with all impiety and inhuman cruelty, and
condemned by an irrevocable sentence.

9. And he was seconded, as was said before,
by that most impious Manes also, who com
bined what was bad in every heresy"; who
being the very lowest pit of destruction, col
lected the doctrines of all the heretics, and
wrought out and taught a yet more novel
error, and dared to say that he himself was
the Comforter, whom Christ promised to send.
But the Saviour when He promised Him, said
to the Apostles, But tarry ye in the city of
Jerusalem, untilye be endued with powerfrom on
high 3. What then ? did the Apostles who had
been dead two hundred years, wait for Manes,
until they should be endued with the power ; and
will any dare to say, that they were not forth
with full of the Holy Ghost? Moreover it is
written, Then they laid their hands on them,
and they received the Holy Ghost ♦ ; was not this
before Manes, yea, many years before, when
the Holy Ghost descended on the day of
Pentecost ?

9 Phrygians, or Cataphrygians (oi Kara vpi/vac) was the name
given to the followers of the Phrygian Montanus. See the ac
count of Montanism in Eusebius, Hist, Eccl. V. xvi.,and the note
there in this Scries.
' The charges of lust and cruelty brought against the Mont
anists by Cyril and Epiphanius(//^r. 48 seem to rest on no trust
worthy evidence, ana arc not mentioned by Eusebius, a bitter foe
t* the sect

•> On Manes, see Cat. vi. 20 flf.
1 Luke xxiv. 49.

4 Acts viii. 17.

10. Wherefore was Simon the sorcerer conI demned ? Was it not that he came to the
Apostles, and said, Give me also this penver,
that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive
the Holy Ghost 1
For he said not, "Give me
also the fellowship of the Holy Ghost," but
" Give me the power ; " that he might sell to
others that which could not be sold, and
which he did not himself possess. He offered
money also to them who had no possessions s ;
and this, though he saw men bringing the prices
of the things sold, and laying them at the
Apostles' feet. And he considered not that
they who trod under foot the wealth which
was brought for the maintenance of the poor,
were not likely to give the power of the Holy
Ghost for a bribe.
But what say they to
Simon ?
Thy money perish with thee, because
thou hast tliought to purchase the gift of God
with money6 ; for thou art a second Judas, for
expecting to buy the grace of the Spirit with
money.
If then Simon, for wishing to get
this power for a price, is to perish, how great
is the impiety of Manes, who said that he was
Let us hate them who are
the Holy Ghost?
worthy of hatred ; let us turn away from them
from whom God turns away ; let us also our
selves say unto God with all boldness concern
ing all heretics, Do not I hate them, O Lord,
that hate Thee, and am not I grieved with
Thine enemies ? ? For there is also an enmity
which is
is written,
/ will put enmity between thee and her seeds ;
for friendship with the serpent works enmity
with God, and death.

right, according as

it

ii. Let then thus much suffice concerning
those outcasts ; and now let us return to the
divine Scriptures, and let us drink waters out
of our own cisterns [that is, the holy Fathers 9],
Drink
and out of our own springing wells *.
we of living water, springing up into ever
lasting life3; but this spake the Saviour of the
Spirit, which they that believe on Him should
receive*.
For observe what He says, He that
believeth on Me (not simply this, but), as the
Scripture hath said (thus He hath sent thee
back to the Old Testament), out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water, not rivers
perceived by sense, and merely watering the
earth with its thorns and trees, but bringing
souls to the light. And in another place He
says, But the water that I shall give him, shall
be in him a well of living water springing up

cucrwioiri.

Cf. S 19 : aKTrffiovovai. and \ 22 :
5 Acts viii. 19.
6 lb. V. 20.
aKTTHLO&VVT\V.
8 Gen. ill. 15.
7 PS. CXXxix. 21.
9 The words ayiwe irartptav are not fuund in the MSS. Mon. I.
Mon. 2. Vind. Roe Casauh. nor in Grodecq.
Whether meant to
refer, as the Benedictine Editor thinks, to the writers of the Old
Testament, or to Christian authors, they are an evident gloss.
1 Prov. v. 15.
■ John iv. 14, quoted more fully at the end of the section.
Jib. vii. 38, 39.

n8

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

into everlasting life,-a new kind of water,
living and springing up, springing up unto them
who are worthy.

form,

but works

12. And why did He call the grace of the
Spirit water? Because by water all things
subsist ; because water brings forth grass and
living things; because the water of the showers
comes down from heaven ; because it comes
in many
down one in
forms.
For one fountain watereth the whole
of Paradise, and one and the same rain comes
down upon all the world, yet it becomes white
in the lily, and red in the rose, and purple in
violets and hyacinths, and different and varied
in each several kind : so it is one in the palmtree, and another in the vine, and all in all
things ; and yet is one in nature, not diverse
from itself ; for the rain does not change itself,
and come down first as one thing, then as an
other, but adapting itself to the constitution of
each thing which receives it, it becomes to each
what is suitable 4. Thus also the Holy Ghost,
being one, and of one nature, and indivisible,
divides to each His grace, according as He
will 5 .• and as the dry tree, after partaking of
water, puts forth shoots, so also the soul in
sin, when it has been through repentance
made worthy of the Holy Ghost, brings forth
clusters of righteousness. And though He is
One in nature, yet many are the virtues which
by the will of God and in the Name of Christ
He works. For He employs the tongue of one
man for wisdom ; the soul of another He en
lightens by Prophecy ; to another He gives
power to drive away devils ; to another He
gives to interpret the divine Scriptures. He
strengthens one man's self-command ; He
teaches another the way to give alms; another
He teaches to fast and discipline himself ;
another He teaches to despise the things of
the body ; another He trains for martyrdom :
diverse in different men, yet not diverse from
Himself, as it is written, But the manifestation
of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal.
For to one is given through the Spirit
the word of wisdom; and to another the word
of know/edge according to the same Spirit/ to
another faith, in the same Spirit ; and to an
othergifts of healing, in the same Spirit ; and to
another workings of miracles ; and to another
prophecy ; and to another discernings of spirits ;
and to another divers kinds of tongues ; and to
another the interpretation of tongues : but all
these worketh that one and tlie same Spirit,
dividing to every man severally as He will6.

13. But since concerning spirit in general
many diverse things are written in the divine
Scriptures, and there is fear lest some out

4 Compare a similar passage on rain in Cat. ix. 9, 10-

5 x Cor. xii. xx.

6 lb. vv. 7-xx.

Thus an Angel is

of ignorance fall into confusion, not know
ing to what sort of spirit the writing refers;
it will be well now to certify you, of what kind
the Scripture declares the Holy Spirit to be.
For as Aaron is called Christ, and David and
Saul and others are called Christs
but there is
only one true Christ, so likewise since the
name of spirit is given to different things, it is
right to see what is that which is distinctively
For many things are
called the Holy Spirit.
called
called
spirits.
spirit, our soul is
called spirit, and this
wind which is blowing is called spirit; great
virtue also is spoken of as spirit ; and im
pure practice is called spirit ; and a devil our
adversary is called spirit.
Beware therefore
when thou hearest these things, lest from their
having a common name thou mistake one for
another.
For concerning our soul the Scrip
ture says, His spirit shall goforth, and he shall
return to his earth 8.- and of the same soul it
says again, Which formeth the spirit of man
within him?. And of the Angels it is said in
the Psalms, Who maketh His Angels spirits,
and His ministers a flame offire1. And of the
wind it saith, Thou shalt break the ships of
Tarshish with a violent spirit * ; and, As the
tree in the wood is shaken by the spirit
and,
Fire, hail, snow, ice, spirit of storm *. And of
good doctrine the Lord Himself says, The
words that J have spoken unto you, they are
spirit*, and they are life;
instead of, "are
spiritual."
But the Holy Spirit is not pro
nounced by the tongue; but He is a Living
Spirit, who gives wisdom of speech, Himself
speaking and discoursing.

14. And wouldest thou know that He dis
courses and speaks?
Philip by revelation of
an Angel went down to the way which leads
to Gaza, when the Eunuch was coming; and
the Spirit said to Philip, Go near, and join
Seest thou the Spirit
thyself to this chariot 6.
talking to one who hears Him?
Ezekiel
also speaks thus, The Spirit of the Lord came
upon me, and said unto me, Thus saith the
LordT. And again, The Holy Ghost said*,
unto the Apostles who were in Antioch, Sepa
rate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have calledJhem.
Beholdest thou
the Spirit living, separating, calling, and with
authority sending forth ? Paul also said, Save
that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every city,
saying that bonds and afflictions await me 9.
For this good Sanctifier of the Church, and
her Helper, and Teacher, the Holy Ghost, the
Comforter, of whom the Saviour said, He shall

7 See Cat. x. xi ; xi. i.
1 Ps. civ. 4.
4 Ps. cxlviii. 8.
7 Exek. xi. 5.

" Ps. xlviii. 7.
8 Acts xiii. a.

5 John vi. 63.

B Ps. cxlvL 4.

» Zech. xii. t.

3 Is. vii. a.
9 lb. xx. 23.

6 Acts viii. 29,

LECTURE XVI.

ttaeh you all things (and He said not only, He
shall teach, but also, He shall bring to your re
membrance whatever I have said unto you 1 ;
for the teachings of Christ and of the Holy
Ghost are not different, but the same)-He, I
say, testified before to Paul what things should
befall him, that he might be the more stout
hearted,
beforehand.
Now I have spoken these things unto you
because of the
text, The words which I
have spoken unto you, they are spirit ; that
thou mayest understand this, not of the utter
ance of the lips *, but of the good doctrine in
this passage.

knowing them

from

says,

15. But sin also is called spirit, as I have
already said ; only in another and opposite
sense, as when it is said, The spirit of whore
dom caused them to err 3. The name "spirit"
is given also to the unclean spirit, the devil ;
but with the addition of, " the unclean ; "
for to each is joined its distinguishing name,
to mark its proper nature.
If the Scrip
ture speak of the soul of man, it says the
spirit with the addition, of the man; if
it
spirit of storm ;
mean the wind, it
it says, spirit of whoredom ;
if sin,
if the*
devil,
that we
says, an unclean spirit :
it
may know which particular thing is spoken
of, and thou mayest not suppose that it means
the Holy Ghost ; God forbid ! For this name
of spirit
is common to many things ; and
every thing which has not a solid body is
in a general way called spirit*.
Since, there
fore, the devils have not such bodies, they
are called spirits : but there is a great dif
ference ; for the unclean devil, when he comes
upon a man's soul (may the Lord deliver from
him every soul of those who hear me, and
of those who are not present), he comes
like a wolf upon a sheep, ravening for blood,
His coming is most
and ready to devour.
fierce ; the sense of it most oppressive ; the
mind becomes darkened ; his attack is an in
justice also, and so is his usurpation of an
other's possession.
For he makes forcible use
of another's body, and another's instruments, as
if they were his own ; he throws down him who
stands upright (for he is akin to him who
fell from heaven s) ; he twists the tongue and
distorts the lips ; foam comes instead of
words ; the man is filled with darkness ; his
eye is open, yet the soul sees not through it ;
and the miserable man gasps convulsively
The devils are verily
at the point of death.

■ jonn xiv. ao.
» lb. vi. 63. The Holy Spirit is more than words pronounced
by the tongue, even than our Lord's own words, which he called
Mpirit.
3 liosea iv. 13.
< Origen, de Prituipiti, i. I 2: "It is the custom of Holy
Scripture, when it would designate anything contrary to this
more dense and solid body, to call it spirit."

5 Luke x. 18.

foes of men, using them foully and merci
lessly.

16. Such is not the Holy Ghost; God for
For His doings tend the contrary way,
bid !
towards what is good and salutary.
First, His
coming is gentle; the perception of Him is
fragrant; His burden most light; beams of
light and knowledge gleam forth before His
coming 6. He comes with the bowels of a true
guardian ; for He comes to save, and to heal,
to teach, to admonish, to strengthen, to exhort,
to enlighten the mind, first of him who receives
Him, and afterwards of others also, through
him. And as a man, who being previously in
darkness then suddenly beholds the sun, is
enlightened in his bodily sight, and sees plainly
things which he saw not, so likewise he to whom
the Holy Ghost is vouchsafed, is enlightened
in his soul, and sees things beyond man's sight,
which he knew not ; his body is on earth, yet
his soul mirrors forth the heavens. He sees,
like Esaias, the Lord sitting upon a throne high
and lifted upi ; he sees, like Ezekiel, Him who
is above the Cherubim 8 / he sees like Daniel, ten
thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of
thousands 9 ; and the man, who is so little, be
holds the beginning of the world, and knows
the end of the world, and the times intervening,
and the successions of king?, - things which he
for the True Enlightener is
never learned :
present with him. The man is within the walls
of a house ; yet the power of his knowledge
reaches far and wide, and he sees even what
other men are doing.

1 7. Peter was not with Ananias and Sapphira
when they sold their possessions, but he was
present by the Spirit; Why, he says, hath
Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost 1 1
There was no accuser ; there was no witness ;
Whiles
whence knew he what had happened ?
it remained was it not thine own 1 and after it
was sold, was it not in thine own power 1 why
hast thou conceived this thing in thine heart" 1
The unlettered ^ Peter, through the grace of the
Spirit, learnt what not even the wise men of
Thou hast the like
the Greeks had known.
in the case also of Elisseus.
For when he
hatl freely healed the leprosy of Naaman,
Gehazi received the reward, the reward of
another's achievement ; and he took the money
from Naaman, and bestowed it in a dark place.
But the darkness is not hidden from the Saints *.
And when he came, Elisseus asked him ; and
like Peter, when he said, Tell me whether ye

6 In this contrast between the evil spirit and the Spirit of God
Cyril'* language rises to true eloquence, tar surpassing a somewhat
similar description, which may have been known to him, in
Euseb. Dtm. Evang. V. 13a.

8 Ezek. x. 1.
» lb. v. 4.

9 Dan. vu. 10,
3 lb. iv. Z3.

7 Is. vi. 1.
■ Acts v. 3.
4 Fs. exxxix. la.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

sold the land for so much ' f he also enquires,
Whence comest thou, Gehazi6? Not in ignorance,
but in sorrow ask I whence comest thou f From
darkness art thou come, and to darkness shalt
thou go ; thou hast sold the cure of the leper,
and the leprosy is thy heritage.
I, he says,
have fulfilled the bidding of Him who said
to me, Freely ye have received, freely give 1 ;
but thou hast sold this grace ; receive now
the condition of the sale.
But what says
Elisseus to him ?
Went not mine heart with
thee t
I was here shut in by the body, but the
spirit which has been given me of God saw
even the things afar off, and shewed me plainly
Seest thou how
what was doing elsewhere.
the Holy Ghost not only rids of ignorance,
but invests with knowledge ? Seest thou how
He enlightens men's souls ?

1 8. Esaias lived nearly a thousand years
ago ; and he beheld Zion as a booth. The
city was still standing, and beautified with
public places, and robed in majesty ; yet he
says, Zion shall beploughedas afield*, foretelling
what is now fulfilled in our days °. And ob
for
serve the exactness of the prophecy ;
he said, And the daughter of Zion shall be left
as a booth in a vineyard, as a lodge in a garden
And now the place is filled with
of cucumbers
Seest thou how the
gardens of cucumbers.
Be not
Holy Spirit enlightens the saints?
therefore carried away to other things, by the
force of a common term, but keep fast the
exact meaning.

19. And if ever, while thou hast been sitting
here, a thought concerning chastity or vir
ginity has come into thy mind, it has been His
teaching.
Has not often a maiden, already at
the bridal threshold2, fled away. He teaching
her the doctrine of virginity?
Has not often
a man distinguished at court 3, scorned wealth
and rank, under the teaching of the Holy Ghost ?
Has not often a young man, at the sight of
beauty, closed his eyes, and fled from the sight,

6 2 Kings v. 25.

5 Acts v. B.
7 Matt. x. 8.
9 Cf. Euseb. Dttn. Ev.itig. vi. 13 :

8 Micah iii. 12 ; ascribed l>y Cyril to Isaiah.
•' In our ow n time we have
seen with our eyes the Skin of old renown being ploughed by
Romans with yokes of oxen, and Jerusalem in a state of utter
desolation, as the oracle itself says, like a lodge in a garden of
cucumbers. As Cyril at that time saw the Prophet's prediction
fulfilled, so we also to the present day see most plainly the fulfil
ment of the divine oracle, ,md Sion ploughed before our eyes : for
except the Church of the Apostles, with the houses lying around
it, and the luius-.- of Caiaphas And the ceme teries, all the remaining
space of this hill, lying without the city, is under plough. '
(Jerusalem Editor).
orrwpo^vAdjrtov is the hut of the watchman who
1 Isa. i. 8.
guarded the crop when ripening for harvest.
^LKi/rjAaTor is
explained by Basil in his comment on the passage of Isaiah as
"A place that produces quick-growing and perishable fruits."
This agrees with the etymological sense of the word a*: ''a forcingbed for cucumbers" (Hippocrates apud Fritzsche, " Ver Brie/ ties
Jeremia" v. 70). On the form ctjcvrjpdru, see the notes on the
Epistle of Jeremy in the Speaker's Commentary.
On the meanirg of iratrras see the notes on
Herodotus, II. 148, 169 in liahr. and Rawlinson.
Here it appears
to m.-an the cloister or colonnade which gave access to the bridal
chamber, daAafiOf.

3 iv vaAanoic

2 iraoraSac.

'

and escaped the defilement ?
Askest thou
whence this has come to pass ? The Holy Ghost
taught the soul of the young man. Many ways
of covetousness are there in the world ; yet
Christians refuse possessions : wherefore? be
cause of the teaching of the Holy Ghost. Worthy
of honour is in truth that Spirit, holy and good ;
and fittingly are we baptized into Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. A man, still clothed with a
body, wrestles with many fiercest demons; and
often the demon, whom many men could not
master with iron bands, has been mastered by
the man himself with words of prayer, through
the power which is in him of the Holy Ghost ;
and the mere breathing of the Exorcist * be
comes as fire to that unseen foe. A mighty ally
and protector, therefore, have we from God ; a
great Teacher of the Church, a mighty Cham
pion on our behalf.
Let us not be afraid of
the demons, nor of the devil ; for mightier is He
who fighteth for us.
Only let us open to Him
our doors ; forHe godh about seeking such as are
worthy i, and searching on whom He may con
fer His gilts.

dishonoured

20. And He is called the Comforter, because
"He comforts and encourages us, and helpeth
our infirmities ; for we know not what luc should
pray for as we ought; but the Spirit Himself
maketh intercession for us, with groanings which
cannot be uttered6, that is, makes intercession
Oftentimes a man for Christ's sake
to God.
has been outraged and
un
justly ; martyrdom is at hand ; tortures on
every side, and fire, and sword, and savage
But the Holy Ghost
beasts, and the pit.
softly whispers to him, " Wait thou on the
Lord 1, O man ; what is now befalling thee is a
small matter, the reward will be great.
Sutler
a little while, and thou shalt be with Angels
The sufferings of this present time are
for ever.
not worthy to be compared with the ^lory which
shall be revealed in uss." He portrays to the
man the kingdom of heaven ; He gives him
a glimpse of the paradise of delight ; and the
martyrs, whose bodily countenances are of
necessity turned to their judges, but who in
spirit are already in Paradise, despise those
hardships which are seen.

21. And wouldest thou be sure that by
the power of the Holy Ghost the Martyrs
to
bear their witness ?
His disciples, And when they bring you unto

The Saviour says

4 Compare Procat. Ip : Cat. xx. 3.
5 Wisdom vi. 16.

Compare the saying in Clem. Alex. Qmt
dives salvttur f % 31 : aiiiuv C.r)Ttiv Toi»s tit weivotiivov* dft'ove t«
oprac tow iVuTTjpos /lafrqrac. The Jerusalem Editor quotes from
Origen {Prolog, in Cantic.) a passage which may have been
known to Cyril: **This Comforter therefore goeth about seeking
if He may discover any worthy and receptive souls, to whom He
may reveal the greatness of the love which is in Cod."

,

7 Ps. xxvii. 14; xxxvii. 34.

6 Rom. viii. 26.
8 Rom. viii. 18.

LECTURE XVI.

the synagogues, and the magistrates, and author
ities, be not anxious how ye shall answer, or
what ye shall say ; for the Holy Ghost shall
teach you in that very hour, what ye ought to
say °. For it is impossible to testify as a martyr
for Christ's sake, except a man testify by the
Holy Ghost ; for if no man can say thatJesus
Christ is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost1, how
shall any man give his own life for Jesus' sake,
but by the Holy Ghost ?

22. Great indeed, and all-powerful in gifts,
and wonderful, is the Holy Ghost.
Consider,
how many of you are now sitting here, how
many souls of us are present. He is working
suitably for each, and being present in the
midst, beholds the temper of each, beholds
also his reasoning and his conscience, and
what we say, and think, and believe3.
Great
indeed is what I have now said, and yet is it
For consider, I pray, with mind en
small.
lightened by Him, how many Christians there
are in all this diocese, and how many in the
whole province 3 of Palestine, and carry forward
thy mind from this province, to the whole
Roman Empire ; and after this, consider the
whole world ; races of Persians, and nations
of Indians, Goths and Sarmatians, Gauls and
Spaniards, and Moors, Libyans and Ethiopians,
and the rest for whom we have no names ; for
of many of the nations not even the names
have reached us. Consider, I pray, of each na
tion, Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, Solitaries,
Virgins, and laity besides; and then behold their
great Protector, and the Dispenser of their gifts ;
-how throughout the world He gives to one
to
chastity, to another perpetual
another
voluntary
to
almsgiving,
poverty, to another power of repelling hostile
spirits. And as the light, with one touch of
its radiance sheds brightness on all things, so
also the Holy Ghost enlightens those who have
eyes ; for if any from blindness is not vouch
safed His grace, let him not blame the Spirit,
but his own unbelief.

virginity,

another

all

the world ;

23. Thou hast seen His power, which is
tarry now no longer
in
upon earth, but ascend on high.
Ascend, I
say, in imagination even unto the first heaven,
and behold there so many countless myriads
of Angels.
Mount up in thy thoughts, if thou
canst, yet higher; consider, I pray thee, the
Archangels, consider also the Spirits; consider
the Virtues, consider the Principalities, consider
the Powers, consider the Thrones, consider

9 Luke xii. IX, xa.
" 1 Cor. xii. 3.. Maprvp^roi, " to bear witness by death."
9 Codd. Monac. Vind. Roe. Casaub. add xeu rl -itrrtvo^tv.
3 The terms iropoucta, the See of a Bishop, and cirapyia, the
Province o! a Metropolitan, were both adopted Irom the cor
See Bingham, Antt.
responding divisions ol' the Roman Empire.
Book IX. 1. li a-6.

the Dominions * ;-of all these the Comforter is
: the Ruler from God, and the Teacher, and the
; Sanctifier.
Of Him Elias has need, and Elisseus, and Esaias, among men ; of Him Michael
and Gabriel have need among Angels. Nought
of things created is equal in honour to Him :
for the families of the Angels, and all their
hosts assembled together, have no equality
with the Holy Ghost.
All these the all-excel
lent power of the Comforter overshadows.
[And they indeed are sent forth to minister*,
but He searches even the deep things of God,
according as the Apostle says, For the Spirit
searcheth all things, yea, the deep things op God.
For what man knoweth the things of a man,
save the spirit of the man 7chich is in him ? even
so the things of God knoweth no man, but tlie
Spirit of God6.

For it

24. He preached concerning Christ in the
Prophets ; He wrought in the Apostles ; He
to this day seals the souls in Baptism. And
the Father indeed gives to the Son ; and the
Son shares with the Holy Ghost.
is
Jesus Himself, not I, who says, All things are
delivered unto Me of My Father i ; and of the
Holy Ghost He says, When He, the Spirit of
Truth, shall come, and the rest .... He shall
glorify Me ; for He shall receive of Mine, and
shall shew it unto yous.
The Father through
the Son, with the Holy Ghost, is the giver of
all grace ; the gifts of the Father are none
other than those of the Son, and those of the
Holy Ghost ; for there is one Salvation," one
Power, one Faith; One God, the Father; One
Lord, His only-begotten Son ; One Holy Ghost,
is enough for us to
the Comforter. And it
know these things ; but inquire not curiously
into His nature or substance0: for had it been
written, we would have spoken of it ; what is
not written, let us not venture on ;
is
sufficient for our salvation to know, that there
is Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost.

it

25. This Spirit descended upon the seventy
Elders in the days of Moses. (Now let not the
length of the discourse, beloved, produce weari
ness in you : but may He the very subject of
our discourse grant strength to every one, both
to us who speak, and to you who listen !)
This Spirit, as I was saying, came down upon
the seventy Elders in the time of Moses ; and
this I say to thee, that I may now prove, that
He knoweth all things, and worketh as He wilt1.

4 S. Basil (ZV S/in'tu S. c. xvi. f 38), after quoting the same
passage. Col. i. 16, proceeds-sin nupionrre?, xai el Tivis cia-i*
erfpai AoyiKai ^va'eis ajcaToropaorot.
1 he last word shews that
Basil had in mind this passage of Cyril, who after the^namesof
nations in § 32, adds xat rove Aoin-ovc axarovoyxaffrovc ^^tc.
7 Matt. xi. 97.
6 1 Cor. ii. 10, 11.
_ . regard to the caution with which St.Cyril here speaks, we
must remember that the heresy of Macedonius had not yet given
occasion to the formal discussion and determination of the "nature
and substance" of the Holy Ghost.

5 Heb. i. 14.
8 John xvi. 13, 14.
9 In t

' 1 Cor. xii. 11.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

The seventy Elders were chosen ; And the
Lord came down in a cloud, and took of the
Spirit that was upon Moses, andput it upon the
seventy Elders * ; not that the Spirit was divided,
but that His grace was distributed in propor
tion to the vessels, and the capacity of the re
cipients. Now there were present sixty and
eight, and they prophesied ; but Eldad and
Modad were not present : therefore that it might
be shewn that it was not Moses who bestowed
the gift, but the Spirit who wrought, Eldad and
Modad, who though called, had not as yet pre
sented themselves, did also prophesy

26. Jesus the Son of Nun, the successor of
Moses, was amazed ; and came to him and said,
" Hast thou heard that Eldad and Modad are
prophesying ? They were called, and they came
not ; my lord Afoses, forbid them *."
" I cannot
forbid them," he says, " for this grace is from
Heaven ; nay, so far am I from forbidding
them, that I myself am thankful for it.
I think
not, however, that thou hast said this in envy ;
art thou jealous for my sake, because that they
prophesy, and thou prophesiest not yet ? Wait
for the proper season ; and oh that all the Lords
people may be prophets, whenever the Lord shall
give His Spirit upon them s / " saying this also
prophetically, whenever the Lord shall give ;
" For as yet then He has not given it ; so thou
hast it not yet."-Had not then Abraham
this, and Isaac, and Jacob, and Joseph ? And
they of old, had they it not ?
Nay, but the
words, " u'henever the Lordshallgive " evidently
mean " give it upon all ; as yet indeed the grace
is partial,then it shall be given lavishly." And he
secretly alluded to what was to happen among
us on the day of Pentecost ; for He H imself came
down among us. He had however also come
down upon many before. For it is written, And
Jesus the son of Nun was filled with a spirit of
wisdom; for Moses hadlaid his hands upon him6.
Thou seest the figure everywhere the same
in the Old and New Testament ;-in the days
of Moses, the Spirit was given by laying on
of hands; and by laying on of hands Peter'
also gives the Spirit. And on thee also,
who art about to be baptized, shall His grace
come ; yet in what manner I say not, for I will
not anticipate the proper season.

27. He also came down upon all righteous
men and Prophets ; Enos, I mean, and Enoch,
and Noah, and the rest ; upon Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob ; for as regards Joseph, even Pharaoh

» Num. xi. 24, 25. " Modad" is the form of the name in the
LXX.
3 The apocryphal book of Eldad and Modad is mentioned by
S. Basil, Liber de Sfir. S. cap.
Hermas, Shepherd, Vis. ii. | 3.
61, referring to Num. xi. 26, says that the Spirit rested permanently
4 Num. xi. 28.
only upon Eldad and Mudad.

5 Num. xi. 29.
7 Acts viii. 18. On this passage of Cyril, see the section on

6 Dcut. xxxiv. 0,

" Chrism " in the Introduction.

perceived that he had the Spirit of God within
him 8.
As to Moses, and the wonderful works
wrought by the Spirit in his days, thou hast
This Spirit Job also had, that
heard often.
most enduring man, and all the saints, though
we repeat not all their names. He also was
sent forth when the Tabernacle was in making,
and filled with- wisdom the wise-hearted men
who were with Bezaleel

in

the

rulers

Books of the

28. In the might of this Spirit, as we have it
in the Book of Judges, Othniel judged 1 ;
Gideon 3 waxed strong; Jephtha conquered3;
Deborah, a woman, waged war ; and Samson,
so long as he did righteously, and grieved
Him not, wrought deeds above man's power.
And as for Samuel and David, we have it
plainly
Kingdoms,
how by the Holy Ghost they prophesied
themselves, and were
of the pro
phets ;-and Samuel was called the Seer*;
and David says distinctly, The Spirit ofthe Lord
spake by me 5, and in the Psalms, And take not
thy Holy Spiritfrom me 6, and again, Thy good
Spirit shall lead me in the land of right
eousness''. And as we have it in Chronicles,
Azariah 8, in the time of King Asa, and Jahaziel'
in the time of King Jehoshaphat, partook of the
Holy Ghost ; and again, another Azariah, he
And Ezra says, Thou gavest
who was stoned
But as
also Thy good Spirit to instruct them 2.
touching Elias who was taken up, and Elisseus,
those inspired 3 and wonder-working men, it
is manifest, without our saying so, that they
were full of the Holy Ghost.

29. And if further a man peruse all the
books of the Prophets, both of the Twelve,
and of the others, he will find many tes
timonies concerning the Holy Ghost ;
as
when Micah says in
the person of God,
surely L will perfect power by the Spirit of
the Lord* ; and Joel cries, And it shall come
to pass afterwards, saith God, that L will
pour out My Spirit upon allflesh*, and the rest ;
and Haggai, Because L am with you, saith the
Lord of Hosts 6; and My Spirit remaineth in the
midst of you t ; and in like manner Zechariah,
But receive My words and My statutes which I
command by My Spirit, to My servants the Pro
phets6; and other passages.

30. Esaias

his majestic voice,
says, And the Spirit of God shall rest upon Him,

too, with

3 lb. xi. 20.

9 Ex. xxxi. i-6 ; xxxvi. x.
6 Ps. It. jt.
9 lb. xx. 14.

8 Gen. xli. 38.
■ lb. vi. 3^.
1 Judges Hi. zo.
4 j Sam.ix. 9.
S 2 Sam. xxtii. a.
7 Ps. cxliii. 10.
8 2 Chron. xv. 1.
* lb. xxiv. 20, ax.
3 Nrh. ix. 20. Ezra and Nehemiah form one book 11 Ezra" in
tve Hebrew Canon.
3 irvtynarojioptav, used only twice in the Sept. (Hosea ix. 7 ;
Ztph. iii. 4), and in an unfavourable sense. With Cyril's use of it
compare Theophilus, Ad Autolyc. ii. 9: 6cov artfoaiirovs' vyev
IxarofropovK Ilyev/iaros ayiov.

4 Mic. iii. 8.
7 lb. v 5,

5 Joel ii. 28.

8 Zech. i. 6.

6 Haggai ii. 4.

LECTURE XVI.

T23

the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit I
of cottnsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and]
goutiness ; andthe Spirit of thefear of God shall\
fill Him 9 ; signifying that the Spirit is one and j
Soj
undivided, but His operations various.
again, Jacob My servant,
/ have,
put My Spirit upon Him l. And again, / will
pour My Spirit upon thy seed2 ; and again, And
now the Lord Almighty and His Spirit hath sent
Me* ; and again, This is My covenant with them,
saith the Lord, My Spirit which is upon thee 4 ;
and again, The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me,
because He hath anointed Me*, and the rest ; and
again in his charge against the Jews, But they
rebelled and vexed His Holy Spirit6, and, Where
is He that put His Holy Spirit within them 7 ?
Also thou hast in Ezekiel (if thou be not now
weary of listening), what hasalready been quoted,
And the Spirit fell upon me, and said unto me,
But the words,
Speak ; Thus saith the Lord*.
fell upon mevre must understand in a good sense,
that is " lovingly ;" and as Jacob, when he had
found Joseph, fell upon his neck ; as also in the
Gospels, the loving father, on seeing his son
who had returned from his wandering, hadcom
passion, and ran andfell on his neck, and kissed
him 9. And again in Ezekiel, And he brought
me in a vision by the Spirit of God into Chaldcea,
to them of the captivity '. And other texts thou
heardest before, in what was said about Bap
tism ; Then will L sprinkle clean water upon
you 2, and the rest ; a new heart also will Igive
you, and a neiu spirit will L put within you 3 ;
and then immediately, And I witIput My Spirit
within you1'. And again. The hand of the Lord
was upon me, and carried me out in the Spirit
of the Lord s.

31. He endued with wisdom the soul of
Daniel, that young as he was he should become
a judge of Elders. The chaste Susanna was

9 Is. xi. ft.
5 lb. xlviii. 16.
6 lb. belli. 10.
Luke xv. 20.
9 Gen. xlvi. 29
» lb. xxxvi. 25 ; Cat. iii. 16.
* lb. f. if.

« lb. xliv. t ; xlii. i.
4 Is. lix. 2X.
7 V. II.

* Ezek. xxxvii. i.

a lb. xliv. 3.
5 Is. lxi. 1.

8 Ezek. xi. 5.
1 Ezrk. xi. 24.
3 lb. v.

condemned as a wanton ; there was none to
plead her cause ; for who was to deliver her
from the rulers ?
She was led away to death,
she was now in the hands of the executioners.
But her Helper was at hand, the Comforter,
the Spirit who sanctifies every rational nature.
Come hither to me, He says to Daniel ; young
though thou be, convict old men infected
with the sins of youth ; for it is written, God
raised up the Holy Spirit upon ayoung stripling 6;
and nevertheless, (to pass on quickly,) by the
sentence of Daniel that chaste lady was saved.
We bring this forward as a testimony ; for this
is not the season for expounding.
Nebuchad
nezzar also knew that the Holy Spirit was in
Daniel ; for he says to him, O Belteshazzar,
master of the magicians, ofwhom 1 know, that the
Holy Spirit of God is in thee''. One thing he
said truly, and one falsely ; for that he had the
Holy Spirit was true, but he was not the master
of the magicians, for he was no magician, but
was wise through the Holy Ghost. And before
this also, he interpreted to him the vision of the
Image, which he who had seen it himself knew
not ; for he says, Tell me the vision, which I
who saw it know not 8. Thou seest the power
of the Holy Ghost ; that which they who saw
it, know not, they who saw it not, know and in
terpret.

32. And indeed it were easy to collect very
many texts out of the Old Testament, and to
discourse more largely concerning the Holy
Ghost
But the time is short ; and we must be
careful of the proper length of the lecture.
Wherefore, being for the present content awhile
with passages from the Old Testament, we will, if
it be God's pleasure, proceed in the next Lec
ture to the remaining texts out of the- New
Testament.
peace,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, and through
the love of the Spirit, count all of you worthy
of His spiritual and heavenly gifts :-To whom
Amen.
be glory and power for ever and ever.

And may the God ot

' Susanna, v. 45.

f Dan. iv. g

• lb. ii. 26, 31.

LECTURE XVII.

Continuation of the Discourse on the Holy Ghost.

i Corinthians xii. 8.
For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, &e.

1. In the preceding Lecture, according to
our ability we set before, you, our beloved
hearers *, some small portion of the testimonies
concerning the Holy Ghost; and on the
present occasion, we will, if it be God's plea
sure, proceed to treat, as far as may be, of
those which remain out of the New Testament:
and as then to keep within due limit of your
attention we restrained our eagerness (for
there is no satiety in discoursing concerning
the Holy Ghost), so now again we must say
but a small part of what remains.
For now,
as well as then, we candidly own that our weak
ness is overwhelmed by the multitude of things
written. Neither to-day will we use the subtle
ties of men, for that is unprofitable ; but merely
call to mind what comes from the divine Scrip
tures : for this is the safest course, according
to the blessed Apostle Paul, who says, Which
things also we speak, not in words which man's
wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost
teacheth, comparing spiritual things with spiri
tual3. Thus we act like travellers or voyagers,
who having one goal to a very long journey,
though hastening on with eagerness, yet by
reason of human weakness are wont to touch
in their way at divers cities or harbours.

2. Therefore though our discourses con
cerning the Holy Ghost are divided, yet He
Himself is undivided, being one and the same.
For as in speaking concerning the Father, at
one time we taught how He is
the one
only Cause 3 ; and at another, how He is
called Father'*, or Almighty 5; and at an
other, how He is the Creator 6 of the universe ;
and yet the division of the Lectures made no
division of the Faith, in that He, the Object
of devotion, both was and is One ;- and

again, as in discoursing concerning the Onlybegotten Son of God we taught at one time
concerning His Godhead 7, and at another con
cerning His Manhood8, dividing into many dis
courses the doctrines concerning our Lord
Jesus Christ, yet preaching undivided faith
towards Him ;- so now also though the Lec
tures concerning the Holy Spirit are divided,
yet we preach faith undivided towards Him.
For it is one and the Self-same Spirit who
divides His gifts to every man severally as He
will'), Himself the while remaining undivided.
For the Comforter is not different from the
Holy Ghost, but one and the self-same, called
by various names ; who lives and subsists, and
speaks, and works; and of all rational natures
made by God through Christ, both of Angels
and of men, He is the Sanctifier'.

3. But lest any from lack of learning, should
suppose from the different titles of the HolyGhost that these are divers spirits, and not one
and the self-same, which alone there is, there
fore the Catholic Church guarding thee before
hand hath delivered to thee in the profession of
the faith, that thou "believe in one Holy
Ghost the Comforter, who spake by the
Prophets;" that thou mightest know, that
though His names be many, the Holy Spirit is
but one ;-of which names, we will now re
hearse to you a few out of many.

4. He is called the Spirit, according to the
Scripture just now read, For to one is given by
the Spirit the word of wisdom *. He is called
the Spirit of Truth, as the Saviour says, When
He, the Spirit of Truth, is ccme \ He is called
also the Comforter, as He said, For if Igo not
aiuay, the Comforter will not come unto you «.

1 rate

vfitTtpat aydintf oxocuc. Compare | 30, below :
trvyycifiTji' anu irapa r^s Vfirrtpat ayaTTij*.
Ignat. Philadglpk.
c. iv. (Long recension): OappStv ypapw rj} d£iodc<|» aya?rn vftMv.
" Caritas " is constantly used in the same manner.
5 lb. Tiii.
4 lb. vii.

3 Cat. vi.

* 1 Cor. ii. 13.
6 lb. ix.

8 lb. xii. xv.

1 Cat. x. xi.
1 Compare Basil.. de Sfi. Sancto, c. 38 : " By the Father's will
the ministering spirits subsist, and by the operation of the Son
they are brought into existence, and by the presence of the Holy
Ghost are perfected : and the perfection of Angels is sanctificatioa
and continuance therein."
3 John xvi. 13.

9 1 Cor. xti. 11.

9 r Cor. xii. 8.

* lb v. 7.

LECTURE XVII.

1 25

But that He is one and the same, though called
by different titles, is shewn plainly from the
following.
For that the Holy Spirit and the
Comforter are the same, is declared in those
words, But the Comforter, which is the Holy
Ghost* ; and that the Comforter is the same as
the Spirit of Truth, is declared, when it is said,
And I willgive you another Comforter, that He
may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of
Truth 6 ; and again, But when the Comforter is
come whom I will send unto you from the Father,
even the Spirit of Truth i.
And He is called
the Spirit of God, according as it is written,
And I saw the Spirit of God descending 8 ; and
again, For as many as are led by the Spirit of
God, they are the sons of God'9. He is called
also the Spirit of the Father, as the Saviour
says, For it is not ye ''fat speak, but the Spirit
of your Father which speaketh in you 1 / and
again Paul saitli, For this cause I bow my knees
unto the Father, and the rest ;
. that He
would grant you to be strengthened by His
Spirit*. He is also called the Spirit of the Lord,
according to that which Peter spake, Why is
it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit
of the Lord 11 He is called also the Spirit of
God and Christ, as Paul writes, But ye are not
in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be thai the
Spirit of God dwell in you. But if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His «.
He is called also the Spirit of the Son of God,
as it is said, And because ye are sons, God hath
sent forth the Spirit of His Son s. He is called
also the Spirit of Christ, as it
is written,
Searching what or 7vhat manner of time the
Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify6 ;
and again, Through your prayer, and the supply
ofthe Spirit offesus Christ

.

.

5. Thou wilt find many other titles of the
Thus He is called the
Holy Ghost besides.
Spirit of Holiness, as it is written, According
to the Spirit of Holiness 8 He is also called the
Spirit of adoption, as Paul saith, For ye received
not the spirit of bondage again unto fear, but ye
received the Spirit of adoption, whereby ice cry,\
Abba,Fither9. He is also called the Spirit of
revelation, as it is written, May give you the
Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knmeledge of Him *. He is also called the Spirit of
promise, as the same Paul says, In whom ye
also after that ye believed, were sealed tci/h the
Holy Spirit ofpromise 2. He is also called the
Spirit of grace, as when he says again, And
hath done despite to the Spirit ofgrace 3. And
by many other such-like titles is He named.

5 John xiv. 36.
* John i. 33.
» Eph. iii. 14-16.
S < ial. tv. 6.
8 Kom. i. 4.
■ I la. V. 13.

6 lb. vt>. 16, 17.
9 Rom. viii. 14.
3 Acts v. 9.
6 1 Pet. i. 11.
9 lb. viii. 15.

3 Heb.x. 39.

7 lb. xv. 26.
■ Matt. X. 90.
4 Rom. viii. 9.
7 Phil. i. 19.
1 Eph. i. 17.

And thou heardest plainly in the foregoing
Lecture, that in the Psalms He is called at one
time thegood Spirit*, and at another the princely
Spirit 5 ; and in Esaias He was styled the Spirit
of wisdom and understanding, of counsel, and
might, of knowledge, and of godliness, and of the
fear of God6. By all which Scriptures both
those before and those now alleged, it is estab
lished, that though the titles of the Holy Ghost
be different, He is one and the same ; living
and subsisting, and always present together
with the Father and the Son i ; not uttered or
breathed from the mouth and lips of the Father
or the Son, nor dispersed into the air, but
having a real substance 8, Himself speaking, and
working, and dispensing, and sanctifying ; even
as the Economy of salvation which is to usward
from the Father and the Son and the Holy
Ghost, is inseparable and harmonious and one,
For I wish you
as we have also said before.
to keep in mind those things which were lately
spoken, and to know clearly that there is not
one Spirit in the Law and the Prophets, and
another in the Gospels and Apostles ; but that
it is One and the Self-same Holy Spirit, which
both in the Old and in the New Testament,
spake the divine Scriptures

6. This is the Holy Ghost, who came upon
the Holy Virgin Mary ; for since He who was
conceived was Christ the Only-begotten, the
power of the Highest overshadoiveti her, and
the Holy Ghost came upon her ', and sanctified
her, that she might be able to receive Him, by
whom all things were made 2.
But I have no
need of many words to teach thee that that
generation was without defilement or taint, for
thou hast learned it.
It is Gabriel who says
to her, I am the herald of what shall be done,
but have no part in the work. Though an Arch
angel, I know my place ; and though I joyfully
bid thee All hail, yet how thou shalt bring forth,
is /not of any grace of mine.
The Holy Ghost
snail come upon thee, and the power of the
'Highest shall overshadow thee ;
therefore also
that Holy Thing which shall be born of Uiet shall
be called the Son of God

7. This Holy Spirit wrought in Elisabeth ;
for He recognises not virgins only, but matrons
also, so that their marriage be lawful. And

4 Cat xvi. 28 ; Ps. cxliii. 10.
5 ijytfioviKw, Sept. Ps. li. 12: R.V. Uphold me with a free
spirit.
6 Is. xi. 2.
7 Origen, in the Catena on St. John iii. 8 : " This also shews
that the Spirit is a Being (oviriav) : for He is not, as some suppose
an energy of God, having according to them no individuality
of subsistence. And the Apostle also, after enumerating the gifts
of the Spirit, immediately added, But ail these ivorketh the one
and the smite Spirit, dividing to each one severally as He will.
Now if He wiiUth and workelh and divideth, He is surely an
energizing Being, but not an energy" (Suicer,
Thesaurus.
Hrvvpai.
Cf. Cat. xi. to; xvi. 13, note 5.
1 Luke i. 35.

a John i. 3.

■ ivvKtHTTamv.
9 Cat. iv. 16: xvi. 4.
S I.uke i. 35.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost*, and
prophesied ; and that noble hand-maiden says
of her own Lord, And whence is this to me, that
the Mother of my Lord should come to me*1 For
Elisabeth counted herself blessed.
Filled with
this Holy Spirit, Zacharias also, the father of
John.prophesied6, telling how many good things
the Only-begotten should procure, and that
John should be His harbinger? through baptism.
By this Holy Ghost also it was revealed to just
Symeon, that he should not see death, till he had
seen the Lord's Christ* ; and he received Him
in his arms, and bore clear testimony in the
Temple concerning Him.

8. And John also, who had been filled with
the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb », was
for this cause sanctified, that he might baptize
the Lord ; not giving the Spirit himself, but
preaching glad tidings of Him who gives the
For he says, / indeed baptize you with
Spirit.
water unto repentance, but He that cometh after
me, and the rest ; He shall baptize you with the
Holy Ghost and with fire*. But wherefore with
fire? Because the descent of the Holy Ghost
was in fiery tongues ; concerning .which the
Lord says joyfully, I am come to sendfire on the
earth ; and what will L, ifit be already kindled'1 ?
9. This Holy Ghost came down when the
Lord was baptized, that the dignity of Him
as
who was baptized might not be hidden ;
John says, But He which sent me to baptize with
water, the same said unto me, Upon whomsoever
thou shall see the Spirit descending and remain
ing upon Him, the same is He which baptizeth
But see what saith the
with the Holy Ghost*.
Gospel ; the heavens were opened ; they were
opened because of the dignity of Him who
descended ; for, lo, he says, the heavens were
opened, and he saw the Spirit of God descending
as a dove, and lighting upon Him * :
that
is, with voluntary motion in His descent.
For it was fit, as some have interpreted,
that
of the
Holy Spirit promised to the baptized should
be conferred
the
upon the manhood of
But
Saviour, who is the giver of such grace.
perhaps He came down in the form of a dove,
as some say, to exhibit a figure of that dove
who is pure and innocent and undefiled, and
also helps the prayers for the children she has
begotten, and for forgiveness of sins 6 ; even as

the primacy and first-fruits '

5 lb. v. 43.

7 lb. v. 76.

6 lb. v. 67.

4 Luke i. 41.
8 Luke ii. 26-35.
9 Cat. in. 6.
1 Matt. iii. 11.
4 Matt. iii. 16.
3 John i. 33.
■ Luke xii. 49.
5 to* airapyas Kttl to irpwTfta. The order is inverted in the
translation.
txims £qA6v Tim «k
Cf. Hermas, Sim. viii. 7
oAAl)Aotf Trepi JTtHOTtiwV.
6 The Bcnelictinc Editor adds the two ast words rvtrov wapa-
$j)\ovv from MSS. Roe. Casanb. as necessary to the construction,
and adds the following note.
" The text thus emended is enpah'e
of two senses. The first, that the Holy Spirit came down in the
form of a dove, a pure and harmless bird, to shew that He is
Himself as it were a mystic dove in His simplicity and love of
children, for whose new birth and remission of sins at Baptism He

it was emblematically foretold
Christ
should be thus manifested in the appearance
of His eyes ;
for in the Canticles she cries
concerning the Bridegroom, and says, Thine
eyes are as doves by the rivers of rcater 7.

that

10. Of this dove, the dove of Noe, according
to some, was in part a figure8.
For as in his
time by means of wood and of water there
came salvation to themselves, and the begin
ning of a new generation, and the dove returned
to him towards evening with an olive branch ;
thus, say they, the Holy Ghost also descended
upon the true Noe, the Author of the second
birth, who draws together into one the wills of
all nations, of whom the various dispositions
of the animals in the ark were a figure : - Him
at whose coming the spiritual wolves feed with
the lambs, in whose Church the calf, and the
lion, and the ox, feed in the same pasture, as
we behold to this day the rulers of the world
guided and taught by Churchmen. The spiri
tual dove therefore, as some interpret, came
down at the season of His baptism, that
He might shew that it
is He who by the
wood of the Cross saves them who believe,
He who at eventide should grant salvation
through His death.

11. And these things perhaps should be
otherwise explained ; but now again we must
hear the words of the Saviour Himself con
cerning the Holy Ghost.
For He says, Except
a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God
And that
this grace is from the Father, He thus states,
How much more shallyour heavenly Father give
the Holy Spirit to them that ask him
And
that we ought to worship God in the Spirit,
He shews thus, But the hour cometh and now
is, when the true ivorshippers shall worship the
Father in Spirit and in truth ; for the Father
also seeketh such to worship Him. God is a Stnrit;
and they that worship Him must worship Him in
And again, But if I l>y the
spirit and in truth

unites His prayers with Christ's, as Cyril teaches in Cat. xvi. 20 :
and that Christ was for the like cause mystically foreshown in
'Canticles as having eyes like a dove's. The other sense is, that
the Spirit descended in the form of a dove onChrist's Humanity
in order to shew this to be as it were a dove in innocence, holiness,
love of children, and concurrence with the Holy Spirit in their
regeneration. . . . Either sense is admissible, and maintained by
many of the Fathers : but I prefer the former."
This interpretation is confirmed by Tcrtullian (de Baptumo, c. viii.), who
says that the Holy Spirit glided down on the Lord "inthe shape
of a dove" in order that the nature of the Holy Spirit might
be declared by means of a creature of simplicity and innocence."
The usual
meaning of o^>0aAuo^avwc is " manifestly to trie eyes," Esther
viii. 13.
" Just as after the waters of the deluge,
by which the old iniquity was purged-after the baptism, so to
say. of the world-a dove was the herald which announced to the
earth the assuagement of celestial wrath^ .... so to our fle*h,
as it emerges from the font after its old sins, flies the dove 01 the
Holy Spirit, bringing us the peace of God, sent out from heriven
where the Church is, the tvpified ark." Compare also Hippolytus.
Tht Holy Tkeophany, \\ 8, 9, a treatise with which Cyril hat
much in common.
9 John iii. 5.

eiri nAijpwpara vSotw** (Sept.).

8 Tertullian, ibid

7 Cant. v. 12.

» Luke xi. 13.

• John ir. 13.

«

LECTURE XVII.

Spirit of God cast out devils* ; and immediately
af terwards, Therefore I say unto you, All man
ner of sin and blasphemy shall beforgiven unto
men • but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost
shall not be forgiven.
And whosoever shall
speak a word against the Son of man, it shall
be forgiven him ; but whosoever shall speak a
word against the Holy Ghost, it shall not befor
given him, neither in this world, neither in the
world to come*. And again He says, And I
will pray the Father, and He shall give you
another Comforter, that He may be with you
for ever, the Spirit of Truth ; whom the world
cannot receive, because it seeth Him not, neither
' inoiveth Him ; but ye knorv Him, for He
abideth with you, and shall be in you s. And
again He says, These things have I spoken unto
you being yet present with you. But the Com
forter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in My name, He shall teach
you all things, and bring to your remembrance
all things that I said untoyou6. And again He
says, But when the Comforter is come, whom I
rcill send unto you from the Father, even the
Spirit of Truth, which proceedeth from the
Father, He shall testify of Me
And again the
Saviour says, For if I go not away, the Com
forter will not come unto you 8
And when
He is come, He will convince the world of sin, of
righteousness, and ofjudgment 9 ; and afterwards
again, / have yet many things to say unto you,
but ye cannot bear them now.
Howbeit, when
He the Spirit of Truth is come, Pie will declare
untoyou all the truth; for He shall not speakfrom
Himself ; but whatsoever He shall hear that
shall He speak, and He shall announce unto you
the things to come.
Pie shallglorify Me, for He
shall take of Mine, and shall announce it unto
you.
All things that the Father hath are mine ;
therefore said I, That He shall take of Mine, and
shall announce it unto you1.
I have read to thee
now the utterances of the Only-begotten Him
self, that thou mayest not give heed to men's
words.

12. The fellowship of this Holy Spirit He
bestowed on the Apostles ; for it is written,
And when He had said this, He breathed on
them, and saith unto tliem, Receive ye the Holy
Ghost ; whose soever sins ye remit, they are re
mitted unto them ; and whose soever sins ye
retain, they are retained'1.
This was the second
time He breathed on man (His first breath 3
having been stifled through wilful sins) ; that
the Scripture might be fulfilled, He went up
breathing upon thyface, and delivering thee from

3 Matt. xii. 28.
6 lb. V. 25.
9 lb. v. 8.
3 Gen. ii. 7

Compare Cat. xiv. 10.

4 lb. v. 31.
7 lb. xv. 26.
1 lb. v. 12-15.

5 John xiv. 16.
8 lb. xvi. 7.
• John xx. 22.

and breathed into kit nostrils the breath 0/life.

affliction*.
But whence went He up? From
Hades ; for thus the Gospel relates, that then
after His resurrection He breathed on them.
But though He bestowed His grace then, He
was to lavish it yet more bountifully ; and He
says to them, " I am ready to give it even now,
but the vessel cannot yet hold it ; for a while
therefore receive ye as much grace as ye can
bear ; and look forward for yet more ; but iarrv
ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be clothed
Receive it in part
ivith power from on highs.
now ; then, ye shall wear it in its fulness.
For
he who receives, often possesses the gift but in
part ; but he who is clothed, is completely
enfolded by his robe.
"Fear not," He says,
"the weapons and darts of the devil; for ye
shall bear with you the power of the Holy
Ghost."
But remember what was lately said,
that the Holy Ghost is not divided, but only
the grace which is given by Him.

13. Jesus therefore went up into heaven, and
fulfilled the promise.
For He said to them,
/ will pray the Father, and He shall give you
another Comforter6. So they were sitting, look
ing for the coming of the Holy Ghost ; and when
the day of Pentecost was fully come, here, in this
city of Jerusalem,-(for this honour also belongs
to us 1 ; and we speak not of the good things
which have happened among others, but of
those which have been vouchsafed among our
selves,)-on the day of Pentecost, I say, they
were sitting, and the Comforter came down from
heaven, the Guardian and Sanctifier of the
Church, the Ruler of souls, the Pilot of the
tempest-tossed, who leads the wanderers to the
light, and presides over the combatants, and
crowns the victors.

14. But He came down to clothe the Apos
tles with power, and to baptize them ; for the
Lord says, ye shall be baptized with the Holy
Ghost not many days hence 8. This grace was not
in part, but His power was in full perfection ; for
as he who plunges into the waters and is bap
tized is encompassed on all sides by the waters,
so were they also baptized completely by the
Holy Ghost. The water however Hows round the
outside only, but the Spirit baptizes also the soul
within, and that completely.
And wherefore
wonderest thou ?
'1'ake an example from mat
ter ; poor indeed and common, yet useful for
the simpler sort.
If the fire passing in through
the mass of the iron makes the whole of it

4 Nahura ii.

1. The Septuagint, followed by Cyril, differs
widely from the Hebrew: (R.V.) He that dasheth in pieces is
come Kf> before thy lace.
5 Luke xxiv. 39.
7 Cat. iii. 7 : xvi. 5. Bp. Pearson (Lettiones in Acta Apost. I.
I 18): "Rightly said Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, 'AH prero
gatives are with us.' And the Emperor Justin called her 'Mother
of the Christian name.' Jerome also (Efl. 17, 3), said: "the
whole mystery of our Faith is native of that prov ince and city.' "

6 John xiv. 16.

8 Ac:s i. 5.

'

CATECHETICAL LECTURBS.

fire, so that what was cokl becomes burning
and what was black is made bright,-if
fire
which is a body thus penetrates and works
without hindrance in iron which is also a body,
why wonder that the Holy Ghost enters into
the very inmost recesses of the soul ?

15. And lest men should be ignorant of the
greatnessof themightygiftcomingdown to them,
there sounded as it were a heavenly trumpet,
For suddenly there camefrom heaven a sound as of
the rushing ofa mighty wind?, signifying the pre
sence of Him who was to grant power unto men
to seize with violence the kingdom of God ; that
both their eyes might see the fiery tongues,
and their ears hear the sound. And it filled all
the house where they were sitting ; for the house
became the vessel of the spiritual water ; as
the disciples sat within, the whole house was
filled.
Thus they were entirely baptized ac
cording to the promise, and invested soul and
body with a divine garment of salvation. And
there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of
fire, and it sat upon each of them ; and they
were all filled with the Holy Ghost.
They
partook of fire, not of burning but of saving
fire ; of fire which consumes the thorns of sins,
but gives lustre to the soul.
This is now
coming upon you also, and that to strip away
and consume your sins which are like thorns,
and to brighten yet more that precious posses
sion of your souls, and to give you grace ; for
He gave it then to the Apostles.
And He sat
upon them in the form of fiery tongues, that
they might crown themselves with new and
spiritual diadems by fiery tongues upon their
heads. A fiery sword barred of old the gates of
Paradise ; a fiery tongue which brought salva
tion restored the gift.

16. And they began to speak with other tongues
. The Gali
as the Spirit gave them utterance '.
lean Peter or Andrew spoke Persian or Median.
John and the rest of the Apostles spake every
tongue to those of Gentile extraction ; for not
in our time have multitudes of strangers first
begun to assemble here from all quarters, but
they have done so since that time. W hat
teacher can be found so great as to teach men
all at once things which they have not learned ?
So many years are they in learning by gram
mar and other arts to speak only Greek well ;
nor yet do all speak this equally well ; the
Rhetorician perhaps succeeds in speaking well,
and the Grammarian sometimes not well, and
the skilful Grammarian is ignorant of the sub
jects of philosophy.
But the Holy Spirit
taught them many languages at once, lan
guages which in
they never
their
This is in truth vast wisdom, this is
knew.

life

all

9 Acts ii. a.

' lb. t>. 4.

power divine. What a contrast of their long
ignorance in time past to their sudden, com
plete and varied and unaccustomed exercise of
these languages !

17. The multitude of the hearers was con
founded ;-it was a second confusion, in the
room of that first evil one at Babylon.
For in
that confusion of tongue* there was division
of purpose, because their thought was at
enmity with God ; but here minds were re
stored and united, because the object of interest
was godly.
The means of falling were the
means of recovery. Wherefore they marvelled,
saying 2, How hear we them speaking? No mar
vel if ye be ignorant ; for even Nicodemus
was ignorant of the coming of the Spirit, and
to him it was said, The Spirit breatheth where it
listeth, and thou hearest the voice thereof but
canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it
goelli 3; but if, even though I hear His voice, I
know not whence he cometh, how can
explain, what He is Himself in substance?

18. But others mocking said, They are full
of new wine*, and they spoke truly though
For in truth the wine was new,
in mockery.
even the grace of the New Testament ; but
this new wine was from a spiritual Vine,
which had oftentimes ere this borne fruit in
Prophets, and had budded in the New Testa
For as in things sensible, the vine
ment.
ever remains the same, but bears new fruits
in
its seasons, so also the self-same Spirit
continuing what He is, as He had often wrought
in Prophets, now manifested a new and mar
For though His grace had come
vellous work.
before to the Fathers also, yet here it came
exuberantly ;
for formerly men only partook of
the Holy Ghost, but now they were baptized
completely.

19. Bur. Peter who had the Holy Ghost,
and who knew what he possessed, says, " Men
of Israel, ye who preach Joel, but know not
the things which are written, these men are not
drunken as ye suppose 5.
Drunken they are, not
however as ye suppose, but according to that
which is written, They shall be drunken with
the fatness of thy house ; and thou shall make
them drink of the torrents of thy pleasure6.
They are drunken, witTi a sober drunkenness,
deadly to sin and life-giving to the heart,
a drunkenness contrary to that of the body ;
for this last causes forgetfulness even of what
was known, but that bestows the knowledge
even of what was not known.
They are
drunken, for they have drunk the wine of the
spiritual vine, which says, I am the vine and ye

* Acts ii. 8.
3 John iii. 8: (R.V ) Tlu loind btmvdk: (Mar*.) Or, The
S/irit brcatlitth.
It is impossible to preserve the double meaning
in English.
S Iu. r. 15.

6 Ps. xxxvi. 8.

* Acts ii. 13.

LECTURE XVII.

T29

But if ye are not persuaded
are the branches t.
by me, understand what I
tell you from the
very time of the day ; for it is the third hour
of the day*.
For He who, as Mark relates,
was crucified at the third hour, now at the
third hour sent down His grace.
For His
gface is not other than the Spirit's grace,
but He who was then crucified, who also
gave the promise, made good that which
He promised. And if ye would receive a
testimony also, Listen, he says:
" But this
is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel ;
And it shall come to pass after this, saith God,
I will pour forth of My Spirit 9 "-(and this
word, I will pour forth, implied a rich gift ;
for God giveth not the Spirit by measure, for
the Father loveth the Son, and hath given all
things into His hand1 ; and He has given Him
the power also of bestowing the grace of the
All-holy Spirit on whomsoever He will) ;-
/ will pour forth of My Spirit upon all flesh,
and your sons and your daughters shall pro
phesy ; and afterwards, Yea, and on My ser
vants and on My handmaidens I will pour out
in those days of My Spirit, and they shall
prophesy1." The Holy Ghost is no respecter
of persons ; for He seeks not dignities, but
piety of soul.
Let neither the rich be puffed
up, nor the poor dejected, but only let each
prepare himself for reception of the Heavenly
gift.

20. We have said much to-day, and per
chance you are weary of listening ; yet more
still remains. And in truth for the doctrine
of the Holy Ghost there were need of a third
But we must
lecture ; and of many besides.
have your indulgence on both points.
For as
the Holy Festival of Easter is now at hand,
we have this flay lengthened our discourse ;
and yet we had not room to bring before you
all the testimonies from the New Testament
which we ought
For many passages are stili
to come from the Acts of the Apostles in
which the grace of the Holy Ghost wrought
mightily in Peter and in all the Apostles to
gether ; many also from the Catholic Epistles,
and the fourteen Epistles of Paul ; out of all
which we will now endeavour to gather a few,
like flowers from a large meadow, merely by
way of remembrance.

21. For in the power of the Holy Ghost,
by the will of Father and Son, Peter stood
with the Eleven, and lifting up his voice,
(according to the text, Lift up thy voice with
strength, thou that bringest good tidings to Jeru
salem*), captured in' the spiritual net of his
So great
words, about three thousand souls.

all

was the grace which wrought in
the
Apostles together, that, out of the Jews, those
crucifrers of Christ, this great number believed,
and were baptized in the Name of Christ, and
continued steadfastly in the Apostles' doctrine and
in the prayers*. And again in the same power
of the Holy Ghost, Peter and John went up
into the Temple at the hour of prayer, which
was the ninth hour*, and in the Name of Jesus
healed the man at the Beautiful gate, who had
been lame from his mother's womb for forty
years ;
that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken, Then shall the lame man leap as an
hart6. And thus, as they captured in the
spiritual net of their doctrine five thousand
believers at once, so they confuted the mis
guided rulers of the people and chief priests,
and that, not through their own wisdom, for
they were unlearned and ignorant wen 7, but
through the mighty power of the Holy Ghost ;
for it is written, 2 hen Peterfilled u<ith the Holy
Ghost said to them 8.
So great also was the
grace of the Holy Ghost, which wrought by
means of the Twelve Apostles in them who
believed, that they were of one heart and of one
soul*, and their enjoyment of their goods was
common, the possessors piously offering the
prices of their possessions, and no one among
them wanting aught ;
while Ananias and
Sapphira, who attempted to lie to the Holy
Ghost, underwent their befitting punishment.

22. And by the hands of the Apostles were
many signs and wonders wrought among the
people '. And so great was the spiritual grace
shed around the Apostles, that gentle as they
were, they were the objects of dread ; for of
the rest durst no man join himself to them ; but
the people magnified them ; and multitudes were
added of those who believed on the Lord, both of
men and women; and the streets were filled
with the sick on their beds and couches, that
as Peler passed by, at least his shadow might
overshadoiv some of them. And the multitude
also of the cities round about came unto this
holy Jerusalem, bringing sick folk, and them
that were vexed with unclean spirits, and they
were healed every one in this power of the Holy
Ghost

23. Again, after the Twelve Apostles had
been cast into prison by the chief priests for
preaching Christ, and had been marvellously
delivered from it at night by an Angel, and
were brought before them in the judgment
hall from the Temple, they fearlessly rebuked
them in their discourse to them concerning
Christ, and added this, that God hath also given
His Lloly Spirit to them that obey Him 3. And

7 John rr. 5.
» John iii. 34, 35.
VOL. VII.

8 Acts ii. 35, and 15.

3 Joel ii. 39.

9 Joel ii. 38.
3 Is. xl. 9.

4 Acts ii. 43.
7 Act> iv. 13.
1 Acts v. 13.

5 lb. iii. i.
8 lb. v. 8.
* lb. w. 13->6.

• Is. xxxv. 6.
9 lb. v. 33.
3 lb. v. 32.

K

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

when they had been scourged, they went their
way rejoicing, and ceased not to teach and
preach Jesus as the Christ

24. And it was not in the Twelve Apostles
only that the grace of the Holy Spirit wrought,
but also in the first-born children of this once
barren Church, I mean the seven Deacons ;
for these also were chosen, as it
is written,
being full of the Holy Ghost ami of wisdom 5.
Of whi m Stephen, rightly so named 6, the first
fruits of the Martyrs, a man ///// offaith and of
the Holy Ghost, wrought great wonders and
miracles among the people, and vanquished
those who disputed with him ; for they were
not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit by
which he spake 1.
But when he was maliciously
accused and brought to the judgment hall, he
was radiant with angelic brightness ; for all
they who sat in the council, looking steadfastly
on him, saw his face, as it had been the face of
an Angel*. And having by his wise defence
confuted the Jews, those stiffnecked men, uncircum ised in heart and ears, ever resisting the
Holy Ghost'9, he beheld the heavens opened, and
saw the Son of Man standing on the right hand
of God. He saw Him, not by his own power,
but, as the Divine Scripture says, being full of
the Holy Ghost, he looked up steadfastly into
heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus
standing on the right hand of God

25.

In this power of the Holy Ghost,
Philip also in the Name of Christ at one
time in the city of Samaria drove away the
unclean spirits, crying out with a loud voice;
and healed the palsied and the lame, and
brought to Christ great multitudes of them
that believe. To whom Peter and John came
down, and with prayer, and the laying on of
hands, imparted the fellowship of the Holy
Ghost, from which Simon Magus alone was
declared an alien, and that justly. And at
another time Philip was called by the Angel
of the Lord in the way, for the sake of that
most godly Ethiopian, the Eunuch, and heard
distinctly the Spirit Himself saying, Go near,
andjoin thyself to this chariot". He instructed
the Eunuch, and baptized him, and so having
sent into Ethiopia a herald of Christ, according
as it is written, Ethiopia shall soon stretch out
her hand unto God 3, he was caught away by
the Angel, and preached the Gospel in the
cities in succession.

26. With this Holy Spirit Paul also had been
filled after his calling by our Lord Jesus Christ!
Let godly Ananias come as a witness to what
we say, he who in Damascus said to him, The
Lord, evenJesus who appeared to thee in the way

which thou earnest, hath sent me, that thou mayest
receiw thy sight, and be filled with the Holy
Ghost*. And straightway the Spirit's mighty
working changed the blindness of Paul's eyes
into newness of sight ; and having vouchsafed
His seal unto his soul, made hima chosen vesse/to
bear the Mime of the Lord who had appeared to
him, befote kings and the children of Israel, and
rendered the former persecutor an ambassador
and good servant, -one, who from Jerusalem,
and even unto Illyricum, fully preached the
Gospel*, and instructed even imperial Rome,
and carried the earnestness of his preaching as
far as Spain, undergoing conflicts innumerable,
and performing signs and wonders. Of him
for the present enough.

27. In the power of the same Holy Spirit
Peter also, the chief of the Apostles and the
bearer of the keys 6 of the kingdom of heaven,
healed tineas the paralytic in the Name of
Christ at Lydda, which is now Diospolis, and at
Joppa raised from the dead Tabitha rich in good
works. And being on the housetop in a trance,
he saw heaven opened, and by means of the
vessel let down as it were a sheet full of beasts
of every shape and sort, he learnt plainly to
call no man common or unclean, though he
should be of the Greeks'. And when he was
sent for by Cornelius, he heard clearly the
Holy Ghost Himself saying, Behold, men seek
thee ; but arise and get thee doiem, and go ivii/i
them, nothing doubting ; for I have sent them 8.
And that it might be plainly shewn that those
of the Gentiles also who believe are made par
takers of the grace of the Holy Ghost, when
Peter was come to Cesarea, and was teaching
the things concerning Christ, the Scripture says
concerning Cornelius and them who were with
him ; While Peter yet spake these words, the
Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the
word ; so that they of the circumcision also which
came with Peter were astonished, and when- they
understood it said that on the Gentiles also was
poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost

28. And in Antioch also, a most renowned
city of Syria, when the preaching of Christ
took effect, Barnabas was sent hence as far as
Antioch to help on the good work, being a good
man, andfull of the Holy Ghost, and offaith 1 ;
who seeing a great harvest of believers in Christ,
brought Paul from Tarsus to Antioch, as his
fellow-combatant. And when crowds had been
instructed by them and assembled in the
Church, it came to pass that the disciples were
called Christians first in Antioch *; the Holy
Ghost, methinks, bestowing on the believers
that new Name, which had been promised be-

4 Acta v. 42.

'a crown.''
' lb. v. 55.

7 lb. r. 10.

5 lb. vi. 3.
' lb. viii. 5.

8 Jb. v. 15.

« lb. v. 8.
3 Ps. Ixviii. 31.

Irf^aiot,
9 lb, vii. 51.

4 Acts ix. 17.

5 Rom. xv. ig.

* rAei£ovxoc.

xvi. 19 ; Cat. ii. 19 ; xi. 3.
» lb. v. 44.

> lb. xi. 94.

7 Acts x. 11-16.
" lb. v. a6.

Cf. Mats,
8 lb. v. 19
Cf. Is. Ixv. 15.

LECTURE XVII.

fore by the Lord. And the grace of the Spirit
being shed forth by God more abundantly in
Antioch, there were there prophets and teachers
of whom Agabus was one 3. And as- they minis
teredto the Lord andfasted, the Holy Ghost said,
Separate Me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have called them. And after hands
had been laid on them, they were sent forth by
the Holy Ghost*. Now it is manifest, that the
Spirit which speaks and sends, is a living Spirit,
subsisting, and operating, as we have said.

29. This Holy Spirit, who in unison with
Father and Son has established the New Cov
enant in the Church Catholic, has set us free
from the burdens of the lawgrievous to be borne,
-those I mean, concerning things common
and unclean, and meats, and sabbaths, and
new moons, and circumcision, and sprinklings,
and sacrifices ; which were given for a season,
and had a shadow of the good things to come 5,
but which, when the truth had come, were
rightly withdrawn.
For when Paul and Bar
nabas were sent to the Apostles, because of
the question moved at Antioch by them who
said that it was necessary to be circumcised
and to keep the customs of Moses, the Apos
tles who were here at Jerusalem by a written
injunction set free the whole world from all the
legal and typical observances; yet they attri
buted not to themselves the full authority in
so great a matter, but send an injunction in
writing, and acknowledge this : For it hath
seemed good unto the Holy Ghost and to us, to
lay upon you no greater burden than these neces
sary things ; that ye abstain from things sacri
ficed to idols, and from blood, and from things
strangled, and from fornication6 ; shewing evi
dently by what they wrote, that though the
writing was by the hands of human Apostles,
yet the decree is universal from the Holy
Ghost : which decree Paul and Barnabas took
and confirmed unto all the world.

30. And now, having proceeded thus far in

my discourse, I ask indulgence from your love
or rather from the Spirit who dwelt in Paul, if
I should not be able to rehearse everything, by
reason of my own weakness, and your weariness
who listen. For when shall I in terms worthy of
Himself declare the marvellous deeds wrought
by the operation of the Holy Ghost in the
Those wrought in Cyprus
Name of Christ?
upon Elymas the sorcerer, and in Lystra at the
healing of the cripple, and in
Cilicia and
Phrygia and Galatia and Mysia and Macedonia?
or those at Philippi (the preaching, I mean,
and the driving out of the spirit of divination
in the Name of Christ ; and the salvation by

3 Acts xi. 38.
4 lb. xiii. 2-4.
6 Acts xv. 28, 2g._ ivHTTokq means a message or injunction

S Her., x. I.
7 See note 1 on | i, above.

whether verbal or written.

baptism of the jailer with his whole house at
night after the earthquake) ; or the events at
Thessalonica ; and the address at Areopagus
in the midst of the Athenians ; or the instruc
tions at Corinth, and in all Achaia ? How shall
I worthily recount the mighty deeds which were
wrought at Ephesus through Paul, by the Holy
Ghost8 ? Whom they of that City knew not be
fore, but came to know Him by the doctrine of
Paul ; and when Paul had laid his hands on
them, and the Holy Ghost had come upon
them, they spake with tongues, and prophe
sied. And so great spiritual grace was upon
him, that not only his touch wrought cures,
but even thz handkerchiefs and napkins*,hrought
from his body, healed diseases, and scared away
the evil spirits ; and at last they also who prac
tised curious arts brought their books together,
and burned them before all men

31. I pass by the work wrought at Troas on
Eutychus, who being borne down by his steepfell
down from the third loft, and was taken up dead ;
yet was saved alive by Paul3.
I also pass by
the prophecies addressed to the Elders of
Ephesus whom he called to him in Miletus,
to whom he openly said, That the Holy Ghost
7citnesseth in every city, saying 1,-and the rest ;
for by saying, in every city, Paul made manifest
that the marvellous works done by him in each
city, were from the operative power of the Holy
Ghost, by the will of God, and in the Name of
Christ who spake in him.
By the power of this
Holy Ghost, the same Paul was hastening to
this holy city Jerusalem, and this, though
Agabus by the Spirit foretold what should
befall him ; and yet he spoke to the people
with confidence, declaring the things concern
ing Christ. And when brought to Cesarea,
and set amid tribunals of justice, at one time
before Felix, and at another before Festus the
governor and King Agrippa, Paul obtained of
the Holy Ghost grace so great, and triumphant
in wisdom, that at last Agrippa himself the king
of the Jews said, Almost thou persuadest me to be
a Christian *. This Holy Spirit granted to Paul,
when he was in the island of Melita also,
to receive no harm when bitten by the viper,
and to effect divers cures on the diseased.
This Holy Spirit guided him, the persecutor
of old, as a herald of Christ, even as far as
imperial Rome, and there he persuaded many
of the Jews to believe in Christ, and to them
who gainsaid he said plainly, Well spake the
Holy Ghost by Esaias the Prophet, saying unto
your fathers, and the rest 5.

8 Acts xix. r-6.
9 lb. v. ia.
a lb. xx. p-13.
4 lb. xxvi. aS. Cyril evidently understood iv oAtyw to mi*an
" almost " (A.V.) : but the more correct rendering is, '* In brie'
thou wouldest persuade me to become a Christian.

1 lb. p. 19.

8 lb. ti. aa..

5 lb. xxviii. 25.

K 2

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

32. And that Paul was full of the Holy
Ghost, and all his fellow Apostles, and they
who after them believed in Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, hear from himself as he writes
plainly in his Epistles ; And my speech, he says,
and my preaching was not in persuasive words
of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the
Spirit and ofpower t. And again, But He who
sealed us for this very purpose is God, who gave
us the earnest ofthe Spirit 7. And again, He that
raised up Jesus from the dead shall also quicken
your mortal bodies by His Spirit which dwelleth
in you*. And again, writing to Timothy, That
good thing which was committed to thee guard
through the Holy Ghost which was given to us 9.
33. And that the Holy Ghost subsists, and
lives, and speaks, and foretells, I have often said
in what goes before, and Paul writes it plainly to
Timothy : Now the Spirit speaketh expressly,
that in later times some shall depart from the
faith »,- which we see in the divisions not only
of former times but also of our own ; so motley
and diversified are the errors of the heretics.
And again the same Paul says, Which in other
generations was not made known unto the sons
of men, as it hath now been revealed unto His
Holy Apostles and Prophets in the Spirit *. And
again, Wherefore, as saith the Holy Ghost* ; and
again, The Holy Ghost also witnesseth to us*.
And again he calls unto the soldiers of right
eousness, saying, And take the helmet of salva
tion, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God, with all prayer and supplication s.
And again, Be not drunk with wine, wherein is
excess ; but be filled with the Spirit, speaking to
yourselves in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual
songs 6. And again, Thegrace of the LordJesus,
and the love of God, and the communion of the
Holy Ghost be with you alii.

34. By all these proofs, and by more which
have been passed over,is the personal, and sanc
tifying, and effectual power of the Holy Ghost
established for those who can understand ;
for the time would fail me in my discourse if
I wished to quote what yet remains concerning
the Holy Ghost from the fourteen Epistles of
Paul, wherein he has taught with such variety,
completeness, and reverence.
And to the
power of the Holy Ghost Himself it must
belong, to grant to us forgiveness for what
we have omitted because the days are few,
and upon you the hearers to impress more
perfectly the knowledge of what yet remains ;
while from the frequent reading of the sa
cred Scriptures those of you who are diligent

in us.

7 2 Cor. i. 22.

* I Cor. M. 4.
9 a Tim. i. 14: (R.V.) by tht Holy Ghost whi h dwelleth
1 1 Tim. iv. 1.
* lb x. 15.
7 3 Cor. x.ii. 14.

' Eph. iii. 5.
5 Eph. vi. 17.

6 Rom. viii. n.

* lb. v. 18, 19.

3 Heb. iii. 7.

Faith

come to understand these things, and by this
time, both from these present Lectures, and
from what has before been told you, hold more
steadfastly, the
in " One God the
Father Almighty ; and in our Lord Jesus
Christ, His Oni.y-begotten Son ; and in
the Holy Ghost the Comforter." Though
the word itself and title of Spirit is ap
plied to Them in common in
the sacred
Scriptures,-for it is said of the Father, God
is a Spirit3, as it
is written in the Gospel
according to John ; and of the Son, A Spirit
before our face, Christ the Lord?, as Jeremias
the prophet says ; pud of the Holy Ghost,
the Comforter, the Holy Ghost1, as was said;
-yet the arrangement of articles
the
understood, disproves
Faith,
the error of Sabellius also 2.
Return we there
fore in our discourse to the point which now
presses and is profitable to you.

religiously

in

if

in

35. Beware lest ever like Simon thou come
to the dispensers of Baptism in hypocrisy,
thy heart the while not seeking the truth.
It
is ours to protest, but it is thine to secure thyself.
if
If thou standest in faith 3, blessed art thou ;
thou hast fallen
unbelief, from this day
forward cast away thine unbelief, and receive
full assurance.
For, at the season of baptism,
when thou art come before the Bishops, or
Presbyters, or Deacons'*, -(for its grace is every
where, in villages and in cities, on them of low
as on them of high degree, on bondsmen and
on freemen, for this grace is not of men, but
the gift is from God through men,)- approach
the Minister of Baptism, but approaching, think
not of the face of him thou seest, but remember
this Holy Ghost of whom we are now speaking.
For He is present in readiness to seal thy soul,
'and He shall give thee that Seal at which evil
spirits tremble, a heavenly and sacred seal, as
also it is written, //; whom also ye belin-cd, and
were sealed with the Holy Spirit ofpromise s.

36. Yet He tries the soul. He casts not His
pearls before swine ; if thou play the hypocrite,
though men baptize thee now, the Holy Spirit
But if thou approach
will not baptize thee 6.
with faith, though men minister in what is
seen, the Holy Ghost bestows that which is
unseen. Thou art coining to a great trial,

Lord : referring to the captive king.
the ertor of Sabellius in confusing them.

8 John iv. 94.
Tht breath oftmr nostrils, the anointed oftht
9 Lain. iv. 2o.
1 John xiv. 25.
a The distinct mention in the Creed of three Persons excludes
Cf. Cat. iv. 8 ; xvi. 14.
3 Rom. xi. 20.
4 Cf. P.ingham, Antiquities, II. xx. 9. "When Cyril directs
his Catechumens how they should behave themselves at the time
of Baptism, when they came either before a bishop, or presbyter,
or deacon, in city or village,-this may be presumed a fair inlima.
tion that then deacons were ordinarily allowed to minister Baptism
in country places."
See further ' Of she power granted anciently
to deacons to baptize,' Bingham, Lay Baptism, I. i. 5.
5 Kph. i. 13.
6 Cf. Procat. I 4 : " Ihe water will receive, but the Spirit will
not accept thee."

Cf. Cat. 1. 2, 3.

LECTURE XVII.

to a great muster
in that one hour, which if
thou throw away, thy disaster is irretrievable ;
but if thou be counted worthy of the grace,
thy soul will be enlightened, thou wilt re
ceive a power which thou hadst not, thou
wilt receive weapons terrible to the evil spirits;
and if thou cast not away thine arms, but keep
the Seal upon thy soul, no evil spirit will ap
proach thee ; for he will be cowed ; for verily
by the Spirit of God are the evil spirits cast
out.

37. If thou believe, thou shalt not only re
ceive remission of sins, but also do things
And mayest thou
which pass man's power 8.
For
be worthy of the gift of prophecy also !
thou
grace according to the
measure of thy capacity and not of my words ;
for I may possibly speak of but small things,
yet thou mayest receive greater ; since faith
All thy life long will thy
is a large affair*.

receive

shalt

Cf. Cat. iii. 3, fiiXXtr* <rrpaToAoycIfffttt.

7 <rrpaTo\<yyia.
* The same twofold grace is ascribed to Baptism in Cat. xiii.
33 : " Thou receivest now remission of thy sins, and the gifts of
the King's spiritual bounty."
Cf. a Tim. u. 4 ; and Luke xix. 13 : Tradt
(irpa}>iar«WQ &t) tilt I COIH4%

9 rpay/AKTcta.

guardian the Comforter abide with thee ; He
will care for thee, as for his own soldier ; for
thy goings out, and thy comings in, and thy plot
ting foes.
And He will give thee gifts of grace
of every kind, if thou grieve Him not by sin ;
for it is written, And grieve not the Holy Spirit
of God, whereby ye were sealed unto the day of
redemption '. What then, beloved, is it to pre
serve grace?
Be ye ready to receive grace,
and when ye have received it, cast it not
away.

38. And may the very God of All, who spake
by the Holy Ghost through the prophets, who
sent Him forth upon the Apostles on the flay
of Pentecost in this place, Himself send Him
forth at this time also upon you ; and by Him
keep us also, imparting His benefit in common
to us all, that we may ever render up the fruits
of the Holy Ghost, love, joy, peace, long-suffer'
ing, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, tem
perance', in Christ Jesus our Lord :-By whom
and with whom, together with the Holy Ghost,
be glory to the Father, both now, and ever, and
Amen.
for ever and ever.

t

1 Kob. it. -

' Gal. v. aj, 13.

LECTURE XVIII.

On the Words, And in One Holy Catholic Church, And in the Resurrection
of the Flesh, And the Life Everlasting.

Ezekiel xxxvii. I.

TJie hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried me out in the Spirit of the Lord,
and set me down in the midst of the valley which wasfull of bones.

in

believing

1. The root of all good works is the hope
of the Resurrection ; for the expectation of
the recompense nerves the soul to good works.
For every labourer is ready to endure the toils, if
he sees their reward in prospect ; but when men
weary themselves for nought, their heart soon
sinks as well as their body. A soldier who
expects a prize is ready for war, but no one is
forward to die for a king who is indifferent
about those who serve under him, and bestows
In like manner
no honours on their toils.
every soul
Resurrection is
a
naturally careful of itself; but, disbelieving it,
abandons itself to perdition. He who believes
that his body shall remain to rise again, is
careful of his robe, and defiles it not with
fornication ; but he who disbelieves the Resur
rection, gives himself to fornication, and mis
uses his own body, as though it were not his
Faith therefore in the Resurrection of
own.
the dead, is a great commandment and doctrine
of the Holy Catholic Church ; great and most
ncessary, though gainsaid by many, yet surely
warranted by the truth.
Samaritans 2 disbelieve it, heretics 3 mutilate it ;
•the contradiction is manifold, but the truth is
uniform.

Greeks contradict it

2. Now Greeks and Samaritans together ar
gue against us thus. The dead man has fallen,
and mouldered away, and is all turned into
worms ; and the worms have died also ; such is
the decay and destruction which has over
taken the body ; how then is it to be raised ?
The shipwrecked have been devoured by fishes,
which are themselves devoured. Of them who
fight with wild beasts the very bones are ground
to powder, and consumed by bears and lions.
Vultures and ravens feed on the flesh of the

» Cf. $ 12, below.

1 Acts xvii. 32; xxvi. 34.
3 Tertull. De Resurr. carnis, cap. 2 : " They acknowledge
a half-resurrection, to wit of the soul only." Compare Iren. 1.
xxiii. 5, on Mcnander's assertion that his disciples attain to the
resurrection by being baptized into him, and can die no more, but
retain immortal youth: id. xxiv. 5.
Basilides taught that "salvation belongs to the soul alone." On other forms of heresy
concerning the Resurrection, see Suicer, TAesaurus, 'Avaffrcwns.

unburied dead, and then fly away over all the
world ; whence then is the body to be col
lected ?
For of the fowls who have devoured
it some may chance to die in India, some in
Persia, some in the land of the Goths. Other
men again are consumed by fire, and their
very ashes scattered by rain or wind ; whence
is the body to be brought together again « ?

3. To thee, poor little feeble man, India is far
from the land of the Goths, and Spain from
Persia ; but to God, who holds the whole earth
in the hollow of His hand*, all things are near
at hand.
Impute not then weakness to God,
from a comparison of thy feebleness, but rather
Does then the sun, a
dwell on His power6.
small work of God, by one glance of his
beams give warmth to the whole world ; does
the atmosphere, which God has made, encom
pass all things in the world ; and is God, who
is the Creator both of the sun, and of the
atmosphere, far off from the world?
Imagine
a mixture of seeds of different plants (for as
thou art weak concerning the faith, the ex
amples which I allege are weak also), and
that these different seeds are contained in thy
single hand ; is it-then to thee, who art a man,
a difficult or an easy matter to separate
what is in thine hand, and to collect each
seed according to its nature, and restore it
Canst thou then separate
to its own kind ?
the things in thine hand, and cannot God
separate the things contained in His hand,
and restore them to their proper place? Con
sider what I say, whether it is not impious to
deny it ?

attend, I

4. But further,

the
very principle of justice, and come to thine
own case.
Thou hast different sorts of ser
vants : and some are good and some bad ;

pray,

to

4 The objections noticed in 8 2 are discussed by Athenagoras,
De Resurr. capp. ii., iv.-viii. ; Tatian. Or. ad Graecos. cap. vi.,
Tertull. De Resurr. Cam. cap. 63.
6 On the argument from fiod's power compare Athenagor
De Resurr. c. ix ;
Justin. M. De Resurr. c. v; TheophiL ad
Autolyc. c. xiii. ; Iren. V. iii. s.

5 Is. xl. 12.

LECTURE XVIII.

Nay, to deny it is impious.

thou honourest therefore the good, and smitest '
the bad. And if thou art a judge, to the good
thou awardest praise, and to the transgressors,
Is then justice observed by
punishment.
thee a 'mortal man ; and with God, the ever
changeless King of all, is there no retributive
justice??
For
consider what I say.
Many murderers have
died in their beds unpunished ; where then is
Yea, ofttimes a
the righteousness of God ?
murderer guilty of fifty murders is beheaded
once ; where then shall he suffer punishment
for the forty and nine?
Unless there is a
judgment and a retribution after this world,
unrighteousness.
thou
Marvel not, however, because of the delay of
the judgment ; no combatant is crowned or
disgraced, till the contest is over ; and no
president of the games ever crowns men while
yet striving, but he waits till all the combatants
are finished, that then deciding between them
he may dispense the prizes and the chaplets8.
Even thus God also, so long as the strife
in
this world lasts, succours the just but
partially," but afterwards He renders to them
their rewards fully.

chargest God with

5. But if according to thee there is no
resurrection of the dead, wherefore condemnest
thou the robbers of graves ?
For if the body
perishes, and there is no resurrection to be
hoped for, why does the violator of the tomb
undergo punishment? Thou seest that though
thou deny it with thy lips, there yet abides
with thee an indestructible instinct of the
resurrection.

6. Further, does a tree after it has been
cut down blossom again, and shall man after
being cut down blossom no more? And does
the corn sown and reaped remain for the
threshing floor, and shall man when reaped
from this world not remain for the threshing?
And do shoots of vine or other trees, when
clean cut off and transplanted, come to life
and bear fruit ; and shall man, for whose
sake all these exist, fall into the earth and not
rise again ? Comparing efforts, which is greater,
to mould from the beginning a statue which
did not exist, or to recast in the same shape
Is God then, who
that which had fallen ?
created us out of nothing, unable to
raise
again those who exist and are fallen?? But
thou believest not what is written of the
resurrection, being a Greek : then from the

7 The argument from God's justice is treated by Athenngor.
De Resurr. c. x. and xx.-xxiii. ; Justin M. De Reittrr. c. yiii.
Cf. Pind. Ot. via. 13 ;
Roc. Cas. A.
8 rrtv irrtjiavn'ttopiav.
Eurip. Electr. 862.
9 Athcuag. De Resurr. c. iii. : " If, when they did not exist.
He made at their first formation the bodies of men, and their
original elements, He will, when they are dissolved, in whatever
manner that may take place, raise them again with equal ease."
Lactant. Inttitt. VII. 23 (in. : Apast. Const. V 7.

I analogy of nature consider these matters, and
understand them from what is seen to this
day.
Wheat, it may be, or some other kind
of grain, is sown ; and when the seed has
it dies and rots, and is henceforth
fallen,
useless for food.
But that which has rotted,
springs up in verdure ; and though small when
sown, springs up most beautiful. Now wheat
was made for us ; for wheat and all seeds were
created not for themselves, but for our use;
are then the
things which were made for
us quickened when they die, and do we for
whom they were made, not rise again after
our death 1 ?

7. The season is winter 2, as thou seest ; the
trees now stand as if they were dead :
for
where are the leaves of the fig-tree ? where
are the clusters of the vine ?
These in winter
time are dead, but green in spring ; and when
the season is come, .there is restored to them
a quickening as it were from a state of death.
For God, knowing thine unbelief, works a resur
rection year by year in these visible things ;
that, beholding what happens to things inani
mate, thou mayest believe concerning things
animate and rational.
Further, flies and bees
are often drowned in water, yet after a while
revive ^ ; and species of dormice4, after remain
ing motionless during the winter, are restored
in the summer (for to thy slight thoughts like
examples are offered) ; and shall He who to
irrational and despised creatures grants life
supernaturally, not bestow it upon us,
for
whose sake He made them ?

8. But the Greeks ask for a resurrection of
the dead still manifest ; and say that, even if
these creatures are raised, yet they had not
utterly mouldered away ; and they require
to see distinctly some creature rise again after
complete decay. God knew men's unbelief,
and .provided for this purpose a bird, called
This bird, as Clement writes, and
a Phoenix s.

1 An eloquent statement of the argument for the resurrection
from the analogies of nature occurs in Tertull. De Restitr. c. xti.
That it was not unknown to Cyril, seems probable from the con
cluding sentence: "And surely if all things rise again for man,
for whom they have been provided-but not for man unless for
his flesh also-how can the flesh itself perish utterly, for the sake
and service of which nothing is allowed to perish."
Terlullian
himself was probably indebted, as Bp. Lightfoot suggests, to
Ct. Lactant. Div. Insi.
Clemens. Rom. Epist. ad Corinth, xxiv.
vii. 4.2 Cf. Cat. iv. 30. These passages shew that the Lectures were
delivered in a year when Easter fell early, as was the case in
348 A.U.

3 In such cases there is, of course, no actual death.
4 The ^ivofoc is supposed by the Benedictine Editor to be the
toad (" Inventusque cavisbufo," Virg. Georg. i. 185), by others the
marmot (inus Alptnus). More probably it is the dormouse (myoxis
glis), which stores up provisions for the winter, though it sleeps
through much of that season.
5 The story of the Phcenix as told by Herodotus, II. 73, is as
follows : " They have also another sacred bird called the phoenix,
which I myself have never seen, except in pictures.
Indeed it is
a great rarity even in Egypt, only coining there (according to the
! accounts of the people of Heliopolis) once in five hundred years,
] when the old phienix dies. . . . They tell a story of what this liiH
! does, which does not seem to me to be credible . that he conies at.1

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

as many more relate, being the only one of its
kind6, arrives in the land of the Egyptians at
periods of five hundred years, shewing forth
the resurrection, not in desert places, lest the
occurrence of the mystery should remain un
known, but appearing in a notable city
that
men might even handle what would otherwise
be disbelieved.
For it makes itself a coffin 8 of
frankincense and myrrh and other spices, and
entering into this when its years are fulfilled,
it evidently dies and moulders away.
Then
from the decayed flesh of the dead bird a worm
is engendered, and this worm when grown large
is transformed into a bird ;-and do not dis
believe this, for thou seest the offspring of
bees also fashioned thus out of worms', and
from eggs which are quite fluid thou hast seen
wings and bones and sinews of birds issue.
Afterwards the aforesaid Phcenix, becoming
fledged and a full-grown Phcenix, like the
former one, soars up into the air such as it
had died, shewing forth to men a most evident
resurrection of the dead. The Phcenix indeed
is irrational, nor
is a wondrous bird, yet it
flies abroad
to God ;
ever sang praise
through the sky, but it knows not who is the
Only-begotten Son of God. Has then a resur
rection from the dead been given to this ir
rational creature which knows not its Maker,
and to us who ascribe glory to God and keep
His commandments, shall there no resurrection
be granted ?

it

9. But since the sign of the Phcenix is re
mote and uncommon, and men still disbelieve
our resurrection, take again the proof of this
from what thou seest every day. A hundred
or two hundred years ago, we all, speakers and

* fiovoytves virapvor. Clem. Rom. vbi supra.

ihe way from Arabia, and brings the parent bird, all plastered
over with myrrh, to the temple of the Sun, and there buries the
body."
Tne many variations and fabulous accretions of the story are
detailed by Suicer, Thesaurus, votrt£, and by Hp. Lightfoot in
a long and interesting note on Clemens Rom. Epist. ad Cor. xxv.
Cyril borrows the story from Clement almost verbally, yet not
without some variations, which will be noticed below. The legend
with all its miraculous features is told bv Ovid, Metamorph. XV.
i >2, by Claudian, Phoenix, and by the Pseudo-Laclantiiis in an
fclegiac poem, Phanix, included in Weber's Corpus Poetarum
Latinorum, and literally translated in Clark's Aute-A'icene
Library.
See also Tertull. De Resurr. Cam. c. xiii.
Cf. Origen.
contra Celsum, iv. 98 : Apost. Const. V. 7 : "a bird single in its
kind, which they say is without a mate, and the only one in the
creation."
M Hoc nemus hos lucos avis incolit unica, phcenix,
7 "By day, in the sight of all" (Clem. R.) The city was
Heliopolis, according to Herodotus and the other ancient authois.
But Milton, "Paradise Lost, V. 27a-
' A phtnix gaz'd by all, as that sole bird,
When to enshrine his reliques in the Sun's
Bright temple to Egyptian Thebes he flies.'
Why does Milton despatch his oird to Thebes rather than Helio
polis?" 1 Lightfoot).
8 Ovid, Met. xv. 405: " Fertque pius cunasque suas patriumque sepulcrum." See the Commentaries on Jol» xxix. 18 : / shall
die in my nest, and I shall multiply my days as the sand.
Margin R.V. Or, thepha-nix.
9 The mode of reproduction in bees was regarded by Aristotle
as mysterious, having in it something supernatural (0ttor): De
In the story of ihe phuenix
Generatione Animal. 111. 10. 1, 37.
Herodotus makes no mention of the " worm."

Pseudo-Lactant. v. 30.
Unica( sed vivit morte tefecta sua."

hearers, where were we ? Know we not the
groundwork of the substance of our bodies?
Knowest thou not how from weak and shape
less and simple1 elements we are engendered,
and out of what is simple and weak -a living
man is formed ? and huw that weak element
being made flesh is changed into strong sinews,
and- bright eyes, and sensitive nose, and hear
ing ears, and speaking tongue, and beating
heart, and busy hands, and swift feet, and into
members of all kinds2? and how that once
weak element becomes a shipwright, and "a
builder, and an architect, and a craftsman of
various arts, and a soldier, and a ruler, and
a lawgiver, and a king? Cannot God then, who
has made us out of imperfect materials, raise
us up when we have fallen into decay? He
who thus frames a body out of what is vile,
cannot He raise the fallen body again ? And
He who fashions that which is not, shall He
not raise up that which is and is fallen?

10. Take further a manifest proof of the re
surrection of the dead, witnessed month by
month in the sky and its luminaries3. The body
of the moon vanishes completely, so that no
part of it is any more seen, yet it fills again,
and is restored to its former state *> ; and for the
perfect demonstration of the matter, the moon
at certain revolutions of years suffering eclipse
and becoming manifestly changed into blood,
yet recovers its luminous body : God having
provided this, that thou also, the man who art
formed of blood, mightiest not refuse credence
to the resurrection of the dead, but mightest
believe concerning thyself also what thou seest
These therefore use
in respect of the moon.
thou as arguments against the Greeks ;
for
with them who receive not what is written
fight thou with unwritten weapons, by reason
ings only and demonstrations ; for these men
know not who Moses is, nor Esaias, nor the
Gospels, nor Paul.

11. Turn now to the Samaritans, who, re
ceiving the Law only, allow not the Prophets.
To them the text just now read from Ezekiel
appears of no force, for, as I said, they admit
no Prophets ; whence then shall we persuade
the Samaritans also ?
Let us go to the writ
ings of the Law. Now God says to Moses, /
am the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of
Jacob s / this must mean of those who have be
For if Abraham has
ing and subsistence.

1 M ot-Oftiijs.
a For a similar argument, see Lactam. De Resurr. c. xvii.
3 Clem. Rom. Epist. ad Cor. xxiv: "Day and night shew
unto us the resurrection. The night falleth asleep, and day ariseth ;
the day departeth, and night comcth on."
4 Tertull. de Resurr. Carnis, xii. : " Readomcd also are the
mirrors of the moon, which her monthly course had worn away.". . .
•' The whole of this revolving order ot things bears witness to the
resurrection of the dead."
Cf. Matt. xxii. 31 : He is not the God0/the dead,
5 Ex iii. 6.
but oj the liviHf.

LECTURE XVIII.

'37

come to an end, and Isaac and Jacob, then He
is the God of those who have no being. When
did a king ever say, I am the king of sol
diers, whom he had not ? When did any
display wealth which he possessed not ? There
fore Abraham and Isaac and Jacob must
subsist, that God may be the God of those
who have being ; for He said not; " I was their
God," but/a;«. And that there is a judgment,
Abraham shews in saying to the Lord, He who
judgeth all the earth, shall He not execute judg
ment 6 1

12. But to this the foolish Samaritans ob
ject again, and say that the souls possibly
of Abraham and Isnac and Jacob continue,
but that their bodies cannot possibly rise
Was it then possible that the rod
again.
of righteous Moses should become a
ser
pent, and is it impossible that the bodies of
the righteous should live and rise again? And
was that done contrary to nature, and shall
they not be restored according to nature?
Again, the rod of Aaron, though cut off and
dead, budded, without the scent of waters i,
and though under a roof, sprouted forth into
blossoms as in the fields ; and though set in
dry places, yielded in one night the flowers
and fruit of plants watered for many years.
Did Aaron's rod rise, as it were, from the dead,
and shall not Aaron himself be raised ? And
did God work wonders in wood, to secure to
him the high-priesthood, and will He not vouch
safe
to Aaron himself? A
woman also was made salt contrary to nature ;
and flesh was turned into salt ; and shall not
flesh be restored to flesh ? Was Lot's wife made
a pillar of salt, and shall not Abraham's wife be
raised again ? By what power was Moses' hand
changed, which even within one hour became
Certainly
as snow, and was restored again?
by God's command. Was then His command
of force then, and has it no force now ?

resurrection

a

13. And whence in the beginning came
man into being at
all, O ye Samaritans,
most senseless of all men ? Go to the first
book of the Scripture, which even you re
ceive ; And God formed man of the
dust
of the ground*.
Is dust transformed into
flesh, and shall not flesh be again restored
to flesh ? You must be asked too, whence
the heavens had their
being, and earth,
and seas ?
Whence sun, and moon, and
stars ? How from the waters were made the
things which fly and swim ? And how from
earth all its living things? Were so many
myriads brought from nothing into being, and
shall we men, who bear God's image, not be
full of unTruly this course is
raised up ?

6 Gen. xviii. 25.

7 Job xiv. 9.

8 Gen. ii. 7.

belief, and the unbelievers are much to be
condemned ; when Abraham addresses the
Lord as the Judge of all the earth, and the
is
learners of the Law disbelieve; when it
written that man is of the earth, and the readers
disbelieve it ».

For if it

14. These questions, therefore, are forthem,
the unbelievers : but the words of the Prophets
But since some who
are for us who believe.
have also used the Prophets believe not what is
written, and allege against us that passage, The
ungodly shall not rise up in judgment
and, For
if man go down to the grave he shall come up no
more'', and, The dead shall not praise Thee, O
Lord*, - for of what is well written, they have
made ill use-it will be well in a cursory
manner, and as far as is now possible, to
meet them.
is said, that the un
godly shall not rise up in judgment, this shews
rise, not in judgment, but
that they shall
in condemnation ;
for God needs not long
scrutiny, but close on the resurrection of the
ungodly follows also their punishment.
And
if it is said, The dead shall not praise Thee, O
Lord, this shews, that since in this life only is
the appointed time for repentance and pardon,
for which they who enjoy it shall praise the
Lord, it remains not after death for them who
have died in sins to give praise as the receivers
of a blessing, but to bewail themselves ; for
praise belongs to them who give thanks, but
to them who are under the scourge, lamenta
tion.
Therefore the just then offer praise ; but
they who have died in sins have no further
season for confession \

15. And respecting that passage, If a man
go down to the grave, he shall come up no more,
observe what follows, for it is written, He shall
come up no more, neither shall he return to his
For since the whole world shall
07cn house.
pass away, and every house shall be destroyed,
how shall he return to his own house, there
being henceforth a new and different earth ?
But they ought to have heard Job, saying, For
there is hope of a tree; for if it be cut down, it will
sprout again, and the lender branch thereof will
For though the root thereof wax old
not cease.
in the earth, and the stock thereof die in the rocky
ground; yet from the scent of water it will
bud, and bring forth a crop like a new plant.
But man when he dies, is gone ; and when mortal
man falls, is he no more s ? As it were remonstratirg and reproving (for thus ought we to

9 The anomalous construction orav yeypatrnu .... koX iiriffTtovtv may be explained by the consideration, that the uncertainly
expressed in orav attaches only to the latter Verb. See Winer's
Grammar ofN. T. Gnek, P. III. sect. xlii. 5-
'
1's i.5: Tktviicktd shall not ttand in thtjnagmenl (R.V'.).
3 Ps. cxv. 17.
3 Job vii. 9.
< As to the bearing of this passage on the doctrine of Purgatory
and prayer for the dead see note on xxiii. 10.
5 Job xiv. 7-10.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

read the words is no more with an interroga
tion6); he says since a tree falls and revives,
shall not man, for whom all trees were made,
himself revive? And that thou mayest not
suppose that I am forcing the words, read
what follows ; for after saying by way of ques
tion, When mortal man falls, is he no more f he
says, For if a man die, he shall live again i ; and
immediately he adds, I will wait till I be made
again 8 / and again elsewhere, Who shall raise
up on the earth my skin, which endures these
things'). And Esaias the Prophet says, The dead
men shall rise again, and they that are in the
tombs shall awake
And the Prophet Ezekiel,
now before us, says most plainly, Behold I will
open your graves, and bring you up out of your
graves2. And Daniel says, Many of them that
sleep in the dust of the earth shall arise, some to
everlasting life, and some to everlasting shame 3.
1 6. And many Scr'ptures there are which
testify of the Resurrection of the dead ; for
there are many other sayings on this matter.
But now, by way of remembrance only, we will
make a passing mention of the raising of
l^azarus on the fourth day ; and just allude,
because
time,
shortness
to
the widow's son also who was raised,
and merely for the sake of reminding you, let
me mention the ruler of the
synagogue's
daughter, and the rending of the rocks, and
how there arose many bodies of the saints
which slept *, their graves having been opened.
But specially be it remembered that Christ
has been raised from the deads.
I speak but
in passing of Elias, and the widow's son w hom
he raised ; of Elisseus also, who raised the
dead twice ; once in his lifetime, and once
after his death.
For when alive he wrought
the resurrection by means of his own soul 6 ;
but that not the souls only of the just might be
honoured, but that it might be believed that in
the bodies also of the just there lies a power,
the corpse which was cast into the sepulchre of
Elisseus, when it touched the dead body of the
prophet, was quickened, and the dead body of
the prophet did the work of the soul, and that
which was dead and buried gave life to the
dead, and though it gave life, yet continued
itself among the dead.
Lest if
Elisseus should rise again, the work should be

Wherefore ?

the

the

of

of

6 There is no indication of a question in the Septuagint version
of the passage, which means in the Hebrew, and where is het
(A.V. and R.V.): Vulg. mil, quceso,est'
7 Job xiv. 14 : For ifa man die, shall he live again f (A.V.
and R.V.). By omitting the interrogation here, and inserting it
above in v. to, Cyril exactly inverts the meaning.
8 lb. p. 14: (A.V.) All the days of my appointed time
(R.V. ofmy warfare) -will I wait, tilt my chinge (R. V. release)
come.
9 Job xix. 26 : (R.V.) and that he shall stand up at the last
rtfion the earth : and after my skin hath been thu t destroyed, cW.
» Is. xxvi. 19.
Cyril, as usual, follows the Siptuagint.
* Malt, xxvii. 5a.

3 Dan. xii. a.

a Erck. xxxvii. ta.
5 1 Cor. xv. 20.

6 2 Kings i». 34.

ascribed to his soul alone ; and to shew, that
even though the soul is not present, a virtue
resides in the body of the saints, because of
the righteous soul which has for so many years
dwelt in it, and used it as its minister
And
let us not foolishly disbelieve, as though this
thing had not happened : for if handkerchiefs
and aprons, which are from without, touching
the bodies of the diseased, raised up the sick,
how much more should the very body of the
Prophet raise the dead ?

17. And with respect to these instances we
might say much, rehearsing in detail the mar
vellous circumstances of each event ; but as you
have been already wearied both by the super
posed fast of the Preparation8, and by the watchings °, let what has been cursorily spoken con
cerning thein suffice for a while ; these words
having been as it were sown thinly, that you,
receiving the seed like richest ground, may in
bearing fruit increase them.
But be it remem
bered, that the Apostles also raised the dead ;
Peter raised Tabitha in Joppa, and Paul raised
Eutychus in Troas ; and thus did all the other
Apostles, even though the wonders wrought by
each have not all been
Further,
remember all the sayings in the first Epistle to
the Corinthians, which Paul wrote against them
who said, How are the dead raised, and with

written.

1 "The worship of relics, and the belief in them as remedies
and a protection against evil, originated in the 4th century.
They first (?) appear in writings, none of which are earlier than
the year 370 : but they prevailed rapidly when they had once
taken root" (Scudamore, Diet, Chr. Antiq. " Relics," p. 1770).
Bingham {Ant, xxiii. 4, f 7) quotes a law of Thcodosius, "that
no one should remove any dead body that was buried, from one
place to another ; that no one should sell or buy the relics of
Martyrs : but if any one was minded to build over the gtave.
where a martyr was buried, a church to be called a martyrinm,
in re.pect to him, he should have liberty to do it." The law
wholly failed to suppress a superstition which was sanctioned
by such men as Cyril, Basil, Chrysostura, Ambrose, and Augustine.
8 it ttj« vrtp0<o~emc T^s injtrrtiat r^t a-apatntcinjf, Ed. Bened.
"The ecclesiastical term njs vnrpSiaeiot we have rendered, ac
cording to the interpretation received among the latins, by the
word ' superpositio.' The ancients meant by it a fast continued for
two or three days without food.
Moreover, since the great week
was observed with severer fastings, there were many who passed
either the whole week or four, three, or two days, namely the
Preparation and the Holy Sabl ath (Easier Eve), entirely fasting,
as is testified by S. Irenxus (Euseb. Hist, V. 24) and others.
The continuance of the fast throughout the Friday and Saturday
was highly approved, as may be seen from the Apostolical Con.
stitutions,\. 18." The passage referred to is as follows: "Do
you therefore fast on the days of the Passover, beginning from the
second day of the week until the Preparation and the Sabbath,
six days, making use only of bread, and salt, and herbs, and water
for your drink : but abstain on these days irom wine and flesh, for
they are days oflamentation and not of fasting. Do ye who are ahle
fast throughout the Preparation and the Sabbath entirely, tasting
nothing till the cockcrowing at night ; but if any one is not able
to combine them both, let the Sabbath at least be observed."
9 The fast of the Great Sabbath was to be continued through
the night, as prescribed in the Afiost. Const. V. 19: "Continue
until cock-crowing and break off your fast at dawn of the first day
of the week, which is the Lord's day. keeping awake from evening
until cock-crowing : and assembling together in the Church,
watch and pray and beseech God, in your night-long vigil, reading
the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms, until the crowing of the
cocks: and after baptizing your Catechumens, and reading the
Gospel in fear and trembling, and speaking to the people the
things pertaining to salvation, so cease from your mourning."
A chief reason for the watching was that Christ was expected
to return at the same hour in which He rose. On the meaning of
"superposition" see Routh's note on the Synodical Epistle of
Iren;cus to Victor of Rome (Rell. Sac. ii. p. 45, ss.), and the
passage ot Dionysius of Alexandria there quoted.

LECTURE XVIII.

what manner of body do they come *f And how
he says, For if the dead rise not, then is not
Christ raised2; and how he called them fools 3,
who believed not ; and remember the whole of
his teaching there concerning the resurrection
of the dead, and how he wrote to the Thessalonians, But we would not haveyou to be ignorant,
brethren, concerning them which are asleep, thai
ye sorrow not, even as the rest which have no
hope'', and all that follows : but chiefly that, And
the dead in Christ shall rise first s.

18. But especially mark this, how very
pointedly6 Paul says, For this corruptible must
put on interruption, and this mortal must put
on immortality '.
For this body shall be raised,
not remaining weak as now ; but raised the very
same body, though by putting on incorruption it
shall betashionedanew8,-as iron blendingwith
fire becomes fire, or rather as He knows how, the
This body therefore shall
Lord who raises us.
be raised, but it shall abide not such as it now
is, but an eternal body ; no longer needing for
its life such nourishment as now, nor stairs for
its ascent, for it shall be made spiritual, a mar
vellous thing, such as we cannot worthily speak
Then, it is said, shall the righteous shine
of.
forth as the sun?, and the moon, and as the
brightness of thefirmament io. And God, fore
knowing men's unbelief, has given to little
worms in the summer to dart beams of light
from their body % that from what is seen, that
which is looked for might be believed ; for He
who gives in part is able to give the whole
also, and He who made the worm radiant with
light, will much more illuminate a righteous
man.

19. We shall be raised therefore, all with
our bodies eternal, but not all with bodies
alike : for if a man is righteous, he will receive
a heavenly body, that he may be able worthily
to hold converse with Angels ; but if a man is
a sinner, he shall receive an eternal body, fitted
to endure the penalties of sins, that he may
burn eternally in fire, nor ever be consumed 2.
And righteously will God assign this portion to
for we do nothing without
either company ;
the body. We blaspheme with the mouth,
and with the mouth we pray.
With the body
we commit fornication, and with the body we
keep chastity.
With the hand we rob, and by
the hand we bestow alms ; and the rest in like

> lb. v. 16.

3 lb. p. 36.

5 lb. v. 16.

1 I Cor. xv. 35.
< 1 Thess. iv. 13.
6 fiovovov\i fiaxTvAoSctjtrbiv.
7 i Cor. xv. 53.
8 ftcran-otciTat. The meaning of this word as applied to the
Eucharstic elements is fully uiscussed, and illustrated from its
u*c by Cyril and other Fathers, by Dr. Pusey (A'eal Presence,
p. 189).

5 Matt. xiii. 43.
1 Cyril refers to the glnw-worm (irvYcAa/xiric, Aristot
8 Cf. Cat. iv. 31.

flist.
Attimat V. 19. 14), or some other species of Lampyris (Arist.
de Partilus Animal. I. 3. 3).

10 Dan. xii. 3.

manner.
Since then the body has been our
minister in all things, it shall also share with
us in the future the fruits of the past 3.

20. Therefore, brethren, let us be careful of
our bodies, nor misuse them as though not our
own.
Let us not say like the heretics, that
this vesture of the body belongs not to us, but
Jet us be careful of it as our own ; for we must
give account to the Lord of all things done
through the body.
Say not, none seeth me ;
think not, that there is no witness of the deed.
Human witness oftentimes there is not; but
He who fashioned us, an unerring witness,
abides faithful in heaven «, and beholds what
thou doest. And the stains of sin also remain
in the body ; for as when a wound has gone
deep into the body, even if there has been
a healing, the scar remains, so sin wounds soul
and body, and the marks of its scars remain in
all ; and they are removed only from those who
receive the washing of Baptism.
The past
wounds therefore of soul and body God heals
by Baptism ; against future ones let us one
and all jointly guard ourselves, that we may
keep this vestment of the body pure, and
may not for practising fornication and sensual
indulgence or any other sin for a short season,
lose the salvation of heaven, but may inherit
the eternal kingdom of God ; of which may
of you
God, of His own grace, deem all
worthy.

21. Thus much in proof of the Resurrection
of the dead ; and now, let me again recite to
you the profession of the faith, and do you
with all diligence pronounce it while I speak
and remember it.

22. The Faith which we rehearse contains
in order the following, "And in one Baptism
of repentance for the remission of sins;
and in one Holy Catholic Church ; and
in the resurrection of thf. flesh; and
in eternal life."
Now of Baptism and
repentance I have spoken in the earliest Lec
tures ; and my present remarks concerning
the resurrection of the dead have been made
with reference to the Article " In the resur
rection of the flesh." Now then let me finish
what still remains to be said for the Article,
"In one Holy Catholic Church," on which,
though one might say many things, we will
speak but briefly.

23. It is called Catholic then because it

3 tup yevoulvuv. With the reading ytvofiiwv (Codd. Monn.
Vind.), the meaning will be-"share with us in the future what
shall happen to us then." On the argument of this section com
pare the pa>sages quoted on § 4. note 7.
4 Ps. Ixxxix. 37.
5 Cat. V. 1a, notes 7 and 4.

Cf. Plat. Theaet. 204 c :

tKatr-rni Ae'f«*K, "each time we speak."

T40

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

extends over all the world, from one end of
the earth to the other ; and because it teaches
universally and completely one and all the
doctrines which ought to come to men's know
ledge, concerning things both visible and in
visible, heavenly and earthly6; and because it
brings into subjection to godliness the whole
vace of mankind, governors and governed,
learned and unlearned ; and because it uni
versally treats and heals the whole class of
sins, which are committed by soul or body,
and possesses in itself every form of virtue
which is named, both in deeds and words, and
in every kind of spiritual gifts.

24. And it is rightly named (Ecclesia) because
it calls forth » and assembles together all men ;
according as the Lord says in Leviticus, And
make an assembly for all the congregation at the
door ofthe tabernacle of witness 8. And it is to be
noted, that the word assemble, is used for the
first time in the Scriptures here, at the time
when the Lord puts Aaron into the Highpriesthood.
And in Deuteronomy also the
Lord says to Moses, Assemble the people unto
Me, and let them hear My words, that they may
learn to fear Me?. And he again mentions the
name of the Church, when he says concerning
the Tables, And on them were written all the
words which the Lord spake with yon in the
mount out of the midst of thefire in the day of
the AssemblyTM ; as if he had said more plainly,
in the day in which ye were called and
gathered together by God.
The Psalmist also
says, / will give thanks unto Thee, O Lord, in
thegreat Congregation ; I willpraise Thee among
much peofle '.

25. Of old the Psalmist sang, Bless ye God
in the congregations, even the Lord, (ye that are)
from the fountains of Lsracl*.
But after the
Jews for the plots which they made against
the Saviour were cast away from His grace,
the Saviour built out of the Gentiles a second
Holy Church, the Church of us Christians,
concerning which he said to Peter, And upon
this rock L will build My Church, and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it 3.
And David prophesying of both these, said
plainly of the first which was rejected, / have
hated the Congregation of evil doers*; but of

* Bishop Lightfost {Tgnathis, ad Smvrnaeos, viii.) traces the
original and Inter senses of the word ''Catholic" very fully.
" In its earliest usages, therefore, as a fluctuating epithet of
fKK\T)<riat ' catholic 1 me.ins 4 universal,' as opposed to " individual,'
' particular.1
In its later sense, as a fixed attribute, it implies
orthodoxy as opposed 10 heresy, conformity as opposed to dissent."
Commenting on this passage of Cyril, the Bishop adds that "these
two latter reasons, that it (the Church) is comprehensive in doc
trine, and that it is universal in application, can only be regarded
as secondary glosses."
7 eKimAcIatfat.
8 Lei . viii. 3 : iKK^ijataaov.
9 Dent. iv. 10.
1 Ps. xxxv. 18; Heb. ii. zl.
Matt. xvi. 18.

10 lb. ix. 10: fKitAqtrtac.
4 Ps. xxvi. 5.

» Ps. Ixviii. 26 : iv «KitA*<rtaic.

Cf. Heh. xii. 33.

(as also it

the second which is built up he says in the
same Psalm, Lord, I have loved the beauty of
Thine house 5; and immediately afterwards. In
the Congregations will L bless thee, O Lord6. For
now that the one Church in Judaea is cast
off, the Churches of Christ are increased over
all the world ; and of them it is said in the
Psalms, Sing unto the Lord a new song, His
praise in the Congregation of Saints 7. Agree
ably to which the prophet also said to the
Jews, / have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord
Almighty* ; and immediately afterwards, For
from the rising of the sun even unto the going
down of the same, My name is glorified among
the Gentiles ». Concerning this Holy Catholic
Church Paul writes to Timothy, That thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in
the House of God, which is the Church of the
Living God, the pillar and ground if the truth'.
26. But since the word Eccle>ia is applied
to different things
is written of
the multitude in the theatre of the Ephesians, And when he had thus spoken, he dis
missed the Assembly*), and since one might
properly and truly say that there is a Chunk
of evil doers, I mean the meetings of the here
tics, the Marcionists and Manichees, and the
rest, for this cause the Faith has securely
delivered to thee now the Article, " And in one
Holy Catholic Church ;" that thou mayest
avoid their wretched meetings, and ever abide
with the Holy Church Catholic in which thou
wast regenerated. And if ever thou art sojourn
ing in cities, inquire not simply where the Lord's
House is (for the other sects of the profane
also attempt to call their own dens houses
of the Lord), nor merely where the Church is,
but where is the Catholic Church.
For this
is the peculiar name of this Holy Church, the
mother of us all, which is the spouse of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Only-begotten Son of
God (for it is written, As Christ also loved the
Church and gave Himself for iti, and all the
rest,) and is a figure and copy of Jerusalem
which is above, which is free, and the mother
of us all* ; which before was barren, but now
has many children.

27. For when the first Church was cast off,
in the second, which is the Catholic Church,
God hath set, as Paul says, first Apostles,
secondly Prophets, thirdly teachers, then mir
acles,
helps, govern
ments, divers kinds of tongues*, and every
sort of virtue,
I mean wisdom and under
standing, temperance and justice, mercy and
loving-kindness, and patience unconquerable

then gifts of healings,

5 Ps. xxvi. 8 : Sept. rvwpixttav. R.V. and A.V. "habitation/
6 lb. f. ta.
9 lb. v. it.
3 Eph. v. 25.

8 Mai. i. 10.
9 Acts xix. 14.
5 t Cor. xii. 38.

1 Ps. cxltx. 1.
1 Tim. iii. 15.
4 Gal. iv. 26.

LECTURE XVIII.

in persecutions.
She, by the armour of right
eousness on the right hand and on the left,
by honour and dishonour 6, in former days amid
persecutions and tribulations crowned the holy
martyrs with the varied and blooming chaplets
of patience, and now in times of peace by
God's grace receives her due honours from
kings and those who are in high place 1, and
from every sort and kindred of men. And
while the kings of particular nations have
bounds set to their authority, the Holy Church
Catholic alone extends her power without
limit over the whole world ; for God, as it
is written, hath made her border peace*.
But
I should need many more hours for my dis
course, if I wished to speak of all things which
concern her.

28. In this Holy Catholic Church receiving
instruction and behaving ourselves virtuously,
we shall attain the kingdom cf heaven, and
inherit eternal life; for which also we
toils, that we may be made par
endure all
For ours is no
takers thereof from the Lord.
trifling aim, but our endeavour is for eternal life.
Wherefore in the profession of the Faith, after
the words, "And in the resurrection of
the flesh," that is, of the dead (of which
we have discoursed), we are taught to believe
also "In the life Eternal," for which as
Christians we are striving.

29. The real and true

life then is the
Father, who through the Son in the Holv
Spirit pours forth as from a fountain His
heavenly gifts to all ; and through His love to
man, the blessings of the life eternal are pro
mised without fail to us men also. We must
not
disbelieve the possibility of this, but
having an eye not to our own weakness but
to His power, we must believe ; for with God
all things are possible.
And that this is pos
sible, and that we may look for eternal life,
Daniel declares, And of the many righteous
shall they shine as the stars for ever and ever 9.
And Paul says, And so shall we be ever with
Ihe Lord'1 : for the beingfor ever with the Lord
implies the life eternal.
But most plainly
of all the Saviour Himself says in the Gospel,
And these shall go away into eternal punish
ment, but the righteous into life eternal''.

30. And many are the proofs concerning
the life eternal.
And when we desire to
gain this eternal life, the sacred Scriptures
suggest to us the ways of gaining it ; of which,
because of the length of our discourse, the
texts we now set before you shall be but few,
the rest being left to the search of the diligent.
8 Ps- cxivii. 14.
3 Matt. xxv. 46.

6 2 Cor. vi. 7, 8.
9 Dan. xii. 3, Sept.

I Tim. ii. a.
1 1 Thess. iv. 17.

They declare at one time that it is by faith ;
for it is written, He that beliaieth on the Son
hath eternal life 3, and what follows ;
and
again He says Himself, Verily, verily, I say
unto you, He that hearelh My word, and be
lieve!h Him that sent Me, hath eternal life*,
and the rest.
At another time, it is by the
preaching of the Gospel ; for He says, that He
that reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit
At another time, by martvrunto life eternal
dom and confession in Christ's name; for He
says, And he that hateth his life in this world,
shall keep it unto life eternal*.
And again, by
preferring Christ to riches or kindred; And
every one that hath forsaken brethren, or sisters'',
and the rest, shall inherit eternal life.
More
over it
is by keeping the commandments,
Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shalt not
kill*, and the rest which follow ; as He answered
to him that came to Him, and said, Good
Master, what shall I do that I may have eternal
life1) ? But further, it is by departing from evil
works, and henceforth serving God ; for Paul
says, A'ut now being made free from sin, and
become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto
sandification, and the end eternal life '.

31. And the ways of finding eternal life are
many, though I have passed over them by
reason of their number.
For the Ford in His
loving-kindness has opened, not one or two
only, but many doors, by which to enter into
the life eternal, that, as far as lay in Him,
all might enjoy it without hindrance.
Thus
much have we for the present spoken within
compass concerning the life eternal, which
is the last doctrine of those professed in the
Faith, and its termination ; which life may we
all, both teachers and hearers, by God's grace
enjoy !

32. And now, brethren beloved, the word
of instruction exhorts you all, to prepare your
souls for the reception of the heavenly gifts.
As regards the Holy and Apostolic Faith de
to you to profess, we have spoken
livered
through the grace of the Lord as many Lectures,
as was possible, in these past days of Lent ; not
that this is all we ought to have said, for many
are the points omitied ; and these perchance are
thought out better by more excellent teachers.
But now the holy day of the Passover is at
hand, and ye, beloved ' in Christ, are to be
enlightened by the Laver of regeneration. Ye
shall therefore again be taught what is requi-

3 John iii. 36.
' lb. v. 24.
6 lb. xii. 25.
7 Malt- xix. 39.
9 Mark x. 1 7.
2 Tjjs u^iere'pas iv Xpiirry ayctwni.

8 lb. w. id"-x8.
Cf. Cat. xvii. 1, note I.
Athan. Episl. ad Ef>ict. % 2 : irapd rjj <rfi 0eo'jt)S. ia. adSerap. iv. 1 :
jrapa rijf trqf evAa/Sffafc

1 Rom. vi. aa.

5 lb. iv. 36.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

site, if God so will ; with how great devotion
and order you must enter in when summoned,
for what purpose each of the holy mysteries of
Baptism is performed, and with what reverence
and order you must go from Baptism to the
Holy Altar of God, and enjoy its spiritual
and heavenly mysteries ; that your souls being
previously enlightened by the word of doc
trine, ye may discover in each particular the
greatness of the gifts bestowed on you by
God.

the assembly into

33. And after Easter's Holy Day of sal
vation, ye shall come on each successive clay,
beginning from the second day of the week,
the Holy Place
after
of the
if God
Resurrection 3, and there,
permit, ye shall hear other Lectures ; in which
ye shall
again be taught the reasons of
every thing which has been done, and shall
receive the proofs thereof from the Old and
New Testaments,-first, of the things done
just before
Baptism,-next, how ye were
cleansed from your sins by the Lord, by /he
washing ofwater with the word *,-and how like
Priests ye have become partakers of the Name
of Christ,-and how the Seal of the fellowship
of the Holy Ghost was given to you,-and
concerning the mysteries at the Altar of the New
Testament, which have taken their beginning
from this place, both what the Divine Scriptures
have delivered to us, and what is the power of
these mysteries, and how ye must approach
them, and when and how receive them ;-and
at the end of all, how for the time to come
ye must behave yourselves worthily of this
grace both in words and deeds, that you may
all be enabled to enjoy the life everlasting.
And these things shall be spoken, if
it be
God's pleasure.

34. Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord
alway ; again I will say, Rejoice : for your re
demption hath drawn nigh s, and the heavenly
host of the Angels is waiting for your sal
vation.
And there is now the voice of one
crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the jvay of
the Lord 6 ; and the Prophet cries, Ho, ye that
thirst, come ye to the water1 ; and immediately
afterwards, Hearken unto me, and ye shall eat
that which is good, and your soul shall delight
itself in good things 8. And within a little while
ye shall hear that excellent lesson which says,
Shine, shine, 0 thou new Jerusalem; for thy

3 The place meant is not the Church of the Resurrection
in which the Service had been held, but the Anastasis or actual
cave of the Resurrection, which Constantinc had so enlarged
by additional works that a discourse to the people could be held
there: for Jerome (E/>isi. 61) relates that Epiphanius had preached
in that place in front of the Lord's sepulchre to clergy and people
in the hearing of John the Bishop (Hen. lid.).
4 Eph. v. 26.
5 Phil. iii. i ; and iv. 4 ; I.uke xxi. 28.
• lb. v. 2.
7 lb. lv. 1.

• Is. xl. 3.

light is come*.
Of this Jerusalem the prophet
hath said, And afterwards thou shnlt be called
city of righteousness, Zion, the faithful
the
because of the law which
mother of cities 1 ;
went forth out of Zion, and the word of the
Lord from Jerusalem *, which word has from
hence been showered forth on the whole world.
To her the Prophet also says concerning you,
Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold thy
children gathered together* ; and she answers,
saying, Who are these that fly as a cloud,
and as doves with their young ones to me 4 ?
(clouds, because of their spiritual nature, and
doves, from their purity). And again, she says,
Who knoweth such things ? or who hath seen it
thus f did ever a land bringforth in one day ? or
was ever a nation born all at once 1 for as
soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her
children*.
And all things shall be filled with
joy unspeakable because of the Lord who said,
Behold, L create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her
people a joy 6.

But ye who have

35. And may these words be spoken now
again over you also, Sing, O heavens, and be
joyful, O earth; and then; for the Lord hath
had mercy on His people, and comforted the
lowly of His people?. And this shall come
to pass through the loving-kindness of God,
who says to you, Behold, I will blot out as
a cloud thy transgressions, and as a thick
cloud thy sins 8.
been
counted worthy of the name of Faithful (of
whom it is written, Upon My servants shall
be called a new name which shall be blessed
on the earth »,) ye shall say with gladness,
Blessed be the God ana Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with every
spiritual blessing in
the heavenly places in
Christ 1 ;
in whom we have our redemption
through His blood, the forgiveness of our sins,
according to the riches of His grace, wherein
He abounded towards us 3, and what follows ;
and again, But God being rich in mercy, for
His great love wherewith He loved us, when
we were dead through our trespasses, quickened
us together with Christ*, and the rest. And
again in like manner praise ye the Lord of
all good things, saying, But when t/i.: kind
ness of God our Saviour, and His love to
wards man appeared, not by works of right
eousness which we had done, but according
to His mercy He saved us, through the wash
ing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Ghost,
us abundantly
through Jesus Christ our Saviour, that being

which He shed on

9 Is. lx. 1.
4 II). lx 8.
7 ib. Xlix. 13.
■ Eph. i. 3.

■ lb. i. 16.

• lb. ii. 3.

5 II). lxvi. 8.
• Ib. v. 7.

8 Is. Xliv. 22.

3 lb. xlix. 18.
« lb. lxv. 18.
9 lb. IXV. It,

3 Ib. ii. 4.

LECTURE XVIII.

justified by His grace, we might be made
heiis, according to hope, of eternal life*.
And
may God Himself the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, give unto
you a spirit of wisdom and revelation
in
the knowledge of Himself, the eyes of your
understanding being enlightened*, and may He
ever keep you in good works, and words, and
to Whom be glory, honour, and
thoughts ;
power, through our Lord Jesus Christ, with

* Tit. iii. 4.

5 Eph. i. 17, 18.

the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and unto all
the endless ages of eternity. Amen 6.

6 "At the end of this Lecture in the older of the Munich MSS.
there is the following addition : Many other Lectures were de
livered year hy year, Doth before Baptism and after the neophytes
had been baptized.
But these alone were taken down when
spoken and written by some of the earnest students in the year
353 of the advent of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. And in
these you will find partly discussions of all the necessary doctrines
of the Faith which ought to be known to men, and answers to the
Greeks, and to those 01 the Circumcision, and to the Heresies, and
the moral precepts of Christians of all kinds, by the grace of God.
The year 352 according to the computation of the Greeks is the
year 360 of the Christian era" (Rupp).
The date at which the Lectures were delivered cannot possibly
be so late as is here stated.
See the section of the Introduction
on the " Date."

FIVE CATECHETICAL LECTURES

OF

THE SAME AUTHOR,

xo The Newly Baptized 1 .

LECTURE XIX.

FIRST LECTURE ON THE MYSTERIES.

With a Lesson from the First General Epistle of Peter, beginning at
Be sober, be vigilant, to the end of the Epistle.

1. I have long been wishing, O true-born
and dearly beloved children of the Church, to
discourse to you concerning these spiritual and
heavenly Mysteries ; but since I well knew that
seeing is far more persuasive than hearing, I
waited for the present season ; that finding you
more open to the influence of my words from
your present experience, I might lead you by
the hand into the brighter and more fragrant
meadow of the Paradise before us ; especially
as ye have been made fit to receive the
more sacred Mysteries, after having been found
worthy of divine and life-giving Baptism 2.
Since therefore it remains to set before you
a table of the more perfect instructions, let us
now teach you these things exactly, that ye may
know the effects wrought upon you on that
evening of your baptism.

2. First ye entered into the vestibule * of the

1 This general title of the five following Lectures is omitted in
many MSS\ "In Cod. Ottob. at the end of the special title of this
first Mystagogic Lecture, after the words " to the end of the
Epistle," there follows the statement "Oj the same author Cyril,
and of John^lhe Bishop" (Bened. Ed.). See Index, Authenticity.
a This Lecture was delivered on the Monday after Easier
in the Holy Sepulchre : see Cat. xviii 33.
3 tijp uiJ.mu' ttji* .... ytytvjintvitv, is found in all the MSS.
"Nevertheless it would seem that we ought to read ray .
.
.
ytytvrifLevtiiv, which Grodecq either read or substituted " (Ben. Ed.),
with the proposed reading the meaning would be-''the signi
ficance of the things done to you," which agrees better with the
meaning of «*i^acris.
* rov irpoauAtois called below in S 11 "the outer chamber."
Cf. Procat. S li note 3.
It appears from Tertullian, De Corona,
I 3. that the renunciation was made first in the Church, and after
wards in the Baptistery : "When we are going to enter the water,
at that moment as well as just before in the Church tinder the
hand of the President, we solemnly profess that we disown the
devil, and his pomp, and his angels."

.

Baptistery, and there facing towards the West
ye listened to the command to stretch forth
your hand, and as in the presence of Satan ye
renounced him. Now ye must know that this
figure is found in ancient history.
For when
Pharaoh, that most bitter and cruel tyrant,
was oppressing the free and high-born people of
the Hebrews, God sent Moses to bring them
out of the evil bondage of the Egyptians. Then
the door posts were anointed with the blood
ol a lamb, that the destroyer might flee from
the houses which had the sign of the blood ;
and the Hebrew people was marvellously
delivered.
The enemy, however, after their
rescue, pursued a/ter them s, and saw the sea
wondrously parted for them ; nevertheless he
went on, following close in their footsteps, and
was all at once overwhelmed and engulphed in
the Red Sea.

3. Now turn from the old to the new,
from the figure to the reality.
There we have
Moses sent from God to Egypt ; here, Christ,
sent forth from His Father into the world :
there, that Moses might lead forth an afflicted
people out of Egypt ; here, that Christ might
rescue those who are oppressed in the world
under sin : there, the blood of a lamb was the
spell against 6 the destroyer ; here, the blood of
the Lamb without blemish Jesus Christ is made
the charm to scare? evil spirits : there, the tyrant

5 Ex. xiv. 9, 33.
7 Ca-yaotvTi/ptoi', the word commonly used in the Septuagint

6 arorp6iraio».

LECTURE XIX.

was pursuing that ancient people even to the
sea ; and here the daring and shameless spirit,
the author of evil, was following thee even to
the very streams of salvation. The tyrant of old
was drowned in the sea ; and this present one
disappears in the water of salvation.

is necessary.

4. But nevertheless thou art bidden to say,
with arm outstretched towards him as though
he were present, "I renounce thee, Saran."
I wish also to say wherefore ye stand facing
to the West ; for it
Since the
West is the region of sensible darkness, and
he being darkness has his dominion also in
darkness, therefore, looking with a symbolical
meaning towards the West, ye renounce that
What then did
dark and gloomy potentate.
each of you stand up and say ?
"I renounce
thee, Satan,"-thou wicked and most cruel
tyrant ! meaning, " I fear thy might no longer ;
for that Christ hath overthrown, having par
taken with me of flesh and blood, that through
these He might by death destroy death 8, that I
might not be made subject to bondage for ever."
" I renounce thee,"- thou crafty and most
subtle serpent. "I renounce thee,"-plotter as
thou art, who under the guise of friendship
didst contrive all disobedience, and work apos
tasy in our first parents.
"I renounce thee,
Satan,"-the artificer and abettor of all wicked
ness.

5. Then in a second sentence thou art
taught to say, "and all thy works." Now the
worKs of Satan are all sin, which also thou
must renounce ;-just as one who has escaped
a tyrant has surely escaped his weapons also.
All sin therefore, of every kind, is included
in the works of the devil.
Only know this ;
that all that thou sayest, especially at that most
thrilling hour, is
in God's books ;
written
when therefore thou doest any thing contrary
to these promises, thou shalt be judged as a
Thou renouncest therefore the
transgressor*.
works of Satan ;
I mean, all deeds and
thoughts which are contrary to reason.

6. Then thou sayest, " And all his pomp '."
Now the pomp of the devil is the madness of
theatres3, and horse-races, and hunting, and all

for "a city of refuge." But the Verb tf>uyx*.ev« is Transitive
in 2 Mace. lx. 4, as well as in Xenophon and Demosthenes. The
application of the blood ol' Christ in Baptism is represented by
marking the sign of the Cross on the forehead. Compare the lines
of Prudcntius quoted by the Benedictine Editor :
" Passio qua; nostram defendit sanguine frontem,
Corporeamque doinum signato collinit ore."
* Heb. ii. 14, 15.
1 Herod. II. 58: "The Egyptians were the first to introduce
At
solemn assemblies (irawrvvpic) and processions (rroiiira«)."
Rome the term " pompa " was applied especially to the procession
with which the Ludi Circenscs were opened, and also to any
grand ceremony or pageant.
Cf. Tertnll. Apolofret. 38 ; " We renounce all
3 dtarpopavioi.
your spectacles. . .
. Among us nothing is ever said, or seen, or
heard, which has anything in common with the madness of the
Circus, the immodesty ot the theatre, the atrocities of the irena,
the useless exercises of the wrestling-ground." He calls the theatre

9 Gal. ii. t8.

VOL. VII.

such vanity : from which that holy man pray
ing to be delivered says unto God, Turn
away mine eyes from beholding vanity 3. Be not
interested in the madness of the theatre, where
thou wilt behold the wanton gestures of the
players
carried on with mockeries and all
unseemliness, and the frantic dancing of effem
inate men s ;-nor in the madness of them who
in hunts 6 expose themselves to wild beasts, that
they may pamper their miserable appetite ;
who, to serve their belly with meats, become
themselves in reality meat for the belly of
untamed beasts; and to speak justly, for the
sake of their own god, their belly, they cast
away their life headlong in single combats 7.
Shun also horse-races that frantic and soulsubverting spectacle8.
For all these are the
pomp of the devil.

7. Moreover, the things which are hung up at
idol festivals', eilher meat or bread, orother such
things polluted by the invocation of the unclean
spirits, are reckoned in the pomp of the devil.
For as the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist

10, "im
"that citadel of all impurities," De Spectaculis. c.
modesty's peculiar abode," c. 17, and gives a vivid description
of the rage and fury of the Circus in c. r6.
3 Ps. cxix. 37.
4 iiiiiittv, the name either of a species of low comedy, "con
sisting more of gestures and mimicry thar. of spoken dialogue,"
or of the persons who acted in them.
Cyril's description of the
coarse and indecent character of the mimes is more than justified
by the impartial testimony of Ovid, Trist. ii. 497 :
*' Quid si scripsissem mimos obscccna jocantes,
Qui semper vetiti crimen amoris habent ;
In quibus assidue cultus procedit adulter,
Verbaque dat stttlto callida nupta viro.
Nubilis hos virgo, matronaque, virque, puerqne
Spectat, et e magna parte Senatus adest.
Nec satis incestis Lemerari vocibus aurcs ;
Assucscunt oculi imilta pudenda pati."
A theatre is mentioned as one of the buildings erected by Hadrian
in his new city Aelia Capitolina built on the site of Jerusalem ;
and that theatrical performances were continued in the time of
Cyril wc know from the accusation that in a time of famine he
had sold one of the Church vestments, which was afterwards used
upon the stage.
5 Lactantius, Epitome, I 63: *' Histrionici etiam impudici
gestus, quibus infames fueminas trnitantur, libidines, quae saltando
expriuiunt, doccnt."
0 Kvcnyeo-t'iuc, the so-called "venationes" of the Circus in
which the "bestiarii" fought with wild beasts.
7 The "bestiarii" were feasted in public on the day before
their encounter with the beasts. See Tertull Apoioget. S 42 :
" I do not recline in public at the feast of Bacchus, after the
manner of the beast-fighters at their last banquet."
Ib. Jo:
"Those also who dine on the flesh of wild beasts trom the arena,
who have keen appetites for bear and stag." These latter, how
ever, were chiefly the poor, to whom flesh was a rarity : Apukius
Mctam. iv. 14, quoted by Ochlcr.
8 i/iuyas cierpa vi/Ai£op, an allusion to the risk of a broken n*ck
in the chariot-race.
Tertull. tie Spectacniis, § 9 : " Equestriar ism
was formerly practised in a simple way on horseback, and certainly
its ordinary use was innocent : but wuen it was dragged into the
games, it passed from a gift of God into the service of demons."
The presiding deity of the chariot-race was Puseidrm (Horn. //.
xxiii. 307; Plnd. Ol. i. 63 ; Pyth. vi. 50; Soph. tiidip. Col. 712),
and both this and the other shows of the Circus, nnd ot the theatre,
were connected with the worship ot the gods of Greece and Rome,
and therefore forbidden as id. Iat'ous: "What high religious
rites, what sacrifices precede, intervene, and follow, how many
guilds, how manv priesthoods, how many services are set astir
(Tert. lie Sped, ft 7).
9 TravrjyvpitTL. The Panegyris was itrictly a religious festival,
but was commonly accompanied by a great fair or market, in which
were sold not only such tilings as the worshippers might n.t i for
their offerings, e.g. frankincense, but also the flesh of the animals
which had been sacrificed.
Cf Dictionary 0/ Greek and t\om.
Antitj. "Panegyris."
Tertull. Apolog. $ 42: "We do not go to
your spectacles : yet the articles that are sold there, if 1 need them,
1 shall obtain more readily at their proper places. We certainly
buy no frankincense."

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

before the invocation of the Holy and Adora
ble Trinity were simple bread and wine, while
after the invocation the Bread becomes the
Body of Christ, and the Wine the Blood of
Christ *, so in like manner such meats belong
ing to the pomp of Satan, though in their own
nature simple, become profane by the invo
cation of the evil spirit.

8. After this thou sayest, "and all thy ser
vice*." Now the service of the devil is prayer
in idol temples ; things done in honour of
lifeless idols ; the lighting of lamps 3, or burning
of incense by fountains or rivers *, as some
persons cheated by dreams or by evil spirits
do [resort to this '], thinking to find a cure even
for their bodily ailments. Go not after such
things.
The watching of birds, divination,
omens, or amulets, or charms written on leaves,
sorceries, or other evil arts6, and all such
therefore
things, are services of the devil ;
shun them.
For if after renouncing Satan
and associating thyself with Christ 7, thou fall
under their influence, thou shalt find 8 the ty
rant more bitter ;
because he
treated thee of old as his own, and relieved
thee from his hard bondage, but has now been
greatly exasperated by thee ; so thou wilt be
bereaved of Christ, and have experience of the
other.
Hast thou not heard the old history
which tells us of Lot and his daughters ? Was
not he himself saved with his daughters, when
he had gained the mountain, while his wife
became a pillar of salt, set up as a monu
ment for ever, in remembrance of her depraved
will and her turning back.
Take heed there
fore to thyself, and turn not again to what is

perchance,

.

1 Compare St. Paul's argument atrainst meats offered to idols,
1 Cor. x. 14-ai : and on Cyril's Eucharislic doctrine, see notes on
Cat. xxii.
- The form of renunciation before Baptism is given in the
Apostolic Constitutions, VI I. 41: "I renounce Satan, and his
works, and his pomps, and his services, and his angels, and his
inventions, and all things that are under him."
Cf. Tertull. De
Spectnculis, S 4 : " When on entering the water, we make profes
sion of the Christian faith in the words of its rule, we bear public
testimony that we have renounced the devil, his pomp, and his
angels.''
3 Herod, ii. 63 : " At Sais, when the assembly takes place for
the sacrifices (to Minerva, or Neith), there is one night on which
the inhabitants all burn a multitude of lights in the open air round
. These burn the whole night, and give to the
their houses. .
festival the name of the Feast of Lamps (XvxvoKaiij)."
* Fountains and rivers had each i.s own deity or nymph, to
whom sacrilices were offered, and incc.ise burned.
5 «'* rovro 5ie',3riTav. These words are omitted in many MSS.,
and regarded by the Benedictine Editor as a spurious addition
The words rf roiaOra at the
made to complete the construction.
end of the sentence arc better omitted, as in several good MSS.
6 Cat. iv. 37 ; Apost. Const, vi. :
11 Be not a diviner, for that
leads to idolatry. .
. Thou shalt not use enchantments or pur
.
gations for thy child. Thou shalt not be a soothsayer nor a diviner
by great or little birds. Nor shalt thou learn wicked arts ; for all
these things has the Law forbidden."
7 Apost. Const, vii. 41 : "And after his renunciation let him in
his association [ffvvraairopfvof) say, I associate myself with
Christ."
8 tr*ipa(bj<rn (Cod. Mon . t ) is a better reading than xttpatrBija-o.
Cf. Plat. LaJus, 1S8 E

Deut. xviii. 10, ti.

behind*, having put thine hand to the plough,
and then turning back to the salt savour of
this life's doings ; but escape to the mountain,
to Jesus Christ, that stone hewn without hands1,
which has filled the world,

9. When therefore thou renouncest Satan,
utterly breaking all thy covenant with him, that
ancient league with hell*, there is opened to
thee the paradise of God, which He planted
towards the East, whence for his transgression
our first father was banished ; and a symbol of
this was thy turning from West to East,
the place of lights.
Then thou wert told
to say, " I believe in the Father, and in the
Son, and in the Holy Ghost, and in one
Baptism of repentance*." Of which things we
spo'ce to thee at length in the former Lectures,
as God's grace allowed us.

10. Guarded therefore by these discourses,
For our adversary the devil, as was
be sober.
just now read, as a roaring lion, walketh about,
seeking whom he may devour s.
But though in
former times death was mighty and devoured,
at the holy Laver of regeneration" God has
For
wiped away every tear from off all faces 6.
thou shalt no more mourn, now that thou hast
put off the old man ; but thou shalt keep holyday
clothed in the garment of salvation 8, even
Jesus Christ.

11. And these things were done in

the
outer chamber.
But if God will, when in the
succeeding lectures on the Mysteries we have
entered into the Holy of Holies f, we shall there
know the symbolical meaning of the things
which are there performed. Now to God the
Father, with the Son and the Holy Ghost, be
glory, and power, and majesty, for ever and
ever.

Amen.

9 Phil. iii. 13. On the pillar of salt, see Wisd. x. 7 : •' Of whose
wickedness even to this day the waste land that smoketh is a
testimony, . . . and a standing pillar of salt is a monument of an
unbelieving soul." Joseph. Ant. I. XL 4 : " Moreover 1 have seen
it, tor it remains even unto this day." Bp. Lightfoot, Clem. Koin..
Ep. rtd Cor. xi. remarks that the region abounds in pillars of salt,
and " Mediaeval and even modern travellers have delighted to
identify one or other of these with Lot's wite."

9 Is. xxviii. 15.

1 Dan. ii. 35, 4s.
3 Cf.

S. Ambros. De Mysteriis, c.

ii. 7: "Ad orientem
converters ; qui enim renunciat diabolo ad Christum convertitur:"
" Where he plainly intimates .... that turning to the East was
a symbol of their aversion from Satan and conversion unto Christ,
that is, from darkness to li&ht, from serving idols, to serve Him,
who is the Sun of Righteousness and Fountain of Light " (Bingh.
Ant. xi. vii. 7X
4 Cf. Didachrf, vii. 1 ; Justin M. Apolog. I. c. 61 A : Swainson,
'* The wiitings
Creeds,^ c. iii. on the short Baptismal Professions.
of S. Cyprian distinctly tell us, that in his day the form of in
terrogation at Baptism was fixed and definite. He speaks of the
" usitata et legitima verba interrogationis,"-and we know as
distinctly that the interrogation included the words, " Dost thou
believe in God the Father, in His Sou Christ, in the Holy Spirit?
Dost thou believe in remission ot sins and eternal life through tbe
Church?"

5 1 Pet. v. 9.
8 Is. Ixi. 10.
7 irai/r/yvptVctf.
9 These words seem to imply that the Lectures on the Eucharist
were to be delivered in the Holy Set ulchre, tiiough the Mysteries
themselves may be called metaphorically " the Hcly of Holies,"

6 Is. xxv. 8 : Rev. vii. 17.

LECTURE XX.

(ON THE MYSTERIES. II.)

OF BAPTISM.

Romans vi. 3- 14.
Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into His

death ? &v. .

.

. .for ye are not under the Laiv, but under grace.

1. These daily introductions into the Mys
teries
and new instructions, which are the
announcements of new truths, are profitable
to us ; and most of all to you, who have been
renewed from an old state to a new.
There
fore, I shall necessarily lay before you the
sequel of yesterday's Lecture, that ye may
learn of what those things, which were done
by you in the inner chamber3, were symbolical.
2. As soon, then, as ye entered, ye put off
your tunic ; and this was an image of putting
off the old man with his deeds*.
Having
stripped yourselves, ye were naked ; in this
also imitating Christ, who was stripped naked
on the Cross, and by His nakedness put off
from Himself the principalities and powers,
and openly triumphed over them on the tree''.
For since the adverse powers made their lair
in your members, ye may no longer wear that
old garment ;
I do not at all mean this visible
one, but the old man, which waxeth corrupt
in the lusts of deceit*. May the soul which
has once put him off, never again put him on,
but say with the Spouse of Christ in the Song
of Songs, / have put off my garment, how
shall I put it on6 ? O wondrous thing ! ye
were naked in the sight of all, and were not
ashamed 1 ; for truly ye bore the likeness of the
first-formed Adam, who was naked in
the
garden, and was not ashamed.

1 made in

the outer chamber or vestibule

' pWTayttrfLai.
' The renunciation and the profession of faith '
> The renuncial
3 Col. iii. 9.
* lb. ii. 15.

of the Baptistery.
Cyril's use of this passage agrees best with the
interpretation that_ Christ, having been cioiheil with the likeness
of siniul fle-h during His life on enrth, submitted therein to the
assaults of the powers of evil, but on the Cross threw off from
Hinnelf both it and them.

S Eph. iv. aa.
7 See Diet. Christ. Antiq. " Baptism," i 48 : The Unclothing
e/tlic Catechumens : \i\nn\uAnt. XI. xi. 1 : All "persons were
hjpti/ed naked, either in imitation of Adam in Paradise, or our
Saviour upon the Cross, or to signify their putting off the body of
sin, and the old man with his deeds."

6 Cant. v. 3.

3. Then, when ye were stripped, ye were
anointed with exorcised oil 8, from the very
hairs of your head to your feet, and were
made partakers of the good olive-tree, Jesus
Christ.
For ye were cut off from the wild
olive-tree*, and grafted into the good one, and
were made to share the fatness of the true
olive-tree.
The exorcised oil therefore was
a symbol of the participation of the fatness of
Christ, being a charm to drive away every
trace of hostile influence. For as the breathing
of the saints, and the invocati >n of the Name
of God, like fiercest flame, scorch and drive
so also this exorcised oil
out evil
receives such virtue by thi invocation
of
God and by prayer, as r.ot only to burn and
cleanse away the traces of sins, but also to
chase away all the invisible powers of the evil
one.

spirits

4. After these things, ye were led to the
holy pool3 of Divine Baptism, as Christ was
carried from the Cross to the Sepulchre which
is before our eyes.
And each of you was
asked, whether he believed in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, and ye made that saving confession,

8 Apost. Const, vii. aa : " But thou shalt beforehand anoint the
person with holy oil (eAai'w), and afterward baptize nim with water,
and in the conclusion shalt seal him with the ointment (jivpet),
that the anointing (xp«o>i«) may be a participation of the Holy
Spirit, and the water a symbol of the death, and the ointment the
But if there be neither oil nor ointment,
seal of the Covenant*.
water suffices both for anointing, and f>r a seal, and for a confes
sion of Him who died, or indeed is dying with us." The previous
anointing "with oil sanctified by prayer" is mentioned in the
Clementine Recognitions, III. c. 67, and in the Pscudo-Tustin,
Quastiones ad Orthotioxos, Qu. 157.
It was not however universal .
and seems to have been unknown in Africa, not being mentioned by
Clement of Alexandria (Pad. II. c. viii. On the use 0/ ointments),
nor Tertullian, nor Augustine.
9 On the significance of the wild olive-tree, see Irenasus, V. to.
> See Index, "Exorcism."
KoAv/i^rjdpnv. The pool or piscina was deep enough tor total
immersion; and large enough for many to be baptized at once.
Ci.
Iiingh. Ant. VIII. vii. a ; XI. xi. a, 3.
For engravings 01 the very
ancient Baptisteries at Aquileia and Ravenna, shewing the torm
of the font or piscina, see Diet. Christian Ant. "Baptistery."

L 2

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

and descended three times into the water, and
ascended again ; here also hinting by a sym
bol at the three days burial of Christ 3. For as
our Saviour passed three days and three nights
in the heart of the earth, so you also in your
first ascent out of the water, represented the
first day of Christ in the earth, and by your
descent, the night; for as he who is in the
night, no longer sees, but he who is in the
day, remains in the light, so in the descent,
as in the night, ye saw nothing, but in ascend
ing again ye were as in the day. And at the
self-same moment ye were both dying and
being born ; and that Water of salvation was
And
at once your grave and your mother.
what Solomon spoke of others will suit you
also ; for he said, in that case, There is a time
to bear and a time to die 4 ; but to you, in the
reverse order, there was a time to die and a time
to be born ; and one and the same time effected
both of these, and your birth went hand in
in hand with your death.

5. O strange and inconceivable thing! we
did not really die, we were not really buried,
we were not really crucified and raised again ;
but our imitation was in a figure, and our
salvation in reality.
Christ was actually cruci
fied, and actually buried, and truly rose again ;
and all these things He has freely bestowed
sharing His sufferings
upon us,
by imitation, might gain salvation in reality.
O surpassing loving-kindness ! Christ received
nails in His undefiled hands and feet, and
suffered anguish ; while on me without pain
or toil by the fellowship of His suffering
He freely bestows salvation.

that

we,

6. Let no one then suppose that Baptism
is merely the grace of remission of sins, or
further, that of adoption ; as John's was a bap
tism' conferring only remission of sins : whereas
we know full well, that as it purges our sins,
and ministers6 to us the gift of the Holy Ghost,

3 The same significance is attributed to the trine immersion by
many Fathers, but a different explanation is given by Tcrtullian
{Adv. Fraxean. c. xxvi.): "Not once only, but three times, we
are immersed into the several Persons at the mention of their
several names."
Gregory of Nyssa (On the Baptism of Christ,
p. 520 in this Series) joins both reasons together: " By doing this
thrice we represent for ourselves that grace of the Resurrection
which was wrought in three days : and this we do, not receiving
the Sacrament in silence, but while there are spoken over us the
Names ol the Three Sacred Persons on whom we believed. &c."
Cf. Ap<ist Const. VIII. § 47, Can. 50: " If any
Compare p. 539.
Bishop or Presbyter does not perform the three immersions of one
initiation, but one immersion made into the death of Christ, let
him be deprived.'*
Miltes in his note on this passage mentions that " this form of
Baptism is still used in the Greek Church.
See Eucholog. p. 3S5.
Ed Jac. Gunr. and his notes p. 365.''

4 Eccles. iii. 2.
5 Tcrtullian (De Baptismo, c 10) denies that John's Baptism
availed for the remission of sins :
' ■ If repentance is a thii-g human,
its baptism must necessarily be of the same nature : else if it hari
been celestial, it would have given both the Holy Spirit and the
remifsion of sins."
Cyril's doctrine is more in accordance with
the language 01 the Fathers generally, and of St. Mark i. 4, Luke
iii. 3.

6 wpottvov.

so also it is the counterpart ? of the sufferings of
Christ.
For this cause Paul just now cried
aloud and said, Or are ye ignorant that all
we who were baptized into Christ Jesus, were
baptized into His death t
We were buried
therefore with Him by baptism into His death 8.
These words he spake to some who were
disposed to think that Baptism ministers to
us the remission of sins, and adoption, but
has not further the fellowship also, by repre
sentation, of Christ's true sufferings.

7. In order therefore that we might learn,
that whatsoever things Christ endured, for us
and for our salvations He suffered them in
reality and not in appearance, and that we
also are made partakers of His sufferings,
Paul cried with all exactness of truth, For
if we have been planted together with the like
ness of His death, we shall be also with the
Well has he said,
likeness of His resurrection.
planted together'10.
For since the true Vine
was planted in this place, we also by partaking
in the Baptism of death have been planted
together with Him.
And fix thy mind with
much attention on the words of the Apostle.
He said not, "For if we have been planted
together with His death," but, with the likeness
For in Christ's case there was
of His death.
death in
for His soul was really
separated from His body, and real burial, for
His holy body was wrapt in pure linen ; and
everything happened really to Him ; but in
your case there was only a likeness of death
and sufferings, whereas of salvation there was
not a likeness but a reality.

reality,

that I

8. Having been sufficiently instructed in
these things, keep them, I beseech you, in
your remembrance ;
also, unworthy
though I be, may say of you,' ATow I love you ',
because ye always remember me, and hold fast
the
traditions, which r delivered unto you.
And God, who has presented you as it ivere
alive from the dead*, is able to grant unto you
to walk in newness of life 3 ; because His is the
glory and the power, now and for ever. Amen.

8 Koin. vi. 3.

Cf. Heb. ix. 34.

7 avriruirov. The "Antitype" is here the sign or memorial
of that which is past, and no longer actually present : See note 6
on xxi. i.
In the following sentence several MSS. have
a different reading : ''These things perhaps he said to some .who
were disposed to think that Baptism ministers remission of sins
only, and not adoption, and that further it has not the fellowship,
&c."
Against this reading, approved by Milles, the Benedictine
Editor argues that in Rom. vi
110 reference to
adoption, but only to the fellowship of Christ's Passion, ami that
Cyril quotes the passage only to prove the latter, the gift of
adopti 11 being generally admitted, and theretore not in question.
9 This clause is contained in the Nicene Creed, and in that
which was otfered to the Council by Eusebtus as the ancient
It probably formed part of the Creed of
Creed of Carsarea.
Jerusalem, though it is not found in the titles of the Lectures,
n <r specially explained.
Cyril gives the phrase "planted together'
a special application to those who had been baptized in the same
place where Christ had been buried.

3, 4, there is

10 Tb. vi.

5.

1 Cor. xi. 2 : Now I praise you, cW.

3 Rom. vi. 13.

3 lb. v. 4.

LECTURE XXI.

(ON THE MYSTERIES. III.)

ON CHRISM.

i John ii. 20- 28.
But ye hare an unction from the Holy One, &c. .... that, when He shall appear, we may
have confidence, and not be ashamed before Him at His coming.

t. Having been baptized into Christ, and
ye have been made conform
put on Christ
for God having
able to the Son of God ;
foreordained us unto adoption as sons
made
us to be conformed to the body of Christ's glory \
Having therefore become partakers of Christ*,
ye are properly called Christs, and of you God
said, Touch not My Christs*, or anointed.
Now ye have been made Christs, by receiv
ing the antitype6 of the Holy Ghost ; and all
things have been wrought in you by imita
tion 7, because ye are images of Christ. He
washed in the river Jordan, and having im
parted of the fragrance8 of His Godhead to
the waters, He came up from them ; and the
Holy Ghost in the fulness of His being' lighted

• Eph. i. 5.

3 Phil. iii. 91.

1 Gal. iiL 27.
* Heb. iii. 14.
• awrvnov. Cat. xx. 6 ;

5 Ps. cv. 15.
xxiii. 20. Twice in this section,
as in Heb. ix. 24 (ivri-nnra tup a\rfHtyCtv), nyrirvirov is the copy
or figure representing the original pattern (tvjtos, cf. Actsvii. 44).
Otherwise (a> in Cat. x. 11 ; xiii. 19 ; xxii. 3) TVTOt is the figure
to be subsequently realised in the antitype.
7 rixomuK .... eixovef TOV XptcTToC.
8 XpwT*>r, literally " tinctures." The Ben. Ed. writes : 11 For
with Codd. Coisl. Ottob. Roe,
tWrwr we have written
Casaub., ffce. . . But we must write \pCtjiav from xowra, nut vpiurwi'
from xpwrcf.
Authors use the word vpwTa to signify the effluence
of an odour. So Gregory of Nyssa takes it in his 3rd Homiiy on
Ike Seng of Songs, p. 512; and S. Maximus in Question 37 on
Scripture :
' ;rjwTa we say *s lnc godliness (evo~iflttai>y whereby
S. Paul was to the one a savour 0/ li/e unto life' , . . In the
Proeatechesis, 8 15, Cyril calls the waters of Baptism vociruv
If however any one prefers the
XpiVTobopuv *xovtuv ctiwStaf.
reading fcrrtav, he m.iy defend himself by the authority of Epiphanius, who in the Exposition of the Faith, c. 15, says that
Christ descending into the water gave rather than received, ....
illuminating them, and empowering them for a type of what was
to be accomplished in Him." According to the Kbionite Gospel of
St. Matthew in hlpiphanius (Hwr. xxx. Ebionitol c.
13). when
Jesus came up out of the water a great light shone around the
place : a tradition to which the Benedictine Editor thinks the
Justin M. (Dialog, c. Ixxxviii.):
reading $>j>Tu>v may refer.
" When Jesus had stepped into the water, a fire was kindled in the
Otto quotes the legend, as found in Orac. Sibj/lt. vii.
Jordan."
Ii-83 :-

*0« trc Aoyof yiymfae ITarrjp Jlvevu.' opvtv a^rjxev,
'i)£vv aira-vyfArTjpa Aovwv, Abyov voao'ti' ayrait
'PaiVwv, ITov p'airrto'/ia, 8i' o£ Trvpo? cfceWaftri}**-
9 ovtrtwSrjs eiruftot'iprtf eWrcro. The Benedictine Editor under
stands this phrase as an allusion to the descent of the Holy Ghost
on Jesus in a substantial bodily form. So Gregory Nazianzen
(Orat. xliv. 17), says that the Holy Ghost descended on the
Apostles otxriMObH, xai 0-up.vriKwf.
But Anastasius Sinaita interprets ovotwowc in this latter passage as meaning 11 in the essence
and reality of His (Divine) Person :" and this Tatter sense agree
ing with the frequent use of ovtriwoiif by Athana&ius is well

on Him, like resting upon like ro. And to you in
like manner, after you had come up from the
pool of the sacred streams, there was given an
Unction", the anti-type of that wherewith Christ
was anointed ; and this is the Holy Ghost ;
of whom also the blessed Esaias, in his pro
phecy respecting Him, said in the person of
the Lord, The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me.
because He hath anointed Me: He hath sent
Me to preach glad tidings to the poor

sceptre of righteousness

2. For Christ was not anointed by men
with oil or material ointment, but the Father
having
before appointed Him to be the
Saviour of the whole world, anointed Him
with the Holy Ghost, as Peter says, Jesus of
Nazareth, whom God anointid with the Holy
Ghost*
David also the Prophet cried, saying,
Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever;
is the sceptre of
a
Thy kingdom ; Thou hast lored righteousness
and hated iniquity ;
therefore God even Thy
God hath anointed Thee with the oil of glad
ness above Thy fellows*. And as Christ was
reality crucified, and buried, and raised,
in
and you are in Baptism accounted worthy of
being crucified, buried, and raised together
with Him in a likeness, so is
it with the
As He was anointed with an
unction also.
the
ideal *
Holy Ghost, called oil of gladness, because
He is the author of spiritual gladness, so ye
were anointed with ointment, having been
made partakers and fellows of Christ.

of gladness,

with

thai

oil

is,

rendered by Canon Mason (The Relation of Confirmation to
baptism, p. 343, " in the fulness of His being."
IO_ Cf. Greg. Naz. Orat. xxxix : " The Spirit also bears witness
to His Godhead, for He comes to that which is like Himself."
1 Cf. Tertullian, De B.tptismo, c 7: ''Exinde egressi de
It is clear that the
lavacro pemngimur benedicta unetione."
Unction mentioned in these passages was conferred at the same
Wuether it formed part of that
time and place as Baptism.
Sacrament, or was regarded by Cyril as a separate and indepen
dent rite, has been made a matter of controversy. See Index,
3 Acts x. 38.

Chrism."
a Is. Ixi. 1.
S roirrtp cannot here he translated "spiritual"

4 Ps. xlv. 6, 7.

kvi i/wiiriKt|s immediately following.

Cf. i. 4, note.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

3. But beware of supposing this to be plain
ointment.
For as the Bread of the Eucharist,
after the invocation of the Holy Ghost, is
mere bread no longer6, but the Body of Christ,
so also this holy ointment is no more simple
ointment, nor (so to say) common, after invo
cation, but it is Christ's gift of grace, and, by
the advent of the Holy Ghost, is made fit to
impart His Divine Nature ?. Which ointment is
symbolically applied to thy forehead and thy
other senses8 ; and while thy body is anointed
with the visible ointment, thy soul is sanctified
by the Holy and life-giving Spirit.

4. And ye were first anointed on the fore
head, that ye might be delivered from the
shame, which the first man who transgressed
bore about with him everywhere ; and that
with unveiled face ye might reflect as a mirror
the glory of the Lord?.
Then on your ears ;
that ye might receive the ears which are
quick to hear the Divine Mysteries, of which
Esaias said, The Lord gave me also an ear
to hear 1 ; and the Lord Jesus in the Gospel,
He that hath ears to hear let him hear1. Then
that receiving the sacred
on the nostrils ;
ointment ye may say, We are to God a sweet
savour of Christ, in them that are saved \
Afterwards on your breast ;
that having put
on the breast-plate of righteousness, ye may
For as
stand against the wiles of the devil *.
Christ after His Baptism, and the visitation of
the Holy Ghost, went forth and vanquished
the adversary, so likewise ye, after Holy Bap
tism and the Mystical Chrism, having put on
the whole armour of the Holy Ghost, are to

6 Compare xix. 7 ;
xxiii. 7, 19 ; and the section on * Eu
charist " tn the Introduction.
7 Xpio-rov x&puriia jcat npev/iarov ayiov irapovtria -nit avrov
8*ottjto? ivepyrjratbp yivontvov. The meaning of this passage
seems to have been obscured by divergent views of the order and
In the Oxlord translation, followed
construction of the words.
by Dr. Pusey {Real Presence, p. 357), the Chrism is " the gift of
Christ, and by the presence 0) His Godhead it causes in us the
The order of the operations proper to the two
Holy Ghost.'
Divine t'ersons seems thus to be inverted.
According to the Benedictine Editor, and Canon Mason (Rela
tion ofConfirmation 10 Baptism, p. 344), it is " Christ's gracious
gift, and 15 made effectual to convey the Holy Ghost by the
presence of His own Godhead,"-i.e. apparently, the Godhead
of the Holy Ghost conveys the Holy Ghost.
But according to the context " the presence " must be that of
the Divine Person who has been invoked, namely the Holy Ghost :
and this is clearly expressed in the order of the words ITfcv/iaroc
ayi'mi irapovtrtq rrjf aurov 6t6rr)TO{ ivepyqTiKov. The connexion
of the words nr. ay. irapovtria is put beyond doubt by the Invo
cation in the Liturgy of S. James quoted in Myst. V. 7, note 8.
The true meaning thus seen.s to be that the Chrism is Christ's
gift of grace, and imparts His Divine nature by the presence
of the Holy Ghost after the Invocation. This meaning is confirmed
by the formula given in Apost. Const, vii. 44, for the consecration
of the Chrism : " Grant also now that this ointment may be made
effectual in the baptized, that the sweet savour of Thy Christ may
remain firm and stable in him, and that, having died with Him.
he may rise again and live with Him." The Chrism is thus re
garded as " the Seal" which confirms the proper benefits of
Baptism.
8 ciri m'tumtov koX rir aWw o~ov aiafhrnjpttav. The forehead
may be regarded as representing the sense of touch ; or we may
translate, according to the idiomatic use of aAAoc. "thy forehead
and thine organs 01 sense besides." See Winer, Grammar ofN.
T. Greek, P. III. Sect. lix. 7: Riddell, Digest of Platonic
9 2 Cor iii. 18.
Idioms, g 46.

1 Is. I. 4.
4 Eph. vi. 14, and 11.

■ Matt. xi. 15.

3 a Cor. ii. 15.

stand against the power of the adversary, and
vanquish it, saying, I can do all things through
Christ which strengtheneth me 5.

5. Having been counted worthy of this
Holy Chrism, ye are called Christians, veri
fying the name also by your new birth.
For
before you were deemed worthy of this grace,
ye hail properly no right to this title, but were
advancing on your way towards being Chris
tians.

6. Moreover, you should know that in the
old Scripture there lies the symbol of this
Chrism.
For what time Moses imparted to
his brother the command of God, and made
him High-priest, after bathing in water, he
anointed him ; and Aaron was called Christ
or Anointed, evidently from the typical Chrism.
So also the High-priest, in advancing Solomon
to the kingdom, anointed him after he had
bathed in Gihon6. To them however these
things happened in a figure, but to you not
in a figure, but in truth ; because ye were
Christ
truly anointed by the Holy Ghost.
is the beginning of your salvation ;
for He
is truly the First-fruit, and ye the mass 1 ; but
if the First-fruit be holy, it is manifest that
Its holiness will pass to the mass also.

7. Keep This unspotted : for it shall teach
you all things, if it abide in you, as you have
just heaid declared by the blessed John, dis
coursing much concerning this Unction 8.
For
this holy thing is a spiritual safeguard of the
body, and salvation of the soul.
Of this the
blessed Esaias prophesying of old time said,
And on this mountain,-(now he calls the
Church a mountain elsewhere also, as when
he says, In the last days the mountain of the
Lord's house shall be
manifest v /)-on this
mountain shall the Lord make unto all nations
a feast ; they shall drink wine, they shall drink
it'ith
gladness,
ointment*. And that he may make thee sure,
hear what he says of this ointment as being
mystical ; Deliver all these things to the na
tions, for the counsel of the Lord is unto all
Having been anointed, therefore,
nations1.
with this holy ointment, keep it unspotted
and unblemished in you, pressing forward by
good works, and being made well-pleasing to
the Captain of your salvation, Christ Jesus, to
whom be glory for ever and ever.

shall anoint themselves

Amen.

they

Holy One.

7 Rom. xi. 16.

6 1 Kings i. 39.

5 Phil. iv. 13.
8 1 John ii. 30 : But ye have an unction {.xpioTia)from the
9 Is. ii. 3.
1 lb. xxv. 6. The Septtiagint differs much from the Hebrew,
R.V. " And in this moun
both here and in the fullowing verse.
tain shall the Lord of hosts make unto all peoples a feast of fat
things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of
wines on the lees well refined."
R.V. "And He will destroy in this mountain the
face of the covering that is cast over all peoples, and the veil that
is spread over all nations."

■ lb. t\ 7.

LECTURE XXII.

(ON THE MYSTERIES. IV.)

ON THE BODY AND BLOOD OF CHRIST,

i Cor. xi. 23.
/ received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, how that the LordJesus,
in the night in which He was betrayed, took bread, 6rc.

Christ in

1. Even of itself 1 the teaching of the Blessed
Paul is sufficient to give you a full assurance
concerning those Divine Mysteries, of which
having been deemed worthy, ye are become
of the same body9 and blood with Christ.
For you have just heard him say distinctly,
That our Lord Jesus
night
in which He was betrayed, took bread, and
when He had given thanks He brake it, and
gave to His disciples, saying, Take, eat, this
is Afy Body: and having taken the cup and
given thanks, He said, Take, drink, this is My
Blood 3.
Since then He Himself declared
and said of the Bread, This is My Body, who
shall dare to doubt any longer? And since
He has Himself affirmed and said, This is My
Blood, who shall ever hesitate, saying, that it
is not His blood ?

the

2. He once in Cana of Galilee, turned the
and is it
water into wine, akin to blood
incredible that He should have turned wine
into blood ? When called to a bodily mar
riage, He miraculously wrought5 that wonder-

1 avnj found in all MSS. is changed for the worse into avrrf by
the n.nedictinc Editor.
3 Introduction. " Eucharist." The word owo-toftot has a dif
ferent sense in Eph- lit. 6, where it is applied to the Gentiles
as raving been made members of Christ's body the Church.
3 i Cor xi. 23. The clause "and pave to His disciples" is an
addition taken from Matt. xxvi. 26. The part relating to the cup
dots not correspond exactly cither with St. Paul's language or
with the Evangelists'.
* oUttov atparu t Cod. Scirlel. (Grodecq), Mesni. (Morel),
Vindob. ; Ben. Ed. otxeup vtvuan, Codd. Monnc. 1, 2, Genovcf.
Vatt. (Prevot. ).
Rupp. The wholi passage is omitted in Codd.
Coisl. R. Casaub. owing to the repetition of aXfta.
The reading oi«<tu vevfian, ''by His own will," introduces
a superfluous thought, and destroys the very point of Cyril's
argument, in whicli the previous change of water into an element
so different as wine is regarded as giving an afortiori probability
to the change of that which is already " akin to blood " into blood
itself.
It" Cyril thus seems to teach a physical change of the wine,
it must be remem i ered that we are not bound to accept his view,
See however the section of the
but only to state it accurately.
Introduction on his Eucharistic doctrine.
Cf. Chrysost. Ef)ist. i.
5 iOavfAarovpYttrt rijk irapa5o£oirou'af.
md Olympiad, dt Dtot | r, c. : tot* Bavfiarovpyft cat irapafiofoirotet.

ful work ; and on the children of the bridechamber**, shall He not much rather be ac
knowledged to have bestowed the fruition of
His Body and Blood 7 ?

3. Wherefore with full assurance let us par
take as of the Body and Blood of Christ : for
in the figure3 of Bread is given to thee His
Body, and in the figure of Wine His Blood ;
that thou by partaking of the Body and Blood
of Christ, mayest be made of the same body
and the same blood with Him.
For thus we
come to bear Christ 9 in us, because His Body
and Blood are distributed 1 through our mem
bers; thus it is that, according to the blessed
Peter, we become partakers of the divine na
ture a.

4. Christ on a certain occasion discoursing
with the Jews said, Except ye eat My flesh
and d'ink My blood, ye have no life in you*.
They not having heard His saying in a spiritual

6 Matt. ix. 15.
7 Ben. Ed. : " That the force of Cyril's argument may be the
better understood, we mu.%t observe that in Baptism is celebrated
the marriage of Christ with the Christian soul ; and that the
consummation of this marriage is perfected through the union of
bodies in the mystery oi the Eucharist.
Read Clirysosiom's
Horn. xx. in Ei>hex."
Chrysustom's words are : " In like manner
therefore we become one flesh with Christ by participation
(jx*TOvtrt'a«)."
Hut the participation expressed by fxcTovaia does
not necessarily refer to th* Eucharist. From the use of the word
in Cat. xxiii. u, and in Athanasius {Contra Arianos, Or. i. ; at
Synodis 19 22, 25) the meaning rather seems to be that we are
one flesh with Christ not by nature but by His gift.
8 See Index, Tviros, and the references there, and Waterland,
On the Eucharist, c. vii.
9 Xptcrro^topoi ytvofitOa. Procat. 151 Ben. Ed.: il>.\i>abtt>ou,«vov. The Codices Coisl. Roe. Casnub.
Scirlet. Ottob. 2.
Genovef. have cu'dfefcy/ieVot, which does not
agree well with the Genitives tov <rwpiaTo? and roii aifia-rof.
It is
evident that it was an ill-contrived emendation o' aunliBo^tyov,
the transcribers being offended at the distribution of Christ's Body
But Cyril uses even the same word in C.»r.
among our members.
. (it waaav trou rqv crvarauiy acoiiixxiii. 9: OCto? 6 dproy. .
fioroi, €i« b><f>r\tiai> a-w^/a-roc Kai ifrvx>j«,
' This Bread is distributed
into thy whole system, to the benefit of body and soul.'"
'Ava5t5o/ieVou is the reading 01 Milles and Rupp. For similar language
see Justin M. Afoi. i. 66; Iren. V. ri. 2.

.

* 2 Pet. i. 4.

3 John vi. 5>

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

sense were offended, and went back, sup
posing that He was inviting them to eat flesh.
5. In the Old Testament also there was
shew-bread ; but this, as it belonged to the
Old Testament, has come to an end ; but
in the New Testament there is Bread of
heaven, and a Cup of salvation, sanctifying
soul and body ; for as the Bread corresponds
to our body, so is the Word * appropriate to
our soul.

6. Consider therefore the Bread and the Wine
not as bare elements, for they are, according
to the Lord's declaration, the Body and Blood
of Christ ; for even though sense suggests this
Judge
to thee, yet let faith establish thee.
not the matter from the taste, but from faith
be fully assured without misgiving, that the
Body and Blood of Christ have been vouch
safed to thee.

7. Also the blessed David shall advise thee
the meaning of this, saying, Thou hast pre
pared a table before me in
the presence of
them that afflict me s.
What he says, is to this
effect : Before Thy coming, the evil spirits
prepared a table for men 6, polluted and de
filed and full of devilish influence 1 ; but since
Thy coming. O Lord, Thou hast prepared
a table before me. When the man says to
God, Thou hast prepared before me a table,
what other does he indicate but that mystical
and spiritual Table, which God hath prepared
for us over against, that is, contrary and in
opposition to the evil spirits? And very truly;
for that had communion with devils, but this,
with God.
Thou hast anointed my head with
With oil He anointed thine head upon
oils.
thy forehead, for the seal which thou hast of

4 Ben. Ed.: "Here we are to understand (by b AtSyo?) the
Divine Word, not the bare discourse 01 Gud, but the second Person
of the Holy 'trinity, Christ Himself, the Bread of Heaven^ as He
testifies of Himself, John vi. 51 : Him Cyril contrasts with the
earthly shew-bread in the O. T. ; otherwise he could not rightly
from this sentence infer, by the particle olv. " therefore," that the
Eucharist is truly the Body and Blood of Christ. And since he
says, in Cat. xxiii. 15, that the Eucharistic food is "appointed for
the substance of the soul," for its benefit, that cannot be said of
Christ's body cr of His soul, but only of the Word which is con
Moreover thit the Divine Word is the food of
joined with both.
Angels and of the soul, is a common mode of speaking with all the
Fathers. They often play on the ambiguity of this word (Adyo*),
saying sometimes that the Divine Word, sometimes the word and
oracles of God, are the food of our souls: both statements are
true.
For the whole life-giving power of the Eucharist is derived
from the Word of God united to the flesh which He assumed:
and the whole benefit of Eucharistic eating consists in the union
of our soul with the Word, in meditation on His mysteries and
sayings, and conformity theieto."

5 Ps. xxiii. 5.
6 r)ki.(ryr\)xiyT)v, a good restoration by Miltes, with Codd. Roe,
Casaub. Coislin.
1 he earlier printed texts had i?Avyio>L<Vin',
Cf- Mai. i. 7: aprotff iflAio-yn/ieVous"
''overshadowed."
Tpairtfa Kvpiov i\\ttTyrifx€yi\ eartv.
table of devils," 1 Cor. x. ax.

7 Cyril refers to the idolatrous feasts, which St- Paul calls " the
9 Ps. xxiii. 5.

God ; that thou mayest be made the engraving
of the signet, Holiness unto God*. And thy
cup intoxicateth me, as very strong1.
Thou
seest that cup here spoken of, which Jesus
took in His hands, and gave thanks, and said,
This is My blood, which is shed for many for
the remission of sins*.

is,

the

8. Therefore Solomon also, hinting at this
grace, says in Ecclesiastes, Come hither, eat
spiritual
thy bread with joy (that
bread ; Come hi/her, he calls with the call to
salvation and blessing), and drink thy wine
with a merry heart (that
is, the spiritual
wine) ; and let oil be poured out upon thy
head (thou seest he alludes even to the mystic
Chrism) ; and let thy garments be always
white, for the Lord is well pleased with thy
works'* ; for before thou earnest to Baptism,
thy works were vanity of vanities*.
But now,
having put off thy old garments, and put on
those which are spiritually white, thou must
be continually robed in white : of course we
mean not this, that thou art always to wear
white raiment; but thou must be clad in the
garments that are truly white and shining and
spiritual, that thou mayest say with the blessed
Esaias, My soul shall be joyful in my God ;
for He hath clothed me with a garment of
salvation, andput a robe ofgladness around me s.
9. Having learnt these things, and been
fully assured that the seeming bread is not
bread, though sensible to taste, but the Body
of Christ ; and that the seeming wine is not
wine, though the taste will have it so, but the
Blood of Christ 6 ; and that of this David sung
of old, saying, And bread strengtheneth man's
heart, to make his face to shine with oili,
" strengthen thou thine heart," by partaking
thereof as spiritual, and "make the face of
thy soul to shine." And so having it unveiled
with a pure conscience, mayest thou reflect as
a mirror the glory of the Zords, and proceed
horn glory to glory, in Christ Jesus our Lord:-
To whom be honour, and might, and glory, for
ever and ever,

Amen.

9 Ex. xxviii. 36 : Ecclus. xlv. is. The plate of pure gold
on the forefront of Aaron's mitre was engraved with the motto,
Holy unto the Lard.
This symbolism Cyril transfers to the
sacramental Chrism, in which the forehead is signed with ointment,
and the soul with the seal of God.
1 Ps. xxiii. 5 : My cup runtutk over. Eusebius (Dent. Evattg.
1. c 10, it 38) applies the Psalm, as Cyril does, to the Eucharist.
a Matt. xxvi. 28.
* For irpocre'Aflns (Bened.) we must read irpoinjAfac, or, with
Monac. z. irporrcAdcu'.
5 Is. lxi. 10.
6 On this passage see the section of the Introduction referred
7 Ps. civ. I}.

to in the Index. "Eucharist.*

3 Eccles. ix. 7, 8.

* t Cor. iii. 18.

•

LECTURE XXIII.

(ON THE MYSTERIES. V.)

ON THE SACRED LITURGY AND COMMUNION".

i Pet.
Wherefore putting away allfilthiness, ■
1. By the loving-kindness of God ye have
heard sufficiently at our former meetings con
cerning Baptism, and Chrism, and partaking
of the Body and Blood of Christ ; and now it
is necessary to pass on to what is next in
order, meaning to-day to set the crown on the
spiritual building of your edification.

2. Ye have seen then the Deacon who gives
to the Priest water to wash 3, and to the Presby
ters who stand round God's altar. He gave it
not at all because of bodily defilement ;
it is
not that ; for we did not enter the Church at
first* with defiled bodies.
But the washing of
hands is a symbol that ye ought to be pure
from all sinful and unlawful deeds ; for since
the hands are a symbol of action, by washing 5
them, it is evident, we represent the purity and
Didst thou not
blamelessness of our conduct.
hear the blessed David opening this
very
mystery, and saying, I will wash my hands in
innocency% and so will I compass Thine Altar,
O Lord6 t The washing therefore of hands is
a symbol of immunity ? from sin.

I :

< This title is added by the Benedictine Editor. There is
nothing corresponding to it in the Greek.
9 The text is made up from memory of James i. 21 : Sib
arrodtftevoi waaav pvwapiav, and I Pel. ii.
airodrntvoi ovv
itatTav Kucia* koX vavra SotKov kcll uiroicptVctt xat iratraf xaraAaAtaf.
3 In the Apostolic Constitutions, VIII. xi. this duty is assigned
to a sub-deacon : " Let one of the sub-deacons bring water to
wash the hands of the Priests, which is a symbol of the purity
of those souls that are devoted to God."
See Dictionary of
Christian Antiquities, "Lavabo."
The Priest who celebrates
the Eucharist is here distinguished by the title i«p*v? from the
other Presbyters who stood round the altar.
* Cyril evidently refers to the custom of placing vessels of
water outside the entrance of the Church. Bingham, Antiquities,
VIII. iii. 6. Chrysost. In Jofuinttem Horn, lxxiii. 3: "Do we
then wash our hand* when going into Church, and shall we not
wash our hearts also?" That the same custom was observed in
heathen Temples appears from Herod. I. 51 : vtptppavr^pta 8va
ay*0i)*t (Sec Bahr's note). Compare also Joseph. Ant.jud, III.
vi. 2.
5 [rw] vtyatrQa*. Rupp: "Ty ex conjectura addidi." Possibly
the original reading was vuj/aiitvoi, which would easily become
altered through the presence of vityavBai in the preceding line.
This washing is not mentioned in the Liturgy of St. James.
In the Liturgy of Constantinople this Psalm
was chanted by the Priest and Deacon while washing their hands
at the Prothesis or Credence.

6 Ps. xxvi. 6.

7 aytfirtv&vvof.

. ii. 1.
and all guile, and evil speaking *, Grc.

3. Then the Deacon cries aloud, " Receive
ye one another ; and let us kiss one another 8."
Think not that this kiss is of the same char
acter with those given in public by common
friends.
It is not such : but this kiss blends
souls one with another, and courts entire for
giveness for them. The kiss therefore is the
sign that our souls are mingled together, and
banish all remembrance of wrongs.
For this
cause Christ said, IfIhon art offering thy gift at
the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother
hath aught against thee, leave there thy gift
upon the altar, and go thy way ; first be re
conciled to thy brother, and then come and offer
The kiss therefore is reconciliation,
thy gift*.
and for
as the blessed
this reason
Paul somewhere cried, saying, Greet ye one
another with a holy hiss 1 ; and Peter, with a
kiss of charily

holy :

4. After this the Priest cries aloud, " Lift up
your hearts 3." For truly ought we in that most
awful hour to have our heart on high with
God, and not below, thinking of earth and
earthly things.
In effect therefore the Priest
bids all in that hour to dismiss all cares of this
life, or household anxieties, and to have

9 Matt. v. 23.

8 These two directions by the Deacon are separated in the
Liturgy of St. J;imes : after the dismissal of the Catechumens, the
Deacon says, "Take note one of another ; " and after the Incense,
Cherubic Hymn, Oblation, Creed, and a short prayer "that we
may lie united one to another in the bond of peace and charity,"
the Deacon says, "Let us salute (ayanutntv) one another with
a holy kiss."
In the Apostoiic Constitutions, VIII. it, therr
is but one such direction, and this comes before the washing of
hands and the dismissal of the Catechumens, "Salute \ao-a<raat)*)
ye one another with a holy ki.s."
From Cyril's reference to this passage "it
may be inferred tbat the kiss of peace had been given before
the gifts were brought to the altar, according to ancient custom
attested by Justin M. Apolog. i. c. 65 :
' Having ended the
praters' (lor the newly baptized) 'we salute one another with
a kiss. Then there is brought to the President of the brethren
there
bread, and a cup of wine mixed with water' "(lien. Ed.),
is the same order in the Apost. Const. VIII. 12. and in the 19th
Canon of the Synod of Laodicea ; but in the Liturgy of S. James
the gifts are offered before the kiss of peace.

3 The words are slightly varied in the Liturgies : thus in the
Liturgy of St. James, " Let us lift up our mind aud hearts ;*' in the
Apost. Const, via. 12, " Lift up your mind."

1 Cor. xvi. 20.

1 Pet. iii. 15.

=>

i-4

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

their heart in heaven with the merciful God.
Then ye answer, " We lift them up unto the
Lord:" assenting to it, by your avowal.
But
let no one come here, who could say with
his mouth, " We lift up our hearts unto
the Lord," but in his thoughts have his mind
concerned with the cares of this life
At all
times, rather, God should be in our memory ;
but if this is impossible by reason of human
infirmity, in that hour above all this should
be our earnest endeavour.

5. Then the Priest says, " Let us give thanks
unto the Lord." For verily we are bound to
give thanks, that He called us, unworthy as
we were, to so great grace ; that He recon
ciled us when we were His foes; that He vouch
safed to us the Spirit of adoption.
Then ye
say, " It is meet and right :" for in giving
thanks we do a meet thing and a right ; but
He did not right, but more than right, in doing
us good, and counting us meet lor such great
benefits.

Virtues,

Dominions,

6. After this, we make mention of heaven,
and earth, and sea * ; of sun and moon ; of
stars and all the creation, rational and irra
tional, visible and invisible; of Angels, Arch
angels,
Principalities,
Powers, Thrones ; of the Cherubim with many
faces : in effect repeating that call of David's,
Magnify the Lord with met. We make men
tion also of the Seraphim, whom Esaias in the
Holy Spirit saw standing around the throne
of God, and with two of their wings veiling
their face, and with twain their feet, while with
twain they did fly, crying Holy, Holy, Holy, is
For the reason of our
the Lord of Sabaoth 6.
reciting this confession of God
delivered
down to us from the Seraphim, is this, that so
we may be partakers with the hosts of the
world above in their Hymn of praise.

7. Then having sanctified ourselves by these
spiritual Hymns, we beseech the merciful God

4 Compare the noble Eucharistic Preface In the Liturgy of
St. James: |' It is verily meet, r cht, becoming, and our bounden
duty to praise Thee. 10 sing of Thee, to bless Thee, to worship
Thee, to glorify Thee, to give thanks to Thee the Maker of every
creature, visible and invisible, the Treasure of eternal blessings;
the Fount of life and immortality, the God and Lord of all, whom
the heavens of heavens do praise, and all the powers thereof, sun
and moon and all the choir of the stars, earth, sea, and all that
in them is, Jerusalem the heavenly assembly, Church of the firstborn that are written in the heavens, spirits o< righteous men and
prophets, souls of martyrs and Apostles. Angels, Archangels,
Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Authorities, and Powers
dread, also the many-eyed Cherubim, and the six-winged Sera
phim, which with twain of their wings cover their faces, and with
twain their feet, and with twain do fly, crying one to another with
unresting lips, in unceasing praises, singing with loud voice the
triumphant hymn of Thy majestic glory, shouting, and glorifying,
and crying aloud, and saying,-Holy, Holy, Holy, O Lord of
Hosanna in the
Hosts, heaven and earth arc full of Thy glory.
highest; blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord;
Hosanua in the highest."

5 Ps. xxxiv. 3.
7 tfeoAovtai', " the doctrine of the Godhead," either of the Son
cf. Athanas. j
viiv iv rpiaSi i\ ffcoAoyta nktia

6 Is. vi. a, 3
in particular, or, as here, of the whole Trinity :
contra Arianos, Or. L 6 18 :
jrriV.

to send forth His Holy Spirit upon the gifts
lying before Him ; that He may make the
Bread the Body of Christ, and the Wine the
Blood of Christ8; for whatsoever the Holy
Ghost has touched, is surely sanctified and
changed.

service, is

8. Then, after the spiritual sacrifice, the
bloodless
completed, over that
sacrifice of propitiation » we entreat God for
the common peace of the Churches, for the
welfare of the world 1 ;
for sol
diers and allies ; for the sick ; for the afflicted ;
and, in a word, for all who stand in need of suc
cour we all pray and offer this sacrifice.

for kings ;

at

that

9. Then we commemorate also those who
have fallen asleep before us, first Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
their
prayers and intercessions God would receive
our petition
Then on behalf also of the Holy
Fathers and Bishops who have fallen asleep
before us, and in a word of all who in past
years have fallen asleep among us, believing
that it
will be a very great benefit to the
souls 3, for whom the supplication is put up,
is
while that holy and most awful sacrifice
set forth.

10. And I wish to persuade you by an
illustration.
For I know that many say, what
is a soul profited, which departs from this
world either with sins, or without sins, if it be
commemorated in the prayer ?
For if a king
were to banish certain who had given him of
fence, and then those who belong to them*

8 In the Liturgy of St. James the Triumphal Hymn is followed
by the ' Recital of the work of Redemption.' and of 'the Insti
tution.' by the 'Great Oblation,' and then by the 'Invocation,'
as follows : " Have mercy upon us, O God, alter Thy great meicy,
and send forth on us, and on these gifts here set before Thee,
Thine all-holy Spirit
that He may come, and by His holy.
good, and glorious advent (irapovrriij) may sanctify this Bread and
make it the holy Body of Thy Christ (Amen), and this Cup the
In Cat. xix. 7, Cyril
precious Blood of Thy Chtist" {Amen).
calls this prayer "the holy Invocation of the Adorable Trinity,"
and in xxi. 3, " the Invocation of the Holy Ghost."
9 See Index, ''Sacrifice," and the reference there to the
Introduction. Compare Athenagoras
c. xiii.): ''Whathave
I to do with burnt offerings, of which God has no need ? Though
indeed it behoves us to bring a bloodless sacrifice, and the reason
able service."
1 Cyril here gives a brief summary ofthe " Great Intercession,"
in which, according to the common text of the Liturgy o St.
James, there is a suffrage "for the peace and welfare (eutrTaof the whole world, and of the holy Churches of God."
Mr. Hammond thinks that it has been taken irom the Deacon's
Litany, and repeated by mistake in the Great Intercession.
But
from Chrysostom's language (/« £p. ad Pkii. Horn. iii. p. 218 ;
Gaume, T. xi. p. 251), we must infer that the prayer vrrcp rip-.'i-ns
icai evtrTafht'at* rov koohov formed part of the 'Great I ntercession '
in his Liturgy, as it does in the Clementine [Apost. Constit. VIII.
8 10).a In the Liturgies of St. James and St. Mark, and in the
Clementine, there are similar commemorations ot departed saints,
especially "patriarchs, prophets, apostles, martyrs," but nothing
coi responding to the words, '"that at their prayers and intercessions
God would receive our petition." See Index, Prayer and Inter
cession.
3 So Chrysostom (/» 1 Cor. Horn. 4T, p. 457 a): 11 Not in
vain was this
the
dread Mysteries remembrance should be made of the departed:
for they knew that it is a great gain to them, and a great benefit.
" Hesychius, AlocVpet, ai-ri«cet.
4 01 TOVTOIS I < ti >V por'T, s.
Ubi Kusterus ait, aerixci, id
est. "pertinet," vel " attinet*
Dr. Routh's note
Roulh, Scriptor. Eccles. O/uscu/a, p. 441).

rule ordained by the Apostles, that

in

LECTURE XXIII.

should weave a crown and offer it to him on
behalf of those under punishment, would he
not grant a remission of their penalties?
In
the same way we, when we offer to Him our
supplications for those who have fallen asleep,
though they be sinners, weave no crown, but
offer up Christ sacrificed for our sins s, propitia
ting our merciful God for them as well as for
ourselves.

11. Then, after these things, we say that
Prayer which the Saviour delivered to His own
disciples, with a pure conscience entitling God
our Father, and saying, Our Father, which art
in heaven. O most surpassing loving-kindness
of God ! On them who revolted from Him
and were in the very extreme of misery has He
bestowed such a complete forgiveness of evil
deeds, and so great participation of grace, as
that they should even call Him Father.
Our
Father, which art in heaven ; and they also
are a heaven who bear the image of the
heavenly 6,
in whom is God, dwelling and
walking in them i.

12. Hallowed be Thy Name.

The Name
of God is in its nature holy, whether we say
so or not ; but since it is sometimes profaned
among sinners, according to the words, Through
you My Name is continually blasphemed among
the Gentiles*, we pray that in us God's Name
may be hallowed ; not that it comes to be holy
from not being holy, but because it becomes
holy in
us, when we are made holy, and
do things worthy of holiness.

13. Thy kingdom come. A pure soul can
say with boldness, Thy kingdom come; for
he who has heard Paul saying, Let not there
fore sin reign in your mortal body 9, and has
cleansed himself in deed, and thought, and
word, will say to God, Thy kingdom come.

14. Thy will be done as in heaven so on
God's divine and blessed Angels do
earth.
the will of God, as David said in the Psalm,
Bless the Lord, all ye Angels of His, mighty
in strength, that do His pleasure1.
So then
in effect thou meanest this by thy prayer,
" as in the Angels Thy will is done, so like
wise be it done on earth in me, O Lord."

15. Give us this day our substantial bread.
This common bread is not substantial bread,
but this Holy Bread is
that
is, appointed for the substance of the soul2.

substantial,

refers to Niceeni Cone. Can. xvi. : v^apiratrat top t«5 «re'p<f) iSiac'»i -
Cf. Synodi Nic. aei Ale.xandtitios Epist.: SiatfWporTa
povta.
TJ) Atyvrrw Kai T]j a-ytuTaTf) *A\e$av&p*wv exxA*)<ri*i.
5 According to the Ben. Ed. the mtaning is not "We offer
Christ, who was sacrificed for our sins," but *' We offer for our
sins Christ sacrificed." i.e "Christ lying on the altar as a victim
sacrificed,' in allusion to A*poc. V. 6, 12. See Index, " Sacrifice."

6 1 Cor. xv. 49.
8 Is. lii. 5 ; Rom. ii. 24.
1 Ps. ciii. 20.
9 " It is manifest that the author derives the word emovtrcos
from the two words cirt and ovcrt'a, as do many others : although

7 3 Cor. vi. 16.
9 Rom. vi. 12.

cast out into

the draught*, but is

For this Bread goeth not into the belly and
is
dis
tributed into thy whole system for the benefit
of body and soul 4. But by this day, he means,
" each day," as also Paul said, While ii is
called to-day s.

16. And forgive us our debts as ive also
forgive our debtors.
For we have many sins.
For we offend both in word and in thought,
and very many things we do worthy of con
demnation ; and if we say that we have no sin,
we lie, as John says6. And we make a cove
nant with God, entreating Him to forgive us
our sins, as we also forgive our neighbours
their debts. Considering then what we receive
and in return for what, let us not put off nor
delay to forgive one another.
The offences
committed against us are slight and trivial,
and easily settled ; but those which we have
committed against God are great, and need
such mercy as His only is.
Take heed
therefore, lest for the slight and trivial sins
against thee thou shut out for thyself for
giveness from God for thy very grievous sins.

17. And lead us not into temptation, O
Lord.
Is this then what the Lord teaches us
to pray, that we may not be tempted at all?
How then is
it said elsewhere, "a man untempted, is a man unproved J ;" and again, My
brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into
divers temptations* f
But does perchance the
entering into temptation mean the being over
whelmed by the temptation ?
For tempta
is, as it were, like a winter torrent
tion
Those therefore who are
difficult to cross.
not overwhelmed in temptations, pass through,
shewing themselves excellent swimmers, and
not being swept away by them at all ; while
those who are not such, enter into them and
are overwhelmed.
As for example, Judas
having entered into the temptation of the love
of money, swam not through it, but was over
whelmed and was strangled 9 both in body
and spirit. Peter entered into the temptation of
the denial ; but having entered, he was not over-

4 Cat. xxii. I 3, note 1.

the explanation which derives it from iiriovirn ht**p<f is more
probable. We render it " substantial " in accordance with Cyril's
meaning, with which the word " super-substantial does not agree"
IBen. Ed ).
Ben. Ed. "We are not to think
that Cyril supposed the Body 01 Christ to be distributed and
digested into our body ; but in the usual way of speaking he
attributes to the Holy Body that which belongs only to the species
under which It is hidden. Nor does he deny that those species
Cf. lien.
pass into the draught, but only the Budy ot Christ."
V. ii. 2, 3, and M Euchariscic Doctrine" in the Introduction.

3 Malt. xv. 17.

6 1 John i. 8. We deceive ourseh ex.

5 Hcb. iii. 15.
7 Tertull. De Baftt. c. 20 :

*' For the word had gone before
'that no one uutempted should attain to the celestial kingdoms.'"
Apost. Const. II. viii. : "The Scripture says, 'A man that is
(airttptMrros) by God.'"
reprobate (aSoxtfioc) is not
a
Resell, Agrapha, Logion 26, p.
188, quotes allusions to the
saying in Jas. i. 12, 13; 2 Cor. xiii. 5, 6, 7, and concludes that
it w.is recorded as a saying ot our Lord in one of the un-canonical
gospels (Luke i. i).where it occurred in the context of the incident
narrated in Matt. xxvi. 41, Mark xiv. 38.

tried

9 amrri-tyn.

Matt, xxvii. 5 : amj-y£aTo.

8 Jas. La.

1 56

CATECHETICAL LECTURES.

whelmed by it, but manfully swam through
it, and was delivered from the temptation '.
Listen
again, in another place, to a com
pany of unscathed saints, giving thanks for
deliverance from temptation, Thou, O God
hast proved us; Thou hast tried us by Jinlike as silver is tried.
Thou broughtest us
into the net ; Thou layedst afflictions upon oui
loins.
Thou hast caused men to ride over
our heads ; we went through fire and water ;
and thou broughtest us out into a place oj
rest'.
boldly
Thou seest them speaking
in regard to their having passed through and
not been pierced
But Thou broughtest us
out into a place of rest ; now their coming
into a place of rest is their being delivered
from temptation.

1 8. But deliver us from the evil.

If Leaa
us not into temptation implied the not being
tempted at all, He would not have said, But
deliver usfrom the evil. Now evil is our adver
sary the devil, from whom we pray to be
delivered •».
Then after completing the prayer
thou sayest, Amen*; by this Amen, which
means " So be it," setting thy seal to the
petitions of the divinely-taught prayer.

19. After this the Priest says, " Holy things
to holy men."
Holy are the gifts presented,
hiving received the visitation of the Holy
Ghost ; holy are ye also, having been deemed
worthy 0/ the Holy Ghost ; the holy things
therefore correspond to the holy persons6.
Then ye say, "One is Holy, One is the Lord,
Jesus Christ?."
For One is truly holy, by
nature holy ; we too are holy, but not by
nature, only by participation, and discipline,
and prayer.

so. After this ye hear the chanter inviting
you with a sacred melody to the communion
of the Holy Mysteries, and saying,(9 taste and
Trust not the
see that the Lord is good*.
judgment to thy bodily palate 9 ; no, but to faith

1 Compare the. description of Peter's repentance in Cat. ii. 19.
• Ps. lxvi. 10- 12.
3 For ■ u trap ■
> a i the Ben. Ed. conjectures cpTav^vo* " to have
been stuck fast."
4 Cyril is here a clear witness for the reference of row woviipov
to "the wicked one."
5 From : 14, ruxourroc touto Afyeic, it seems probable that
the whole Prayer was said by the people as well as by the Priest.
See Introduction, *' Eucharistic Rites. '
6 Compare Watcrland on this passage, c. X. p. 688.
7 Apost. Const. VIII. c. xiii :

•' Let the Bishop speak thus
to the people : Holy things for holy persons. And let the people
answer: There is One that is holy; there is one Lord, one Jesus
Christ, blessed for ever, to the glory of God the Father." The
Li-.orgies of St. James and of Constantinople have nearly the
same words : in the Liturgy of St Mark the answer of the people
is : One Father holy, one Son holy, one Spirit holy, in the unity
of the Holy Spirit.
In the Apostolic Constitutions the "Sancta
8 Ps. xxxiv. 9.
and its response are immediately followed by the "Gloria
Sanctis
Then the Clergy partake,
in cxcelsis." and the
and there follows a direction that this Psalm xxxiv. is to be said
while all the rest are partaking.
In the Liturgv of Constan
The Choir sings the communiontinople there is the direction :
anliphon (rb xoirwrtjcbv) of the day or the saint. '
(iriTpc'ingrc, probably an itacism, we should read

Hosanna."

9 For

unfaltering;
for they who taste are bidden
to taste, not bread and wine, but the antitypical 1 Body and Blood of Christ.

21. In approaching" therefore, come not with
thy wrists extended, or thy fingers spread ; but
make thy left hand a throne for the right,
as for that which is to receive a King 3. And
having hollowed thy palm, receive the Body of
Christ, saying over it, Amen.
So then after
having carefully hallowed thine eyes by the
touch of the Holy Body, partake of it ; giving
heed lest thou lose any portion thereof ♦ ; for
whatever thou losest, is evidently a loss to thee
as it were from one of thine own members.
For
tell me, if any one gave thee grains of gold,
wouldest thou not hold them with all careful
ness, being 6n thy guard against losing any
of them, and suffering loss ?
Wilt thou not
then much more carefully keep watch, that
not a crumb fall from thee of what is more
precious than gold and precious stones ?

22. Then alter thou hast partaken of the
Body of Christ, draw near also to the Cup of
His Blood; not stretching forth thine hands,
but bending s, and saying with an air ol wor
ship and reverence, Amen6, hallow thyself by
partaking also of the Blood of Christ. And
while the moisture is still upon thy lips, touch
it with thine hands, and hallow thine eyes
and brow and the other organs of sense 7.
Then wait for the prayer, and give thanks unto
God, who hath accounted thee worthy of so
great mysteries 8.

iii.

eiriTp<ireTot, as a question, the propriety of the change being
'* Is the judgment of this entrusted
indicated by the answer ov\L
to the bodily palate? No, but, &c."
1 apTLTvn-ou crui/iaroc, " the anlitypical Body," not " the anti
Cf. Cat.
type of the Body," which would require tou uw^aroi.
xxi. | i, note 6.
3 Cat. xviii. 32 : " with what reverence and order you must go
from Baptism to the Holy Altar ol God."
3 Cyril appears to be the earliest authority for thus placing the
hands in the form of a Cross. A similar direction is given in the
roist Canon of the Trullan Council (692), and by Joh. Dairtasc.
(De Fid. Orthod. iv. 14). Diet. Chr Ant. " Communion." Thai
the communicant was to receive the Bread in his own hands is
clear from the language of Cyril and other Fathers.
Cf. Clem.
Alex. Strom. I. c. i. t 5 '• " Some after dividing the Eucharist
according to custom allow each of the laity himself to take his
part." See the passage of Origen quoted in the next note, and
" '1 he Sacrament of the Eucharist,
Tertull. Cor. Mil. c.
which the Lord commanded both (to be taken) at meal-times and
by all, we take even in assemblies before dawn, and from the hand
of none but the presidents."
4 Origen, Horn. xiii. in Exod. I 3 : " I wish to admonish you
by examples from your own religion : ye, who have been accus
tomed to attend the Sacred Mysteries, know how, when you receive
the Body of the Lord, you guard it with all care ana reverence,
that no little part ot it fall down, no portion ol the consecrated gift
For you believe yourselves guilty, and rightly so
slip away.
believe, if any part thereof fall through carelessness."
5 KtiirTwv. not kneeling, but standing in a bowing posture.
Cf. Bingham, XV. c. 5, > 3.
* Apost. Const. VIII. c. 13: "Let the Bishop give the
Oblation (npoa^opay) saying, The Body 0/ Christ. Ana let him
that receiveth say, Amen. And let the Deacon hold the Cup,
and when he delivers it say, The Blood oj Christ, the Cup 0/Lije.
And let him that drinkelh say, Amen"

7 Cat. xxi. 3, note 8.
8 In the Liturgy of St. James, after all have communicated,
" The Deacons and the People say:
Fill our mouths with Tny
praise, C Lord, and fill our lips with joy, that we may sing 01 Thy
glory, of Thy greatness, all the day. And a$ain: We render

LECTURE XXIII.

23. Hold fast these traditions undefiled and,
keep yourselves free from offence.
Sever not
yourselves from the Communion ; deprive not
yourselves, through the pollution of sins, of
these Holy and Spiritual Mysteries. And the

thanks Co Thee, Christ our God, that Thou hast accounted us
worthy to partake of Thy Body and Blood,

God of peace sanctify you wholly ; and may
your spirit, and soul, and body be preserved
entire without blame at the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ* :-To whom Be glory and honour
and might, with the Father and the Holy
Spirit, now and ever, and world without end.
Amen.

% x Thess. v. kj.

J

INDICES.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

The References are to the Lectures and numbered Sections of each Lecture.

AARON called Christ, xvi. 13, type
of Christ's priesthood, x.
II,
xii. 28, his rod blossoming as
strange as Christ's birth, xii. 28,
and suggests our resurrection,
his forgiveness and
xviii.
encouragement to the penitent,
ii. 10.

Abomination of desolation, iv. 15,

12,

xv. 9.

Abraham justified not by works only
but by faith, v. 5, perfected by
faith, ib. Father of Christians,
v. 6, his faith a type of ours,
ib. example of reverence
to
God, vi.
3, beheld the Lord,
xii. 16.

Adam, his creation as strange as
Christ's birth, xii. 30, first and
second Adam, xiii. 2, instance
of the efficacy of repentance,
11.
in
represented in
nocence by the Baptized, xx. 2.
Adoption of men to be sons of God,
vii.
7, by the Father's grace,
through the Son and Spirit, ib.
in Baptism, Proc. 16, i. 2, iii. 14,
xx. 6, not of necessity, but our
free choice, vii.
Christ's
Sonship not by adoption, x. 4,
xi.
of
Adoption, xvii. 5.

Advent of Christ twofold, xv. I.

Spirit

Sett),

(vide

his

13.

7,

First in humiliation, ib.

xv.

Second in glory from heaven,
3, foretold by Malachi.
xv. I,
xv.
20,
Ecclesiastes,
2.
St. Paul, xv. 2, time unknown,
yet to be expected, xv. 4, signs
of it given us by Christ, ib.

Object of our hope, xv. I, 2,
33, not from the Earth, xv. 10,
shall destroy Antichrist, xv. 9,
12, changes accompanying it,
xv. 3, shall bring in a new world,
xv. 4.

JEons of Valentinus, vi. 1 7, why said

to be thirty, ib.
Agabus, xiii. 29, xvii. 28.
Agrapha (Resch), vi. 36, xxiii. 17.
Ahab, instance 0/ <he efficacy of

repentance, ii. 13.

1,

Almighty, denied of God by Greeks,
vii.
2, and Heretics, viii. 3,
blasphemies against Him, viii. 8.
Almsdeeds, fruits of repentance, and
preparation for Baptism, iii. 8,
37, taught by the Holy
iv.
Ghost, xvi. 12.

Altar of God, xxiii. 2, of the New

Ambition

Testament, xviii. 33.

conquered
Holy Ghost, xvi. 19.

through

the

Angels made by God, iv. 4, made by
Christ, xi. 23, their orders, iv.
16, xi.
12, have no equality
with the Holy Ghost, xvi. 23,
governed and sanctified by Him,
iv. 16, xvi 23, forgiven by God,

VOL. VII.

/

11. 10, fearful to behold, ix. 1,
xii. 14, but little known of them
by us, xi. 12.

Christ their Lord, x. 10, xii.
14, not the makers of the world,
xi. 31, 22, know not God as
He is, vi.
6, vii. 11, nor our
Lord's generation, xi. 11, 12.

Ministered to Christ, x. IO,
present
3,
Baptism,
rejoice there, Proc. 15, iii. I, 3,
16, know its Seal, i. 3 (vide
Seal), glory in the cross, xiii.
22, minister at the judgment,
xv.
28, innumerable
22,
there present, xv. 24.

19,

iii.

at

Anointing of Christ, x. 4, 14, eter
nally from the Father, ib. as
15, with the Holy
God, xi.
Ghost at His Baptism, xxi. 1, 2,
vide Chrism.

Antediluvians,

instance
long-suffering, ii. 8.

Anthropomorphism, vi. 8, ix. I.
Antichrist, iv. 15.

of God's

14,

xv.

discredit

truth, xv.

of him, xv.

Daniel, xv.
9,

Christ's counter
feit, xv. 33, raised up by Satan
to
II, a
sorcerer, ib. Satan shall be in
him personally,
17,
expected by the Jews, xii. 2,
foretold by our Lord, xv. 9,
13,
8. Paul, ib.
signs
18, by
sorcery shall gain the Roman
Empire, and deceive the Gen
tiles, xv. II, 12, the Eleventh
King, xv. 12, 13, for three years
and a half, xv. 12, 16, shall be
received by the Jews as Christ,
xv.
the
15,
temple, xv. 15, abhor idols, ib.
first mild, then persecuting, xv.
12, 15, especially to the Saints,
ib.
shall pretend to miracles,
xv. 13, shall be destroyed by
Christ's Advent, xv. 9, 12.

rebuild

Martyrs

under him

most
glorious, xv. 17, we must watch
against him, xv. 18, 33.

12,

11,

Antitype, Baptism, xx. 6, Chrism,
Eucharistic Elements,

xxi.
xxii. 3, Intr. pp. xxxi., xl.
Apelles, his heresy, iv. 20, note 2,

I,

xvi. 4, note 3.

Apocalypse, not reckoned in the
Canon by S. Cyril, iv. 36, per
haps referred to, x. 3, xv. 27,
vide note xv. 16.

Apocryphal or doubtful books not
to be studied, iv. 33, 35, proofs
not drawn from them, xv. 16.
Apostasy foretold by S. Paul, in S.

Cyril's day, xv. 9.

Apostles correspond to the Prophets,
xiv. 26, xvi. 4, 24, more favoured
than they, xiv. 26.

Holy Ghost in them, xvi. 3,
4, 9, 24, panially before Pen
tecost, xvii. 12, 13, baptized fully

at Pentecost, xvii. 14, 18, supernaturally enlightened, xvi. 17.
Witnesses of the Cross, xiii.
40, and Resurrection, xiv. 22,
xiii. 25 (v.
hid
13),
Peter,
Gospel of
received power to forgive sins
in the Holy Ghost, xiv. 22, their
deeds by Him, xvii. 21, &c.

themselves,

Send us to the Old Testament
2,
prools of Christ, xiv.
Scriptures

for
handed down the
to us, iv. 35.

§§ 7,

Typified by Joshua's twelve

officers, x. 11.

Apparel, to be simple, iv. 29.
Archelaus, a Bishop of Mesopotamia,
disputes with Manes, vi. 27-30.
Arianism, iv. 7, x. 5, 6, 9, 14, xi.
14, and Sabellianism alike to be
shunned, iv. 8, xi.
13, 16, 17,
the "falling away" spoken 01
by S. Paul, xv. 9.

Arius, Intr., pp. ii., iii., xlviii.
As far as, vide Until.
Ascension of Christ, iv. 13, 14, fore
told by the Prophets, xiv. 24,
compared with the translation
of Enoch and Elias, xiv. 25,
preceded the full gift of the
Spirit, xvii. 12, 13.

Astrologers, iv. 18.
Athanasius, Intr. p. iii.
Authenticity, Intr., p. liii.
Azariah, xvi. 28.

vi. 36.

Babel, its confusion contrasted with
the gift of tongues at Pentecost,
xvii. 17.

Banker, "be thou a faithful banker,"

Baptism, end of the Old Testament,
beginning of the New, iii. 6, ot
John, gave remission of sin,
iii. 7i xx. 61 preceded by con
fession, ib. inferior to Christian
Baptism, iii. 9.

Of our Lord, sanctified ours.
iii. II, xii. 15, Holy Ghost de
scended on Him alter it, xvii.
9, xxi. I, in it He vanquished
the Dragon in the waters, iii. 11,
preparatory to His Temptation,
and Ministry, iii. 13, 14, xxi. 4.
Christian, offered to all, Proc.
3, 4, iii.
I, 2, a trial, xiv. 30,
xvii. 36, not to be approached
lightly, or hypocritically, Proc.
2~4>
3 (vide faith. Hypo
crisy, Purpose), to the faithless
a curse,
like the
Proc. 3, 4,
parable of the Marriage Feast,
Proc. 3, iii. 2, the impenitent
though washed, not accepted,
ib. 2, 4, xvii. 30, case of Simon
Magus, Proc. 2, xvii. 35, pre
paration for it, Proc. 16, I. 6,
iv. 37, during Lent, Proc. 4,
Catechizing ami
i.

iv.

3,

S,

l62

CATECHETICAL LECTURES OF

S. CYRIL.

i.
5,
Exorcisms,
Proc. 9-14,
5, &c.
Repentance, Proc. 4, ii.
iii. 2, 7, 8.
Confession, i. 2, 5,
men must bring Faith, and look
to God for more, Proc. 1 7, v. 9,
not the purpose of Baptism, but
evil motives to be laid aside,
Proc. 4, 5.

Given in the name of the
Holy Trinity, iii. 3, xvi. 4, 19.
16,
Waters of Baptism, Proc.
iii. 3, 4, contain Christ, Proc.
15, why by water, iii. 5.
One,
iv. 37, but once to be received,
Proc. 7,xvii. 36, by Heretics not
Baptism, ib.
Sanctified by our
Lord's Baptism, iii 9, II, xii.
without it,
15, no salvation
iii. 4, 10, except to Martyrs, ib.
Freely given to faith only,
10, conveys
Proc. 8, i. 4,
remission of sins, Proc. 8,
15,
16, iii. 15, to all equally, i. 5,
xvii. 37, xviii. 20, the gift of
the Holy Ghost, iii. 2, 4,
14,
16, iv. 16, but not equally to all,
i. 5, xvii. 37.

iii.

(vide

Proc.

Glory and blessing of Baptism,
Proc. 0, 15, 16, though despised
by ihe world, ib.
Regenera
tion, ib. i. 2, iii. 4, iv. 37, xx. 4.
Illumination, xiii. 21. Adoption,
Proc. 16. iii. 14, xi. 9, titles of,
Proc. 16, called " Seal indel
ible,"
Seal),
transplants into spiritual Para
dise, grafts in the Holy Vine,
i. 5, xix. 9, xx. 7, imparts super
natural gifts, iii.
13. xvii. 37.
Death of sin, new life, Proc. 5,
16,
I, makes us
members of Christ, xxi. 1, pre
pares for the resurrection, iv.
32, destroys the sting of death,
iii. II. Fellowship with Christ's
sufferings, iii. 12, xx. 5-7, called
the '• Gift " i. 6, ii. 9, iii. 2, 4, 5,
13. &c. of God, through men,
XVM> 35> 3& Its twofold grace
of Water and the Spirit, iii. 4,
16, inseparable, ib. typified by
Circumcision, v. 6, to be dili
gently ch'erished. i. 4, xv. 26,
xvii. 37, works after it recorded,
xv. 23.

12, xx.

Names of Candidates enrolled,
Proc. i, 4. i. 5, of the Baptized
written in the book of the living,
xiv. 30, many who fall away
blotted out, ib. sins after it re
corded against the Judgment,
xv. 23,
20, scoffing at,
Proc. 16.

Baptism of Martyrs in blood,
iii. 10, xiii. 21, typified by the
blood from our Lord's side, ib.
water of Baptism, by the water,
ib.

Baptism of fire, xvii. 8, of the

xviii.

Holy Ghost, xv. 12, 14.

Administered

by

Bishops,

Priests, or Deacons, xvii. 35.

Rites previous to, xix. 2, &c.
Renunciation of Satan and his

works, ib. 2-9.
Profession of
Faith, xix. 9, symbolical putting
off of garments, xx. 2, anointing
with exorcised oil, xx. 3.
Con
4.
fession of the Trinity, xx.
Trine immersion, ib. symbolical
of Christ's three-days' burial, ib.
our death and birth, ib. repre
sentation of Christ's sufferings,
xx. 5-7, followed by the Chrism,
xxi. (vide Intr. Ch. iii.-v.).

Baptism of the Manichees, vi.

Baptistery, xix. a.
Barnabas, his preaching in the Holy

Ghost, xvii. 28.

Baruch, accounted in the Canon, iv.

35, quoted xi. 15.
Basil, the Great, Intr. p. viii.
Basilides, his heresy, vi. 17.
Basilisk, ix. 14.
Bath,

of Baptism,

water, Proc. 16, iii. 2.

not common

Beasts, witnesses of God's power
and glory, ix.
13, emblems of
human tempers, ib. in the Ark,
xvii. 10.

display God's power and
13, emblematical

wisdom, ix.
lessons to man, ib.

Beginning (apx^),

only One the

Bees,

Father, xi. 14, 20, 22.

of

15.

Bishop

Believer (vide Faithful).
Bishops, ministers of Baptism, xvii.
35, order of, xvi. 22, xvii. 35,
reverence due to them, iv. 35,
Jerusalem,
first
S. James, iv. 28, xiv. 21, first
fifteen of Jerusalem Hebrews,
xiv.
Bishops
Ancient
settled and handed down the
Canon, iv.
strife among
35,
them a sign of Antichrist, xv. 9.
Birds show forth God's glory, ix. 12.
Birth, New, Christ its author, xvii.
10, the gift of Baptism (vide
Baptism, Regeneration).

10, xiii. 21.
10,

Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost,
danger of it, iv. 16, xvi. K
Blood and water from Christ's side,
Bap
typical, iii.
tism of Blood, iii.
river
changed into it by Moses cor
responds with the Passion, xiii.
21, blood of the Paschal Lamb,
xix. 2, 3, blood not to be eaten,
iv. 28, vide xvii. 29, Blood of
Christ (vide Eucharist).

Body, work of God, not of the evil
one, iv. 4, 22, viii.
3, xii. 26,
vilified by Heretics, ib. instru
ment not cause of sin, iv. 23,
18, 22,
true part of man, iv.
xviii. 20, its excellence shows
God's glory,
be
ix.
cleansed by penitence, iv. 23,
cleansed by the water of Bap
tism, iii. 4, yet may be washed
without the soul being enlight
ened, Proc. 2, of Christians,
temple of the Holy Ghost, iv.
23, to be kept pure for its resur
rection, iv. 20,
20,
resurrection of, encouragement

xviii.

30,

15,

to

Christ's

to holiness, xviii. 1, shown from
analogies of nature, &c, iv. 30,
xviii.
6, &c, shares with the
soul, as its deeds, so its reward,
xviii. 19 (vide Resurrection).
Incarnation,
(vide
Manhood,) a bait to Death, xii.
15,
veil of His Godhead, xii.
26, typified by bread, xiii. 19,
received under the figure of
3, truly received
bread, xxii.
in the Eucharist, xxii.
I-6.
Christians made one with His
body, and blood, xxii.
I-3,
(vide Eucharist, Flesh).

I-6,

Book of life, names of the Baptized
written in, xiv. 30, book of the
Angels, iv. 24, our renunciation
of sin recorded in God's Book,
xix. 5.
Bread, a prophetic symbol of Christ's
body, xiii. 19, of the Eucharist,
Christ's body, xxii.
9,
xxiii. 7, signified by the showbread, xxii. 5, Substantial bread,
xxiii. 15, the Bread has respect
to the body, the Word to the
soul, xxii. s (v. Intr. Ch. vii.).
Breath of Christ gave power to for
give sin, xiv. 22, xvii. 12, and
the Holy Ghost par:ially, xvii.
12.
Breathing on Candidates
for Baptism, Proc. 9, of Exor
cism, xvi. 18, xx. 3.

Burial of Christ, iv. 11, in the Earth
to bless the Earth, xiii. 18, 35,
xiv. 1 1, foretold by the Prophets,
xiii.
3, in a garden,
xiv. ii, with Christ in Baptism,
Proc. 2, iii. 12, xx. 4, 5.

34, xiv.

ii. 7.

Caiaphas, his desolate house a wit
ness to the Cross, xiii. 38.
Cain, an instance of God's mercy,

I,

Proc.

Candidates for Baptism, tpterityfitroi,
distinct from
xi. 9,
Proc.
Be
from
Catechumens, and
lievers,
must
13,
12,
bring a true heart, Proc. 1-4,
the careless or hypocritical must
not forego Baptism but their
sin, ib. 4, seriousness becoming
their awful situation, ib. 13-15
(v. Intr. Ch. III.).

Canon of

Scripture

settled and
handed down by Apostles and
Ancient Bishops, iv. 35, to be
received from the Church, iv.33.

Carpocrates, his heresy, vi. 16.
Cataphrygians or Montanists. xvi. 8.
Catechizings previous to Baptism, to
be diligently attended, Proc. 9,
10, i. 5, their importance, ib.
guard against error, ib. iv.
I,
planting, or building up of the
Faith, Proc.
Creed their
II.
subject, ib. iv. 2, 3, not to be
to Catechumens or
revealed
Gentiles, Proc. 12, (v. end of
Proc. and Intr. Ch. II. § I).
Catechumen, meaning of the name,
Proc. 6, distinct trom the Faith
ful, ib. i. 4, y. I, not to be

informed of mysteries, Proc. 12,
nor of the Creed, v. 12, vi. 29
(v. Jntr. Ch. II. § 1).

Catholic Church, vi. 2, xvi. 22, xvii.

29, xviii. I.

Meaning of the word, xviii.
23. The name a mark of the
true Church, xviii. 26, to dis
tinguish it from Heretical as
semblies, ib.

Ceremonies of the Law abolished in

the Church, xvii. 29.
Cerinthus, his heresy, vi. 16.
Chaff mingled with water by the

.

Manichees, vi. 31.

Chanting of Psalms, xiii. 26, xxiii.
20, imitation of Angels, xiii. 26.

Charms forbidden, iv. 37.
Chastity, iv. 24, taught by the Holy

Ghost, xvi. 19, 22.
Cherubim, ii. 17, ix. 3.
Children, Song of the Three Children
-instance of Confession, ii. 16.
Chrism, or Holy Ointment, typical
of Christ's unction by the Holy
Ghost, xxi. I, 2, after the invo
cation of Christ's name, by the
presence of His Godhead, con
veys the Holy Ghost, xxi. 3,
ib. sym
the gift of Christ,
bolically applied to the different
parts of the body, xxi. 3, 4,
gives the name of Christians,
xxi. 1, S> types of it in the Old
Testament, xxi. 6, 7, to be kept
unspotted, xxi. 7, prepares us
4, Intr.
for our conflict,
Ch. VI. § I.

Christ, meaning of the word, x. 4,
II, 14, many so called typically,
xi. I, xxi. I, 2.

xxi.

Aaron, x. 1 1, xvi. 13. Saul and
David, xvi. 13, Christians, xxi. I.
Name shared by the Baptized,

Proc. 15, xxi I.

Christ Jesus the true Christ,

x. 14, xi. I.
3, 4, though with
One, x.
many titles,
His name
ib.
separated by the Valentinians,
vi. 17, 18.

His twofold Nature in One
Person, iv.
xv. I.
xii.
Son of God, and Son of David,
xi. 5.

9,

I,

God, iv. 7, very God, x. 6,
xi. 9, 14, proved from the Pro-
&hets, xi. 15, &c. God of God,
egotten, iv. 7, xi. 4, 16,
18.
Son of God, iv. 7, vi. 1, vii. 1,
&c. xii. 24, (v. Son), only-be
gotten, iv. 7, vii. 4, (v. Onlybegotten).
Eternally, xi. 4, 7,
8, 13, 17, 20, without beginning,
Partaker of the
xi. 4,
5,
together
Father's
with the Holy Ghost, vi.
6,
(v. Trinity), of the Father, xi.
14, 20, xiii. 14, begotten not
19, 20, 21,
made, xi.
14, 17,
Like in all things
(v. Arius).
to the Father, iv.
7, xi. .4, 9,
18, not the same as the Father,
xi. 17, 18, (v. Sabcllius), how

7.
Godhead,

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

8,

xi.

xi.

10.

subordinate to the Father, x. 9,
how one with the Father, xi. 16,
with the Father before His In
carnation, x. 6, 8.

Word Personal of the Father,
Wisdom and
iv.
Power of the Father,
4.
Maker of all things, by the will
of the Father, iv. 7, x. 6, xi. II,
12, 21-24, and their Lord, ib.
(v. Lord). His Throne Eternal,
iv. 7, xi. 17, (v. Session, Throne).
Anointed Priest before all ages,
X. 4, 14, xi. I.

As Creator so restorer of the
world, vi. II, only way to the
Father, x. I, 2, God made man,
xii. 3, 15, xiii. 33, truly ma le
man, iv. 9. God dwelling with
Emmanuel, xi. 14,
man, xi. 3.
xii. 23.
5,
Son of David, xi.
His incarnation,
reasons,
its
xii. I, &c. xiii. 33, (v. Incarna
tion), not a deified man, xii. 3,
was with the old Fathers, x. 7,
xii. 16. God seen in Him, xiv.
27.
His various names, express
His various offices, x. 3, 4, II,
13, &c.

tb.

xii.

Every thing concerning Him
written in the Prophets, xii. 16,
xiii. 8, v. Lect. x.-xv. passim
(v. Prophets). Witnesses of Him,
X. 17-20, xiii. 38-40, xiv. 22, 23.
The glory of Baptism, iii. 9,
II, sanctified
15,
it,
preached not till Baptized, iii.
14, the Holy Ghost came upon
Him, xvii. 9, xxi. 2, 3, like but
far higher than the Prophets,
xiv. 26, alone sinless, ii.
10,
iii. II, xiii. 3, 5. His righteous
ness greater than our sin, xiii. 33.
Died for us, xiii. 2, (v. Cruci
fixion, Death), truly, xiii. 4, 37,
voluntarily, xiii. 3, $, 6, 33.

Delivered the

Fathers
from Hades, iv. II, (v. Ifades).
His appearance after the Re
surrection, xiv. II, 12, (v. Re
surrection).

old

His first

His Ascension, xiv. 24.
Sits at God's right hand, xiv.
27, present in the Church, xiv.
3°-
His second coming in glory,
as
humiliation,
in
xv. I, (v. Advent), warned us
against being deceived about it,
xv. 4, comes no more from the
Earth, xv. 10, our Judge, xv. 25.
His Kingdom shall have no end,
xv. 26, 27.

We are made partakers of
Him by the Holy Chrism, xxi.
I, 6, and the Eucharist, xxii. I,
(v.
Jesus, Son,
Trinity, Word).

Father, God,

Church

(v.

Spread over the world, x. 16,
xvi. 22, slandered through the
crimes of heretics, xvi. 8, who
falsely share their name, ib.
vi. 12, to be especially perse
cuted by Antichrist, xv. 12, 15,
figures of Christ, xxi. I.

Catholic

throughout

the
world, xvi.
xviii. 23, (v.
22,
Kingdom), governed and sancti
fied by the Comforter, xvi. 14,
19, 22, xvii. 13.
Christ present
in her assemblies, xiv. 30, ever
present witness of Christ, xiii.
40,
Faith). New
Covenant established in her by
29.
the blessed Trinity, xvii.
Baptism plants in her, Proc. 17,
xviii. 26, witness and keeper of
Holy Writ, iv. 33, 35, xv. 13,
teaching
(v.
her
Scripture),
guard from error, iv.
I, 2, xi.
18, xii. 17, xvii. 3.

Creed,

Her order, Proc. 4, 13, con
trasted with heresy, vi. 35, 36,
reverence in Church, Proc. 14,
15, due to her ancient Bishops
from her children, iv. 35, to be
diligently attended before and
after Baptism, i. 6, xviii. 28.

Meaning of the word ixxKricria,
xviii.
Christian has
succeeded the Jewish, ib. why
called Catholic, ib. 23, 26, her
glories, xviii. 28.

25.

24,

Falling away in it a sign of
Christ's coming, xv. J, makes
way for Antichrist, xv. 9, 18,
existed in S. Cyril's day, ib.
lurking heretics in it, ib.
Church, of the Apostles, xvi. 4, of
Golgotha, xiv. 6, (v. Golgjtha),
of the Resurrection, ib. adorned
by Kings, xiv. 9, 14.
Constantine, ib.
Witness of the
22.
Resurrection of the Lord, ib. 23,
the last five Lectures delivered
there, xviii. 33, Intr. p. xii.
Circumcision, a seal -type of the
seal of the Spirit in Baptism, v.
5, 6, of the Spirit, v. 6.
Clement of Rome, quoted, xviii. 8.
Clouds show God's glory, ix. 9.
Comforter,

not diverse from the
Holy Ghost, xvii. 2, xvi. 3, 4,
why so called, xvi. 20, governs
and sanctifies the Church, xvi.
22, Angels and Prophets, xvi.
23, abides for ever with the
Faithful after Baptism, xvii. 37,
(v. Spirit), Manes called him
self the Comforter, vi. 25, xvi.
6, 9, and Montanus, xvi. 8.

mysteries,
L I, in the Holy Ghost given
according to each man's la th,
i. 5, Communion Service, xxiii.
I, &c, Intr. Ch. V., VII.

Communion in Christ's

Christians so called by the Holy
xvii. 28, partakers of
Ghost,
Christ's name, x.
I,
honour of this, x. 20, the new
name spoken of by the Pro
phets, x. 16.

16, xxi.

Confession, 4(ouo\6ynott, v.

ii. 15,
of sins, before Baptism, i. 2, 5,
takes away sin, as in David's
case, ii. 11, 12.
Hezekiah's, ib.
15, can quench fire, and tame
lions, ib. 16, made before John's

M 2

CATECHETICAL LECTURES OF S. CYRIL.

Baptism, iii.
iii. 10, Tntr. Ch. Ill § II.

7, by Martyrs,

Of the Trinity in Baptism,

xx, 4, Intr. Ch. IV. § II.
Of the seraphim ;

8*0X07/0,

xxiii. 6.

Confessors comforted by the Holy

Ghost, xvi. 20, 21.
Consecration of the Bread and Wine,
xxiii. 7, Intr. pp. xxvii., xxxv.

Cor.stantine, xiv. 22.
Continence, or widowhood, ifKfit«io, iv. 26, x. 19, xv. 23.
Controversy, an evil, though neces
sary, vi. 13, how to be engaged
in, xiii. 22. 37, (v. Heresy).
Cornelius though regenerated, yet bap
tized with water, iii. 4, xvii. 27.
Covenant New in the Church, xvii.
29, of Noah and Moses not
made without water, iii. 5Covetousness conquered through the

Holy Ghost, xvi. 19.
Creation, how to be ascribed to the
Father and Son, vi. 9, xi. 21,
22, of all things by God denied
by Heretics, iv. 4, of the world
in spring-time answered by the
Resurrection at the same time,
xiv. 10, material creation, good
in itself, marred by the creature,
ii. I, blasphemed by Manichees,
vi. 31. God seen in it, ix. 2,
glorifies Him, ix.
5, &c, we
know but little of it, ix. 13, 14,
should
teach us reverence to
Him, ix. 16.
Creator of all things God, iv. 4, vi.
7, not the author of evil, ii. I, 4,
blasphemed by Heretics, ix. 4,
Creator of the world its Restorer,
vi. 11.
Creed, Wo-ru, (v. Faith), to be re
ceived from the Church, v. 12,
collected and proved from Scrip
ture, ib. iv, 17, epitome of ne
cessary doctrine for the weak,
ib. provision for our way, ib.
safeguard against error, iv.
2,
I, ix. 4, x. 4, xi.
vii. I, 4, viii.
I, xv. 2, 27, xvii. 3, xviii.
1,
confutes Sabellius, xvii. 34, not
to be written down, or divulged
to Catechumens, v. 12, its Ar
ticles briefly expounded, iv., of
Jerusalem, Intr. p. xlvii.
Cross, chief boast of the Church
Catholic, xiii.
I, 22, redeemed
and enlightened the world, ib.
we must not be ashamed of it,
xiii. 3, 36, 37, glorified by the
Resurrection, xiii. 4, glory to
Christ, xiii. 6, foretold by Jere
miah, xiii.
19, and Moses, ib.
if an illusion, so is our salvation,
xiii. 37, foundation of the Faith,
xiii. 38.

Sign of it to be used on all
14, xiii. 22, 36,
occasions, iv.
scares devils, iv. 13, xiii. 3, 36,
its power and virtue, xiii. 40,
Christ's royal sign, iv. 14, xii.
8. trophy, xiii. 40, " Sign of the
Son of Man," xiii. 41, xv. 22.

Cross, wood of it dispersed through
the world, iv. 10, note, x. 19,
xiii. 4, witness of Christ through
the world, x.
19, of His real
Passion, xiii. 4.
Cross, Basilica of the Holy Cross,
Intr. p. xliii. (v. Golgotha).
Crown of thorns, signified the can
celling of Adam's curse, xiii. 17,
18.
Crucifixion not in appearance, "hut
real, iv. 10, xiii. 4, if an illusion,
so is Salvation, xiii. 37, for our
sins, iv.
xiii. 3, 5, 33, its
time the same as that of the
descent of the Spirit, xvii. 19,
this and its other circumstances
foretold, xiii. 24, &c. its wit
nesses, xiii. 38-40.

The Crucified, xiii. 3, 22, 23, 36, 40.
Curiosity, about mysteries of Bap

10,

tism fearful, Proc. 2, 4, iii. 7.
To be limited by what is
written, xi. 12, xvi. 1, 2, to give
place to faith, xi. 19, 20.
'1 of Jerusalem, his early years,
Intr. p. i., ordained Deacon by
Macarius, p. ii., Priest by Maximus, p. iii., Preacher and Catechist, ib.
his Consecration as
letter to ConBishop, p. iv.,
stantius on the lnminous Cross,
ib. dispute with Acacius, ib.
deposition and appeal, p.
vi. ,
welcomed at Tarsus by Sylvanus,
and meets with Semi-Arian Bi
shops, p. vii., confronts Acacius
at Synod of Seleucia, ib., de
posed again by a Synod at
Constantinople, p. viii., returns
from exile on accession ofJulian,
p. ix., Julian's attempt to rebuild
the Temple, ib. appoints his
nephew Gelasius successor to
x. ,
Acacius
p.
banished a third time, ib.
re
turns after death of Valens, ib.
finds Jerusalem full of heresy
and licentiousness, ib. present
at the 2nd General Council,
p. xi., justified and commended
by Synod of the following year,
382, ib. died 386, ib.
His doc
trine of Baptism, p. xxx., of
Chrism, p. xxxiii., of Eucharist,
p. xxxv., of the Holy Trinity,
p. xlvii., his writings, p, liii.

Caesarea,

at

Daniel, his power in the Holy Ghost,
xvi. 31, prophesied of the Ro
mans, xii. 18, xv. 13, of the
time of the Messiah, xii. 19, of
Antichrist, xv. 9-16, explana
tion of his prophecy, ib. en
dured not the sight ol the Angel,
xii. 14 (v. Confession),

Darkness made by the author of
Light, ix. 7, denied by heretics,
ib. (v. Might), of the Crucifixion
foretold, xiii. 24.

David (v.

Christ, .Spirit), spake of
Christ by the Holy Ghosc, x. 15,
xiv.
Christ his Son, and
Heir of his throne, xii. 23, not

28.

theexclusiveobject of the Psalms,
ib. vii. 2.

Saved by Confession, ii. 10,
yet refused not penitence, though
forgiven, ii. II.

Deacons the first seven, firstborn
children of the Church of Jeru
salem, xvii. 24, may administer
Baptism, xvii. 35.

Dead, how Christ so called, x. 4,
raised by Elijah and Elisha, xiv.
15, 16, by Christ without touch
ing them, xiv. 16, in His name,
witness His resurrection,
xiv.
23 (v. Resurtection. Judicium).
Death, invisible whale of death, xiv.
17, brought by the First man,
as Life by the Second, xiii. 2,
v. xii. 15, doom of sins, xiii. 33,
vanquished by Christ's death,
xii. 15, xiv. 19, sting destroyed
in Baptism, iii.
11, death in
Bamism, Proc. 5, iii. 12, xx. 4.
Of Christ real not illusory,
xiii. 4, not for His sin, but ours,
xu'. 5. 33> voluntary, ib. 6, 28,
foretold by Himself,
6.
God's sentence, and His mercy
reconciled in it, xiii. 33.
Demetrius of Phalerum, iv. 34.
Descent into Hell, iv. II, xiv. 19.

xiii.

Of the Spirit on Christ, how-

explained, xvii. 9.
Despair, its evils, ii. 5.
Devil, meaning of the word, ii. 4,
the dragon, Proc. 16, apostate
37, first work of
Serpent, iv.
God, viii. 4, fallen Archangel,
ii. 4, viii. 4, impenitent, iv. I,
author of evil by this free choice,
ii. 14, not the Lord of the world,
viii. 6, 7, his envy against man,
xii. 5, xix. 4, prompts not forces
to sin, ii. 3, 4. iv. 21, 37, men
have freely phosen him their
F ather, vii. 13, knew not Christ,
xii. 15, tries to prejudice truth
by his counterfeits in idolatry,
xv. II, shall work personally in
Antichrist, xv. 14, and war with
the Martyrs, xv. 17, vanquished
and cast out through the Holy
Ghost, xvi. 19, endured by God
that man may conquer him, viii.
4. watches the Candidates for
16, renounced
Baptism, Proc.
with his works in Baptism, xix.
2-9 (v. Intr Ch. IV. §
17).
what his works are, ib., pursues
us to Baptism, xix. 2, 3.
Devils tremble at the seal of Bap
tism, i. 3, xvii. 35, 36, and the
sign of the Cross, xiii. 3, pos
session by them fearful, xvi. 15,
power against them given by
the Holy Ghost, xvi.
12, 22,
acknowledge Christ, while Jews
knew Him not, x. 15, lurked in
our members till Baptism, xx.
2, driven away by the Exorcised
oil. xx. 3.

Devotion, end of religious knowledge,
vi. 7, xi. 12, 20, xvi. 1, 2.
Diocese, xiv. 21, xvi. 22, (v. vapoi<ci'a).

Dispensation, from the Father and
the Son one, xvii. 5 (v. oIkopoula).

Divination, to be shunned by Chris

tians, iv. 37.

Divisions in the Church make way
for Antichrist, xv. 7, 9, 18.

Docetse, iv. 9, vi. 14, xii. 3.
Doctrines to be withheld from Cate
chumens, Proc. 12, true, equally
necessary with good works, iv.
2, to be proved from Scripture,
iv. 17, xii. 5, xiii. 8 (v. Faith,
Scripture), not fully compre
hended by us, xi. 12, 19, xvi. I,
fondness for ingenious rather
than practical ones, an evil sign,
xv. 9.

Door, Christ, x. I, 3.
Dove, why a symbol of the Holy
Spirit, xvii. 9, of Noah, xvii. 10.
Dragon, xii. 15, head of the Dragon,

heresy, xv. 27.

In the waters, Proc. 16, iii. II.

Earth freed from Adam's curse by
18, 35,
burial,

xiii.

Christ's
xir. 11.

East, symbolical turning towards it

in Baptism, xix. 9.

Easter, xvii. 20, xviii. 33, season of

Baptism, ib.
Ebionites, vi. 16.
Egypt. Christ went there to destroy
its idols, x. 10, His witness, x.
19, deliverance from, typical of
Baptism, xix. 3, 4.

Elder, seventy Elders had the Holy

Spirit, xvi. 25.

Elijah full of the Holy Spirit, xvi.
Sjnai and
28, saw Christ in
Tabor, xii. 16, his raising the
dead answers objections against
15,
Christ's
his
compared with it, ib.
translation
with
compared
Christ's ascension, xiv. 25, not
so
favoured as the Apostles,
xiv. 26, typical passing of Jor
dan, iii. 5-

resurrection, xiv.
16,

Elisha full of the Holy Ghost, xvi.
28, supernatiirally enlightened,
ib. 17, his raising the dead, xiv.
15, 16, compared with Christ's.ib.
Elizabeth full of the Holy Ghost,

xvii. 7-

Emmanuel v. Immanuel.
End of the world not end of Christ's
kingdom or person, xv. 27-32.

Enlighten, said of Baptism, Proc. I,
xiii- 21, Simon Magus not en
lightened though baptized, Proc.
2, the Holy Ghost enlightens,
xvi.
16-18, xvii. 13 (v. Illu
minate).
Enmity, there is a righteous enmity,
vi.
blas
phemers of God, taught by the
world's wonders, ix. 16.

10, against

35, xvi.

Epistles of St. Paul final seal of the
36, why most
Scripture, iv.
numerous, x.
their com
18,
pleteness and variety of teaching
about the Holy Ghost, xvii. 34.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

xvi.

Epistle of the Apostles on the ob
servance of the Jewish Law by
Gentiles, iv. 28, xvii. 29, Uni
versal, ib.

Eternity of the Son of God, xi. 20,
of His generation, iv. 7, of His
Priesthood, x. 14, of His throne,
xiv. 27, Intr. Ch. X.
Church there,

22,
taught by the Eunuch, xvii. 25,
xvi. 14.

Ethiopia,

Eucharist, Christ's blessed gift. xiii.
6, The Body and Blood of the
Lord truly there, xxii. I, 2, under
the figure of Bread and Wine,
xxii.
3, The Bread and Wine
after invocation not simple ele
ments, but the Body and Blood
of Christ, xix. 7, xxii. 2, 6, 9,
xxiii.
7, not bread and wine,
but the sign of Christ's Body
and Blood, xxiii. 20, analogy of
Idol-sacrifices,
of the
Holy Chrism, xxi. 3, we must
not judge by sense of this mys
tery, xxii. 6, 9, but believe that
we have received Christ's Body
and Blood, ib. 1-6, xxiii. 20, a
spiritual mystery, xxii. 4, 8.

xix.

7,

The Bread and Wine after the
invocation of the Holy Trinity,
xix.
7, made the Body and
Blood of Christ, xxiii. 7, sanc
tified and changed by the Holy
Ghost, ib.
gills hallowed by
the Holy Ghost, xxiii. IQ.

Spiritual Sacrifice of Propitia
tion, xxiii.
9, supplications
after it for the living, ib. 8, and
the Dead, xxiii. 9.

The Substantial Bread, xxiii.
15, nourishment of Soul and
Body, ib., xxii. 5.

Typified by the Show-Bread,
xxii. S, foretold by David, ib. 7,
and Ecclesiastes, ib. 8.

8,

•

11y it we bear Christ in us,
xxii. 3, Mode of Communicating
in Christ's Body, xxiii. 21, and
Blood, xxiii. 22, " Eucharistic
Doctrine," Intr. Ch. VII.
Eve a virgin in Paradise, xii. 5, death
through her, as through Mary,
life, xii. 15, her birth as strange
as our Lord's, ib. 29.

Evil the creature s work, not the
Creator's, ii.
I, evil God be
lieved by the Manichees and
Gnostics, vi.
12, 13, physical
evil, ix. 14.

Exercise, Sinter is, previous to Bap

tism, i. 5, iii. 7.

Exorcisms

to

previous

Baptism,
Proc. 9, expel evil spirits, ib.
cleanse the soul, ib. collected
from the Scriptures,
ib. to be
diligently attended, i. 5, power
through the Holy Ghost, xvi.
19, 22, Intr. p. xix.

Exorcised oil, xx. 3.
Ezekiel saw but the likenesss of
God's glory, ix.
I, his vision,
ix. 3, prophecy of Baptism, iii.
16, xvi. 30.

7,

v. 4,

Faith, ground and bond of human
action, v. 3, principle of holi
ness,
exemplified in
Abraham, v. 5, power of faith,
ii. 16, v. 7, 8, in one man for
another, v. 8, 9, partly our own,
but chiefly God's gift to those
who ask, v.
9, two kinds of
faith ; one, our assent to doc
trines ; saves at once, v.
10,
another, a gift of the Spirit ;
reward of the former, working
miracles, v. 11.

Alone wanted to cure our
worst sins, ii. 6, in Baptism, i.
I, v. 2, xvii. 35, necessary to
our New Birth, i. 2, iii. 1, en
ables us to receive the gift of
Baptism, v. 6, purifies the soul,
iii. 2, makes sons of God, vii.
13, without works saved the
robber, v. to, xiii. 31, God can
give fnith to the faithless if he
but ask*, Proc. 17, v. 9, to be
tried by false miracles as well as
persecution, xv. 17, and by false
doctrine, xiii. 37.

Faith, *7<mj, i. e. the Creed-one,
Proc. 7, xvi. 4, 24, delivered by
the Church and proved from
Scripture, iv. 17, v. 12, guard
against error, iv.
2, outline of
teaching, iv. 3, v. I, note xiv.
24, 27, a deposit, and treasure,
v. 13 (v. Creed).

Faithful,

i.e. Baptized Christians,
Proc. 13, dignity of the title,
Proc. 6, v. I, 2, new name given
in Baptism, i. 4, must not pre
sume, ii. 3, Intr. p. xv.

Fall of Adam corresponded to in its
circumstances by the Passion,
xiii. 19.

Fasting taught by the Holy Ghost,
xvi. 12, means towards salva
tion, ii. 9, preparatory to Bap
tism, iii. 7, part of repentance,
ib. 16, iv. 37, David's, ii.
13)
reason of fasting, iv. 27, those
who cannot not to be despised,
ib. fast of the Preparation, xviii.
17 (v. Meats).

Fatalism of heretics, iv. 18-20, vii.

Fate not cause of sin, iv. 18-21, vii.
13, nor of our Sonship to God,
vii. 13, God not subject to it,
iv. 5.

Father, One God the Father, vii. 1,
xi.
13, to be included in our
notion of God, vi. I, Father, by
the Son, with the Holy Ghost
bestows all things, xvi. 4, 24,
xviii. 28 (v.
Trinity), One in
glory with the Son and Holy
Ghost, vi. I, the God of the Old
Testament, vii. 6, Maker of the
World, ib., through the Son,
vi. 9, xi. II, 12, 21-24.

The Father in respect of the
Son, vii. 1-5, viii. 1, as opposed
to Jewish unbelief, vii. 2, pro
perly and by nature the Father
of Christ, iv. 4, vi. I, vii. 5, 7,

CATECHETICAL LECTURES OF S. CYRIL.

t

10, how He begat the Son, He,
with the Son and Holy Ghost,
alone knows, xi. 8, n, we know
but negatively, ib. heresies as
to how God is Father, vi. 6,
vii. 5, xi. 4, 7-10. 14, 18, not
changed into the Son, xi.
13,
17, 18, distinct, yet not to be
separated from the Son, iv. 8
(v. Arms, Sahellius),
suffered
not for us, xi. 17, Father from
Eternity, vii. 5, xi. 4, 8, never
not the Father, iv. 5, vii. 5, 11,
The beginning {ipx^l S"opx0')
of the Son, xi. 4, note 3, -14, 20,
xiii. 23, apart from time, xi. 20,
in the Son, xi. 17, one with the
Son, xi. 16, called by the Son His
God, xi. 18, fountain of life, and
good, vi. 9, xi. 18, 20, xviii. 29,
worshipped through, xi. 17, xii.
15, and with the Son, x. I, 2,
only known to the Son and
Holy Ghost, vi. 6, vii. II, ix. I,
2, xi. 12, revealed by the Son,
through and with the Holy
Ghost, vi. 6, x. I, seen only in
the Son, x. 7, 8, xi. 18, xiv. 27
(v. Angtls).

How called " My Father " by

Christ, vii. 7, xi. 18, 19.

Father of men by adoption,
vii. 8, by faith, and their own
choice, vii. 13, in baptism, xi.
9, inconceivable honour for man
to have God for his Father, vii.
12, xxiii. II.

Other metaphorical senses of

the word, vii. 8-10.

Satan chosen by men for their

father, vii. 13.

Father, earthly Fathers receive their
prerogative from the Heavenly
3, to be honoured
Father, vii.
by the sons of God, vii.
15,
duty to them, the first Christian
duty, vii. 15, 16.
•Fathers of the Old Testament de
livered by Christ from Hades,
xiv. 19, fountains of truth to us,
xvi. II.

Fig-tree cursed for the sake of the

type, xiii. 18.

Figure, ruwos, Bread and Wine of
Christ's Body and Blood, xxiii.
3, Intr. p. xxxix.

Figure, ivrtrvwoy, Baptism, ofChrist's
sufferings, xx. 6 (intr. p. xl.),
Chrism, of the Anointing of the
Holy Ghost, xxi. I, Bread and
Wine, xxiii. 20.

Fire, Exorcism compared to

it,
Proc. 9, Baptism of, xvii. 8, of
the Holy Ghost like it, xvii. 12,
14, fiery tongues at Pentecost,
xvii. 15, opened Paradise, w hich
the fiery sword had guarded, ib.
First-born, Christ in an exclusive
sense, xi. 4, Israel so called, ib.

Fishes show God's glory, ix. II.
Flesh framed by God, xii. 26, not
ib.
unholy as
say,
Christ not ashamed of it,
ib.
hallowed by our Lord's incarna

heretics

tion, xii. 15, His weapon to
conquer the devil, and death,
ib. His flesh the veil of His
Godhead, xii. 26, xiii. 32, " eat
ing the flesh of Christ, not un
derstood spiritually by the Jews,
xxii. 4.

Flowers, their varied beauty show
forth God's glory, ix. 10.
Forgiveness of sins, Christ's, free gift,
11. 15, power of conferring it
granted to the Apostles, xiv. 22,
xvii. 12, how typified, xv. 21.

Of. injuries required in Bap
tism, i. 6, case of David and
Shimei, ii. II.

Even Angels forgiven, ii. 10.
re
Forgiveness of
quired from sinners in the Holy
Communion, xxiii. 16 (v. Re
mission, Sin).

injuries

Fornication defiles the temple of the

Holy Ghost, iv. 23.

Freedom of the soul, ii. 1, 2,iv. 18,21.

Gabriel, his appearance too bright
14, Messenger
for Daniel, xii.
to the blessed Virgin, xvii.
6,
witnessed of the endless king
dom of Christ, xv. 27.

Galatia, heresy of Marcellus arose

there, xv. 27.

6,

vi.

incomprehensible,

Garment of incorruption, xv. 26, of
Salvation, xix. 10, putting off of
garments in Baptism, xx. 2.
Gaul, the Church there, xvi. 22.
Generation of Christ twofold, xi. 5,
xv.
I, His Divine generation
spiritual, xi. 5, 7, 8, mysterious,
xi. 7, 8, not metaphorical, xi. 9,
not as mind begets thought, xi.
7,
iv.
10,
5,
vii.
passionless,
known to no creature, xi.
II,
13, only to the Holy Ghost, xi.
12, declared only negatively by
the Church, xi.
11, not to be
examined but believed, xi. 19,
20, -eternal, iv. 7, without be
ginning, vii. 4, xi. 4, 5, 7, 19,
timeless, xi. 7, 8, 14, 17, 20, (v.
Father, Son).
Gethsemane, x. 19.
Ghost, Holy (v. Spirit).
Gift, name of Baptism, i. 6, heavenly
gift, ii. 20, Gifts of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, same,
xvi. 24 (v. Baptism).

Chrism, gift of Christ, xxi. 3.
Gifts of the Eucharist, hallow
ed by the Holy Ghost, xxiii. 19.
Glory of Christ, eternal, as God, in
time, as crucified, xiii. 6.
Gnostics, iv. 8, vi. 12 ff., their here
sies, xvi. 7, against the Holy
Ghost, xvi. 4, 7, separated the
two Testaments,
4, ab
horred flesh and wines, iv. 27,
note 9, iv. 20, 22.

God (v. Creator, Father, Trinity),
knowledge of Him foundation of
religion, iv. 4, ignorance about
Him source of heresy and idol
atry, iv. 6, viii. I.

xvi.

4,

One, iv. 4, vi. passim, viii. 1,
8, xi. 17, unoriginate, unchange
able, iv.
5, vi. 7, one first
principle, vi. 12, 13, 36, xi. 28.
incorporeal, vi. 7, 8, ix. I, uni
form in substance, vi. 7, like to
Himself, vi. 7, infinite, iv. 5, vi.
8, viii. 2, incomprehensible, vi.
2, 4, 7, even to angels, vi. 6, to
all but the Son and Spirit, ib.
x. I, unspeakable in beginning,
form, nature, vi. 7, yet we must,
not indeed declare, but glorify
Him, as far as we know, vi. 5,
ix. 3, 16, our best knowledge to
know our ignorance of Him, vi.
2, invisible, ix.
I, 2, seen par
tially by angels, vii. 11, to man
in Christ, x. 6, 7, 8, xii. 16. xiv.
27. dimly in His works, ix. 2, &c.
Both Just and Good, iv. 4, vi.
7, and full of all perfection, vi.
7, 8, 9, Father of Christ, vii. 5,
Maker of all things, iv. 4, ix. I,
&c. of darkness as well as light,
ix. 7, Almighty, and Sovereign
over all things, though long-sui'-
fering:viii. i,&c. is in all things,
vi. 8, 9, all things serve Him
save the Son and Spirit, viii. 5.
Forsaken by idolaters, vi. 10,
II, xii. -5, &c. , His great mercy,
11. 7, 10, pardons worst of sin
ners who believe, ii. 5, 6.

Present in Baptism, Proc. 15.
Lord both of soul and body,

iv. 4, 22, viii. 3.

Blasphemed by heretics,
vi.
12, viii. 8, ix. 16, not two Gods,
vi. 13, viii.
3, not the soul of
the world, viii. 2, various here
sies concerning Him, iv. 4,
5,
vi. 14, &c.

"God of Abraham, Isaac, and Ja

cob," xviii. 11, 12.

God of God (v. Christ), made man,

xi. 15, xii. 3, xiii. 33.

" God of this world," the words per
verted by Manes, vi. 28, how
explained by Archelaus, and S.
Cyril, vi. 28, 29.

God the Son, the Word, xii. 3. Intr.

p. xlix. (v. Christ, Son).
God, the Holy Ghost (v. Spirit).
Golgotha, St. Cyril's first xviii. Lec
the Church
tures spoken in
there, iv. 10, xiii. 22, vide xviii.
33, name typically prophetic of
Christ, xiii. 23, witness of the
Crucifixion, iv. 10, 14, x. 19, xiii.
4, 39, Intr. p. xiii.

Gospel, only four genuine, iv. 36,
Manicha?an
ib.
forged
Gospel according to Thomas, iv.
36. vi. 31, our Gospels attested
by the Old Testament, xiv. 2,
that according to St. Matthew
written in Hebrew, xiv. 15.

ones.

All may hear but not under
stand the Gospel, Proc. 6, vi. 29.
Phrase "in the Gospel." 4*
tvayytMois, vi. 4, 7, xiii. 21, 35,
"Gospel of Peter," xiii. 26,
note I.

Grace, God's to give, ours to use, i.
4, necessary that we may re
ceive the truth xvi. 2. requires
honesty and faith, i. 3 to be re
ceived and cherished, xvii. 37,
given through Christ at the New
Birth, i. 2.

Gift of grace, ii. 9.
Spirit of grace, xvii. 5.
Greeks, dangerous because of their
plausible words, iv. 2, deny the
resurrection, xviii. X, limit God's
power, viii. 2, believe things as
hard as Christ's birth, xii. 27, to
be silenced out of their own
fables, xiii. 37, to Ise answered
by reasoning, as the Jews by
Scripture, xviii. 10, their shame
ful idolatry, iv. 6, vi 1 1.

Habakkuk. carried by the angel to
Daniel, xiv. 25. compared with
Christ, ib.
Hades (v. Hell).
Hands of Christ stretched on the
Cross typical, xiii. 27, 28 laying
on of, conveys the Spirit
in
both Testaments xvi. 26.

Head, v. xiii. 23.
Heathenism counterfeits truth to dis
credit it, xv. II (v. Idolatry).
Hearers, danger lest they receive
false impressions of truth, xvi. 2.
Heavens, vi. 3, the abode of angels,
iii. 5. made of water, ib. ix. Si
Heaven distinguished from the
Third Heaven, xiv. 26. its won
ders shew God's glory, ix.
5,
shall perish but be renewed, xv.
3, Christians, a heaven, xxiii. 1 1.
to
Christ descended thither
redeem the just, iv. 11, xiv. 19.
Herbs, men changed into them, who
to
them,

according

Hell

plucked
Manes vi. 31.

Heresy manifold, iv. 2, vi. 13, xvii.
33, xviii. 1, contrasted with the
Church, vi. 35, a knowledge of
it necessary, vi. 34, xvi. 5. yet
an evil, vi. 13, 33, arising from
presumption, xi. 12, from a mis
taken thought of honouring the
Father or the Son, xi. 17, v. x.
2, not to be curiously inquired
into, vi. 19.

Heresies alluded to by S. Cyril :-
vide Apelles ; Arius ; Basilides;
Carpocrates ;
Cataphrygians ;
Cerinthus ; Docetae ; Ebionites ;
Marcellus ;
Gnostics ; Manes ;
Marcion ;
Montanus ; Paul of Samosata ; Sabellius ; Simon Magus: Valentinus.

Menander ;

Heretics perverted Holy Scripture,
iv. 19, vi. 27, their assemblies
to be shunned, iv. 37, how to be
treated, vi. 36, to be avoided,
6, why they should be
xvi.
falsely called
10,
hated, xvi.
12, on whom
Christians,
vi.
8,
they brought discredit, xvi.
blasphemous to God, xi.
16,
a sign of Christ's coming, xv.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

5, formerly manifest, now lurk
ing in the Church, xv.
9, di
vided attributes into persons, iv.
4, x. I, 3, xvii. 2.

Hernias a disciple of Manes, vi. 31.
efficacy of
Hezekiah shewed the
Confession, ii. 15, not the object
of Isaiah's prophecy of Immanuel, xii. 21, 22.

High Priest, reason of his bathing,
iii. 5, Christ our High Priest, x.
4, 5, II, 14, xii. 28.

Holiness, all through the HolyGhost,
iv. 16, Faith its ground, v. 4,
Spirit of, xvii. 5 (v. Sanctificalion).

Hope support to Candidates for Bap

tism, Proc. 9, 10.

Hour, third, that of the Crucifixion,
and of the descent of the Spirit
at Pentecost, xvii.
19, of the
Crucifixion foretold, xiii. 24, 25.
Human conceptions not to be in
truded into the mysteries of the
Gospel, xi. 7, 8.

Human nature of our Lord (v. In

carnation).

Hyssop, symbolical, iii. I.

10,

Idols, offerings to, become polluted
by the invocation of the idol's
name, iii. 3, xix. 7, not to be
touched, iv. 28.

Idolatry, worship of God's gifts, vi.
10, its madness, iv. 6, and de
gradation, vi.
II, will be
abhorred by Antichrist, xv. 15.
Ignorance of all creatures concerning
God, vi. 2-6, xi. II, check to
presumption, not to praise, vi.
5, should repress our curiosity,
xi.
II, knowledge of it our
highest wisdom, vi. 2, of what
is written should make us silent
about what is not written, xi.
12, xvi. I, and guarded in speak
ing, xvi. I.
Illuminated, Proc. I,

2, xviii. 33,
alone know the glory of the
Gospel, vi. 29, Intr. p. xvii.
Illumination of the just by the Holy
Ghost, xvi.
its power,
3,
xvi. 16-18, same as Baptism,
0uMT/ta, xiii. 21.

Image, Christ the true Image of God
to subvert the false one, xii. 15,
man, God's image, xii. 5, soul,
made in God's image, iv. 18,
meaning of the " Image of
God," xiv.
10, "our Image,"
argument from the words, x. 6.
Immortality of the soul, God's gift,

1 1,

iv. 18.
Immanuel,

3,
prophecy of,
21, note 9, meaning of the word,
xi. 14.

xii.

Impersonal, (4n;ir<jffT4Tos,) words, iv.

Incarnation of our Lord, real not
illusory, iv. 9, xii. 3, salvation
depends on its reality, xiii. 4,
denied by Simon Magus, vi. 14.
Must be believed as well as
Clmst's Godhead, xii. I, heretical

8.

and infidel objections a priori,
from its needlessness, xii. 4, rea
sons for it, xii 5
Creator of
the world its Restorer, vi. II, to
restore man, xiii. 5. proved from
the prophets, xiii. 8, &c. that
man might see God, x. 7, xii.
13, 14, to sanctify the waters ;-
that God might be worshipped ;
-that man might be made par
taker of God ;-that the Lord
might suffer for us, xii. 15, ob
jection to its possibility, xii. 4.
answered, xii. 27-30.

Christ Lord and God before
it, x. 6, 12. xi. 20. of a Virgin,
iv. 9, xii. 2, 5, 21, why, xii. 25.
33, 34, blasphemies of heretics
respecting it, ib. xii. 31, without
taint because of the Holy Ghost,
xii. 29, 32, xvii. 6, signs of its
time, place and manner given
by the Prophets, xii. 5, 10-12,
17-24, implied in the histories
of Abraham, Jacob, Moses, and
Klias, xii. 16, witnesses of it,
xii. 32, 33.
Satan's

counterfeits among
idolaters to discredit it, xv. II.
the Church,

Indians, converts to

xvi. 22.

Inspiration contrasted with possession

by devils, xvi. 15, 16.

Interpretation of Scripture, xiii. 9,
12 (v.

gift of the Spirit, xvi
Scripture).
Interpreter, viii. 7,
vide xv. 13.

xiii. 21, xvi. 6,

Invocation of the Holy Trinity gives
a sanctifying power to the water
of Baptism, iii. 3, to the exorcised
oil, xx. 3, analogy of the invoca
tion of the idols' name on offer
ings to them, iii. 3, xix. 7, of
Christ on the Holy Ointment,
causes it to convey the Holy
Ghost, xxi. 3, of the most Holy
Trinity on the Bread and Wine,
xix. 7, makes them the Body
and Blood of Christ, xxiii. 7,
Intr. pp. xxiii., xxviii., xxxv.

Irenaeus quoted, xvi. 6.
Isaiah prophesied of Christ, xii. 2,
of His birth of a virgin, xii. 2,
this explained, ib. 21, 22, be
held Christ, xiv. 27, and in the
Spirit foresaw His coining, xiii.
3, witness of His innocence, ib.
foreknowledge given Him by
the Holy Ghost, xvi. 18.

Sawn asunder, ii. 14, xiii. 6.

Jacob saw the Lord, xii. 16, prophe
sied of the time of His coming,
ib. 17.

Jeremiah, his prophecy of the Lord's
gentile
xiii.

sufferings,
faith, ib.
Jericho, x. II.
Jerusalem, its Holy Places, Intr.
p. xii., its exclusive privileges,
iii. 7, xiii. 22, xvi. 4, xvii. 13,
Christian opposed to Jewish,
xiii. 7, St. James its first Bishop,

7, of

CATECHETICAL LECTURES OF S. CYRIL.

the

Holy

18.

(v.

SI,

28.

His

xiv.

first

fifteen

iv.
Bishops Hebrews, xiv. 15.
Jesus, so named because He saves,
x. II, 12, 13, and heals us, x. 4.
13, meaning in Hebrew, and
Greek, x. 12, 13, Joshua a type
of Him in His kingly office, x.
name
hinted at by the Prophets, x. 12,
not more distinctly because of
the Jews, x. 12.

Christ).

understanding

Jews study and know the Scriptures
them,
without
13, to be silenced
iv.
xii.
2,
from the
37,
Prophets,
xviii. 10, despise the testimony
of the Prophets in rejecting the
Lord, vii. 2, x.2, xii. 2, xiv. 15,
deny that Jesus is Christ, x. 14,
while devils acknowledge Him,
x. 15.

xiii.

the

Mi-interpret

Prophets,
xii. 21, 22, infidel objections to
the Incarnation, xii. 4, 27, ab
surdly apply the prophecies of
Christ's eternal kingdom to men,
xii. 2, gainsay our Lord's suffer
ings, xiii. 7, their subjection to
Rome a proof that Christ is
come, xii. 17, vain attempt to
discredit the Resurrection, xiv.
14, their objections confuted by
the examples
and
Elisha, xiv. 15.

of Elijah

Their Patriarchs, xii. 17.
Are looking for

Antichrist,
xii. 2, will receive him, xv. n,
12, 15, will be favoured by him,
xv. 15,
their observances and
sabbaths to be shunned, iv. 37.

Job had the Holy Ghost, xvi. 27.
St. John Baptist-his high office,
baptism, and character, iii. 6
(v. Bap/ism), link between the
two covenants, x. 19, delivered
from Hades and death by Christ,
iv. II, xiv. 19.

Sanctified by the Holy Ghost

to baptize Christ, xvii. 8.

,

25.

St. John the Divine, xii. 1.
Jonah a type and proof of Christ's
resurrection, xiv. 17, compared
with Christ, xiv. 17, 18, in the
whale, a type of Christ in Hades,
xiv. 20, his prayer fulfilled only
in Christ, ib.
Jordan, typical, iii. 5,
.

z. II, xiv.

Joseph, his ill-treatment turned to
good by God's providence, viii.
4, full of the Holy Ghost, xvi.

Joseph, how called

the Father of
Christ, vii. 9, not really so, xii.
3. 3«-
Judas, xiii. 6, his treason foretold,
xiii. 9, meaning of the name, ib.
explanation of Zechariah's pro
phecy relatiug to him, ib. 10,
II.

Judge, Christ, of quick and dead,

Judgment, day of, xv. 21, its glories
and terrors, xv. 22, 26, hope of

xv. 26.

the poor and desolate, xv. 23,
God and all Angels present, xv.
24. How Christ bids us pre
pare for it, xv. 26.

Judgment of our Lord by His
people, a sign foretold, xii. 12,
xiii. 12.

Just, " the Just " delivered by Christ

from Hades (v. Hell).

Illuminated
Ghost, xvi. 3, 27.

by

The Just God blasphemed by

heretics, iv. 4.

Justification given in Baptism, Proc.
16, i. 4, of Abraham by faith,
vi. 5.

Even by riches, viii. 6.

Justin, M., xiii. 26, cote I.

Keys of heaven given to St. Peter,

xiv. 26.

latter

Kings reign through God, viii. 5, in
the
the
days
Gospel, xiv. 14, taught by the
Church xvii. 10.

honour

Kingdom of Christ, universal :

fore
told by Daniel, xii. 18, without
bound, xii. 24, unwittingly ac
knowledged
soldiers'
in
mockery, xiii. 17, never tp end,
iv. 15, xv. 27, heresy of Marcellus regarding it, ib. &c.

the

God's kingdom, in the Lord's

Prayer, xxiii. 13.

Four great kingdoms, xv. 13,
kingdom of Antichrist, xv.12, 13.

Kiss of Peace, xxiii. 3..
Knowledge not

curiosity but
for
devotion, vi. 5, 7, supernaturally
given by the Holy Ghost, xvi.
16,
in the Apostles and Pro
phets, ib. 17, 18.

Lamentations of Jeremiah refer to
the second captivity of the Jews,
xiii. 7, " Lamp," meaning of in
Psalm 132, x. 15.

Laver of Baptism (\avrpiv), Proc.
2, 7, II, i. 2, iii. 3, 5,
iv. 32,
v. 6, &c, one salvation of the
Laver, iv. 37, of Regeneration,
xix. 10, repentance of the Laver,
iv. 32, Laver (*okt^>), in the
Tabernacle an emblem of Bap
tism, iii. 5.

Law, inspired by the Holy Ghost,
iv. 16, blasphemed by heretics,
iv. 33, fulfilled in Christ, iv. 33,
xiii. 5, its ceremonies now abro
gated by the Holy Trinity in
the Church, xvii. 29, our school
master, iv. 33.

Lazarus, his resurrection an earnest
of our deliverance from sin,
ii. 5, and resurrection, xviii. 16,
raised
of
through the
others, v. 9.

Lent, preparation for Baptism during
it, iv. 3, xviii. 32 (v. Baptism).
Lessons from Scripture, Proc. 4, iv.
xiv. 24, &c. guard against
I, mark canonical

I,
error,
iv.
books, iv. 33, 36.

faith

Libyans in the Church, xvi. 22.

Life, the Father is true life, xviii.
29, given us in Baptism by Him
who is Life, iii. 11, 12.
Christ,
who is
life, brought Life, as
Adam Death, xiii. 2 (v. Eve
Tret).
Eternal Life God's gift,
xviii. 28, 29, ways of entering
into it, ib. 30, 31.

" Life of Life begotten," iv. 7, xi. 4,

Light made by Him who made

Darkness, ix. 7.

The Father is Light eternal,
vi. 9, light given to souls by
the Cross, xiii. I, by the Holy
Ghost, xvi. 3,
II (v. Baptism,
Enlighten, Illuminate).

"Light of Light begotten," iv. 7,

xi. 4, 18.

Lights, Proc. I, 3, i.

I, Intr., ch.

ii. § 4.
"Like in all things to the Father,"
iv. 7, xi. 4, 9, 18, v. xi. 19.

" Like to Himself," vi. 7.
" Likeness of God," xiv. to.
Lion of the tribe of Judah, x. 3.
Living Spirit (v. Spirit).
Living Word (v. Word).
Lord, Christ Lord of all because
Maker of all, x. 5, 6, xi. 21,
&c, not by advancement, but
by nature, x. 5, before His In
carnation, x. 6, from eternity.
x. 9. note 2, by the will of the
Father, x. 9, illustration of this,
xi. 22, Lord of Angels, x. 10.

Lot, xix. 8.

Macedonian empire, iv. 34.
Magic to be shunned by Christians.
devil,

service of the

iv. 37,
xix. 8.

Maker of all things, iv. 4. visible
and invisible, Christ, xi. 21-24
(v. Creator).

Man, work of Christ as well as of the
Father,
x. 6, of God's own
hands, xii. 5, 26, in God's Image,
xii. 5, retained God's Image but
lost His Likeness, xiv. 10, his
twofold nature, iii. 4,
18,
iv.
world made for him, xii. 5.
First man brought

death,
xiii.
5. man's
miserable condition before the
Incarnation, xii. 6,
7, forsook
God, for the devil, ii. I, vi. 10,
vii. 13.

2, his fall,

xii.

Christ came to restore him,
xii. 5, &c. by Christ hallowed,
and made partaker of God. xii.
15, allowed to call God. Father,
vii. 7, 12. partaker of His name,
Proc. 6, and of Christ's, x. 16.

Power of man in faith, v. 11,
by the Holy Ghost, xvi. 16, can
wrestle with the Devil through
the Holy Ghost, viii. 4. xvi. 19.
His wants met by Christ's
various offices, x. 3-5 (v. Incar
nation).

His ministry used to convey

God's gifts, xvii. 35. 36.

11. 14.

Manasseh, saved through repentance,

Manes blended all previous heresies,
vi. 20, xvi. 9.
History, vi. 24,
&c.,a slave, vi. 24, changed his
name, ib. did not arise from
among Christians, vi. 21, con
nection with the Greek philo
sophy, of Alexandria, vi. 22-24,
and with Persian, vi. 24, his
disputatious spirit, vi . 24. claims
to be the Paraclete, vi. 25, xvi.
6, 9, fails to cure miraculously
the Persian king's son, vi. 25.
Flies from prison, vi. 26, dis
putes with
before
heathen judges, vi. 27, seized
and put to death by the Persian
king, vi. 30.

Archelaus

His influence, vi. 25, his dis

ciples, vi. 31.

note 6,

Manichasan doctrine of two
vi.
principles, iv. 4,
13, 27, 28, perversion of
12,
Scripture for this doctrine, vi.
38, they blaspheme the God
of the Old Testament, vi. 27,
xvi. 4, call the Sun Christ, vi. 13,
xi. 21, abhorrence of the ma
terial world, iv. 22 27, vi. 31,
32, 34, deny the reality of Christ's
Resurrection, xiv. 21, fatalism,
iv. 18-21, baptism and offering,
vi. 33, forged gospels, iv. 36, vi.
31, pollutions and blasphemy,
vi. 30-32.

Manes worse than Simon
Magus, xvi.
10, his followers
to be carefully shunned, vi. 36,
knowledge of their doctrines
34,
almost pollution, vi.
carefully
by
S. Cyril, vi. 34.

enquired

13,
into

Marcellus, his heresy about Christ's
kingdom, iv.
15, xv. 27, com
bated, xv. 29-32, a Sabellian,
xi. 17, note 4.

Marcion, his heresy, Iv. 4, vi. 16,
divided the Justice and Good
ness of God, ib. held three
Gods, xvi. 4,
7, removed all
texts of the Old Testament from
the New, vi. 16, xvi. 7.

Marriage though inferior to Virginity
yet honourable, iv. 25, not to
be despised by the unmarried,
ib. acknowledged by the Holy
Ghost, xvii. 7, second marriage
permitted to the weak, iv. 26,
note 3.

Martyrs alone saved without Bap
tism of water, being baptized
21,
with blood, iii.
make confession, iii. 10, trained
by the Holy Ghost, xvi.
12,
strengthened by the Comforter,
xvi. 20, 21, only by Him can
they suffer, ib. under Antichrist,
xi. 17.

Mary the Virgin-Mother of God,
x. 19, v. xii. 33, 34, how called
the wife of Joseph,
31,
sanctified by the Holy Ghost,
xii. 29, 32, xvii. 6, sprung from

xiii.

xii.

10,

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

David, xii. 24, the witness of
Christ, x. 19, type of Virgins,
xii.. 33, repaired the loss caused
by Eve, xii.
29, Christ truly
born of her, iv. 9, xii. 3.

Mary Magdalene, her visit to the
Sepulchre foretold, xiv. 12, her
noble love, xiv. 13.

Matthew wrote in Hebrew, xiv. 15.
Meats abstained from, not as un
clean, but for self-denial, iv. 27,
37» vi. 35, Jewish distinctions
not to be observed, iv. 37, of
fered to idols forbidden, iv. 28,
vide xvii. 29.

Meekness of Christ in judgment

foretold, xiii. 16.

Menander, his heresy, vi. 16.
Mercy of God to sinners, ii. 5, 6,
10, even to Angels, ii. 10.
Miracles of Christ as God, iv. 9,
claimed by Antichrist, xv. 14,
false ones permitted trial of
Christian faith, stumbling-blocks
of the unfaithful, xv. 17.

Mithras, worshipped in Persia, vi.
23, his ministers oppose Terebinthus and Manes, ib. 24.
Montanus condemned second mar
riage, iv. 26, note 3, called him
self the Holy Ghost, xvi. 8,
charged by S. Cyril with prof
ligacy, and with horrid my
steries, ib. note I.

Moon, her changes an intimation of
the Resurrection, xviiL 10.

Moors in the Church, xvi. 22.
Moses the good schoolmaster, vii 8,
had the Holy Ghost, xvi. 27,
beheld Christ, x. 6, 7, xii. 16,
intercession for the people and
Aaron an encouragement to
penitents, ii. ro, change of his
rod as hard as Christ's birth,
xii. 28, his
rod, type of the
wood of the Cross, xiii. 20,
sweetening the water by trees,
a type of the Passion, ib. river
changed into blood by him
corresponds with Christ's water
and blood, xiii. 21.

Mysteries of Christ, i. 1, of Baptism
and the Eucharist, of the Altar,
xviii. 32, 33, xix. 1, not to be
pried into, Proc. 2, 4, iii.
7,
nor divulged to Catechumens or
strangers, Proc. 12, vi. 29, glory
of the
our
Church, vi.
account of them negative not
positive, vi. 2, xi. 11, xvi. 5,
not to be interpreted by human
conceptions, xi. 7, 8, for praise
not curiosity, vi. 5, we must not
be silent about them, ib. Intr.
p. xxxv.

29,

" Mystery of iniquity," xv. 18.

Name of God, vi. 9, xxiii. 12, many
7, of our
names of Him, vi.
Lord, x. 3, name of Jesus, its
meaning, x. 4, 11, 13, of Christ,
x. 4, 14, virtue of the name of
13, names of the
Christ,
iv.
5,
2,
Holy Ghost, xvii.

4,

3,

7,

2,

xvii.

various names of God, Christ,
and the Holy Ghost, not to be
profanely distinguished into per
sons, vi.
3,
x.
Christians partakers of God's
name, Proc. 6, v. I, of Christ's,
x. 16, new name of Christians,
i. 4, x. 16.
Typical

to
names
Joshua and Aaron, x. 11, signi
ficant names of Judas, xiii. 9,
Samuel, Proc. 14.

given

Name of Manes, vi. 20, 24, of the

Gnostics, xvi. 7.

Napkin with which Christ girded
of His

Himself
symbolical
human nature, xii. I.

Nathan, ii. II.
Nations all subject to Christ, xvi.

22, xvii. IO.
Nativities, iv. 5, ix. 8.
Nature not cause of righteousness or
sin, iv. 18-21, nor of salvation
or ruin, vii. 13.

Nature of God, vi. 7, God by
nature Father of Christ, vii. 4.
Natural world, its wonders witness

for God, ix. 2, &c.

Nebuchadnezzar an instance of the
efficacy of repentance, ii. 17, 18.
Necessity, none with God, iv. 5, nor
upon man, iv. 18-21, not the
reason of men's salvation or
ruin, vii. 13.

Night, its religious uses, ix. 7.
Noah, his ark of wood type of the
Church, xxvii. 10, of the wood
of the Cross, xiii. 20.
Example
of decent order in the Church,
Proc. 14, his dove a type of the
dove of the Holy Ghost, xvii.
10.

Himself a type of Christ, as
author of a new birth, xvii. 10.

*

5,

and

xiii.

Obedience of Christ,

as
a Son, not a servant, to the
Father, x. 9, xv. 30.

Offering of Christ sacrificed for us
in the Eucharist, xxiii. 10.
Oil, exorcised of Baptism, xx. 3,
to

symbolical,
drive away devils, ib.

powerful

Old Fathers delivered by Christ
from Hades, iv. 11, xiv. 19.
Old Testament, its books, iv. 35,
document of appeal for Chris
tian truth,
xiv. 2 (v. Father,
Prophet, Scripture, Testament),
blasphemed by heretics, iv. 33,
impiously separated by them
from the New, xvi. 4.

Old man put off by Confession and
Baptism, i. 2, xix. 10, xx. 2.
Olives, the spiritual olive-trees, i. 4,

v. xx. 3.

Olives, mount of, xii. II, witness of
the Resurrection, xiv. 23, scene
of the Ascension, xiv. 25, why
passed by David, when flying
from Absalom, ii. II.

One, how Christ is one with the

father, xi. 16.

CATECHETICAL LECTURES OF

S. CYRIL.

Only-begotten, meaning of the word, |
x. 3, xi. I, 2, &c, 13, 14.
Order commended by our Lord's
example, iii. II, 13, 14, of the
Church, Proc. 4, 13, vi. 35, 36
Orders of the ministry, xvi. 22, xvii.

Parable of the marriage garment
applied to Baptism, Proc. 3, iii.
foolish
2,
Virgins, xv. 26, of the Labourers,
xiii. 31, of the Lost Sheep, xv.

wise and

the

of

Paradise, Adam in Paradise, xii. 5,
his fall, ii. 4, v. xiii. 19, placed
in Adam's view when fallen,
ii. 7, Invisible Paradise opened
in Baptism, Proc. 15, 16, i. 4,
xix.
10,
9, by Faith,
distinguished from heaven, xiv.
26, restored by the Cross, xiii.
30. The penitent thief the first
to enter it, ib.
Parent (v. Father).
Christ
of
Passion

v.

1,

by

the

xiii.

xiii.

real,

Jews,

4,
witnesses of it, ib. 38, 39, gain,
said
7>
witnessed by the Prophets, xiii.
8, 9, Sc., even in its details, ib.
answers circumstantially to the
Fall, xiii. 18, 19, its place, time,
&c. , prophesied, xiii. 23, &c,
represented in Baptism, xx. 5,
fellowship with it therein, ib. 5,
6, 7-

glory

iv.» 7.

Passion, "without passion," iwaSis,
Christ's generation, vL 6, note I,
vii. s, note 5.

Passover, the eating of the Paschal
Lamb a type of Christ's twofold
nature, xii

I.
Patience of Christ foretold, xiii. 6,
'3> gives force to His teaching,
ib. His Divine glory not the
God's
reward of it,
appointed way to
for
man, xv. 17.

Patriarchs, Jewish, ofthe West, xii. 17.
S. Paul, ruler and chief of the Church,
vi. 15, with S. Peter laid Simon
Magus dead, ib. The former
persecutor a witness of Christ,
x.
17, why his Epistles most
numerous x. 18, witness of the
Resurrection, xiv. 21, descended
from the third heaven that he
might receive martyrdom, xiv.
26, his labours in the Holy
Ghost, xviii. 26-31, complete
ness and variety of his teaching
concerning
the Holy Ghost,
xvii. 34.

Paul of Samosata denied the eternity
of Christ's Deity, x. 5, note 8,
xii. 4, note 9.

Peace made by Christ first among
His foes, xiii. 14, by His death,
xiii. 33.

Penitence of forty days before Bap
tism, Proc. 4, i. s, gift of God,
Proc. 9, preparatory to Baptism,
ii.
not
iii.
declined by David after forgive

passim,

2,

8,

7,

ness, ii.
tence, i. 5, iii. 2.

12, cleansing of peni

10,

xiii.

Penitents must not despair, ii, 5.
Pentecost, xvi. 4, 9. Spirit descended
not fully till then, xvi. 26, xvii.
12, 13.
His descent then, xvii.
'5Perfections of God, vi. 7, 8, of the
Father and the Son, xi. 18.
Persecution, xiii. 23, the Baptism of
-blood in it,
21,
iii.
under Antichrist, the fiercest,
yet short, xv. 16.

Persia, converts there witnesses of
Christ, x. 19, worship of Mithras,
vi. 23, origin of Manicheism,
vi. 24, wars with Rome, xv. 6.
Person, distinction of, not implied
in various names (v. Name).
Personality of the Word, iv. 8, xi.
10, of the Holy Ghost, xvi. 3,
xvii. 2, 5, 28, 29.

19, vi.

S. Peter chief ruler of the Church,
xi. 3, xvii. 27.
15,
11.
Chief of the Apostles, ii. 19,
xvii.
His inspired con
fession of Christ, xi. 3, has the
keys of Heaven to which Elias
27,
but
26, xvii.
xiv.
speech at Pentecost, xvii.
19,
supernatural knowledge, xvi. 17,
his works in the Holy Ghost,
xvii. 20, 27, an example of the
power of repentance, ii. 19, and
of faith,
7, with S. Paul
punishes Simon Magus, vi. 15.
Pharaoh, Israel rescued from him,
as we from Satan, by water,
iii. 4, emblem of Satan, xix.
2, 3-

Philip the Deacon, xvi. 14, xvii. 25.
Phineas, his zeal, xiii. 2.
Phoenix, analogy of it, a proof of the

went,

27.

v.

resurrection, xviii. 8.

Physician, Christ, Physician of the
soul, ii. 6, x. 4. 13. xii. I.
Place of Christ's birth foretold, xii.
20, of His crucifixion, xiii. 23,
28, of his burial, xiii. 35, resur
rection, xiv. 2, 5-1 1.

Pomps of the Devil, xix. 6, note I.
Pontius

his
of
treatment
Pilate,
Christ, xiii.
15, 16, reconciled
through Him to Herod, xiii. 14,
witness of Christ's sinlessness,
xiii. 3, 38.

Possession by Devils - contrasted
with Inspiration, xvi. 15.

Potter's field xiii. 10, 11.
Poverty of Christians, v. 2, xvi. 19,
gift of the Holy Ghost, xvi. 22,
taught by Christ, xiii. 5.
Power, the Father is Power, vi. 9,
Christ, God's Power personally
subsisting, iv. 7, of the God
head one, xvi. 24.
preparatory

Prayer,

Baptism,
Proc. 16, i. 5, iv. 37, recorded,
xv. 23. at night, ix. 7, for all
men in the Communion Service,
xxiii. 8, of the Saints departed
for us, xxiii. 9, for the dead,
xxiii.
Lord's prayer, ex
pounded, xxiii. II, inc.

10.

to

Preaching not to be attempted before

Baptism, iii. 13.

Preparation necessary for Baptism,
Proc. 1, &c. iii.
7, how to
behave during it, Pioc 13, for
forty days, ib. 4, i. 5, complete
abstraction
world,
from
Proc. 6, 13, 16, i. 5.

the

Fast of the Preparation, xviii.

Presumption may be indulged under
seeming reverence, xi. 12, xvi. I.
Priesthood of Christ eternal, x. 14,
xi. I, Intr. p. Iii. (v. High Priest,
Christ, Anointing).

xvii.

Order of,
fulfils
it
marriage, xii. 25.

well

35, he who
abstains from

Principles, not two, xi. 14 (t. Be

ginning, Father).
Promise, Spirit of, xiii. 5.
Prophecy, gift of the Holy Ghost,
v. x. 12, xvi. 12, given in Bap
tism, xvii. 37, every thing con
cerning Christ the subject of it,
xiii.
often enigmatical,
8,
xiii. 11.

9,

Gives the signs of His coming,
xii.
10-12 (v. Psalms, Scrip
ture, Testament), prophecies of
the time of His coming, xii.
17-19, of Daniel, ib. the place,
xii. 20, whence ib. of His birth
of a Virgin, xii. 21-23, of the
Virgin's race, xii. 23, 24, of the
sufferings of the Christ, xiii. 7,
9, of the thirty
of Judas, ibpieces of silver, ib. 10, and the
potter's field, ib. 11, of Christ's
judgment, ib. 12, 14, 16, of His
mockery, ib. 13, 15, 17, of the
crown of thorns, ib.
17. and
wood of the Cross, xiii. 19, of
the place, xiii. 23, 28, 32, and
time of the Crucifixion, ib. 24,
of the
of
Christ's vesture, ib. 26, 27, of
His thirst, ib. 29, of the robbers,
ib. 30, of the tomb, ib. 35, xiv.
3, II, of the Resurrection, xiv.
.2, 4, 8, 14, 17, 20, 21, its time,
ib. 4, 8, and place, ib. 5, 6, 9,
II, of the signs following, ib. y,
of our Lord's appearances, ib.
II, 12, of His ascension, ib. 24,
and sitting at the Father's right
hand, ib. 28, 29, at the end of
the world, xv. 3. of Antichrist,
ib.
Christ's Prophecy
concerning His second coming,
xv. 3, 4, &c. of Malachi con
cerning it, xv. 2.

darkness,

25,

13.

ib.

9,

Prophets enlightened by the Holy
Ghost, xvi. 17, 18, Holy Ghost
in them, ib. 3, 28, but partially,
xvii. 18, correspond to, but are
inferior to the Apostles, xvi. 4,
24, xiv. 26, witness all things
concerning Christ, x 2, xiii. 8,
9. 13, xiv.
19. nothing to be
received without their testimony,
xii.
2, our
faith
rests on them, xiv. 21,
xviii. 14, own the Father and

5, 16, xiii. 8, xiv.

10,

xii.

the Son, vii. 2, teachers of the
Faith in the Old Testament, vii.
8,
29, owned
6-9,
Christ as Lord, x. 7, 8, testi
fied of His Godhead, xi. 15, 16,
of the name Jesus, but covertly,
x. 12, longed for His coming,
xii. 7, &c testified of the Holy
Ghost, xvi. 28, 29.

of,

viii.

Are ours as well as the Jews',
Hi. 6, xiv.
16, removed from
the Jews to the Church, xiii.
29, slighted by the Tews, x. 2.
•Providence of God, (oucovoyufa) in
stances
4,
Peter's confession, xi. 3, Christ's
prophecy of His coming, xv. 4,
Thomas, xiii. 39.

Joseph,

Province, iirapxla, xvi. 22, note 3.
Psalms, chanted in Divine Service,
xiii. 26, xxiii. 20, at night, ix. 7.
Psalms prophetical of Christ
cannot be applied to David or
Solomon, vii.
xii. 23 (v.
3,
Prophecy).

Ptolemy, Philadelphus, iv. 34.
Punishment of the wicked, after the
Resurrection, iv. 31, xviii. 19, 20.

Quick and dead to be judged by

Christ, xv. 26.

Reading

Race of Christ according to the
flesh, xi. 5, foretold, xii 23.
Rahab, instance of power of repent
ance, ii. 9, type of the freeness
of Gospel grace, x. II.
i. 6,

of the
14,
Scriptures recommended, iv. 37,
ix.
the Church
mark of a canonical book, iv.
35. 36.

7, public in

Rebapiize, Heretics to be rebaptized,

Proc.

Proc. 7.

xix. 2, 3.

Red Sea typical of Baptism, iii. 5,

Redditio Symboli, Intr. p. xxi.
Redemption of the world by the
Cross, xiii.
I, 4, wrought not
by a mere man, but the Son
of God, ib. 2, 33, by its Creator,
vi. II.

Regeneration, i.vo.yivn\ait, of souls
in the Laver of Baptism through
Faith, i. 2, iii. 4, in the case of
Cornelius before Baptism, iii. 4,
Death and Birth, xx. 4. in the
Catholic Church, xviii. 26, «•
\ryytviola. Baptism so called,
Proc. 16, Laver of, Proc II,
xviii. 34, 35, xix. 10.

Religion consists of true doctrines
and good works, iv. 2, founded
on belief in one God, iv. 4, 6,
false views of it leading to pre
sumption, xi.
1, awe
requisite in speaking of its doc
trines, xvi. I, its worship indi
visible, xvi. 4.

12, xvi.

Remission of sins in Baptism, xx. 6,
freely given to all who believe,
i. 5, iv. 32, xvii. 37-

Renunciation of Satan and his works
in baptism, xix. 2-9, Jntr. p. xxi.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

Repentance, its efficacy in putting
away sin, ii.
1, iv. 23, no sin
beyond its power, ii. 5, instances
of, ii. 7, &c. its temporal bene
fits, ii. 13, exemplified in Ahab,
ib. and Jeroboam, ib. 14, of the
Laver, iv. 32, Baptism of, xix. 9,
its fruits, mercy, and almsdeeds,
iii. 8.

Resurrection of Christ, iv. 12, answer
to objectors from the cases of
Elisha, iv. 12, xiv. 16. Jonah,
iv. 12, xiv. 17, 18, Elijah, xiv.
16, witnessed by the Old Scrip
tures, xiv. 2, 15, 21, all its cir
cumstances written in the Psalms
and Prophets, xiv. 2, &c. (vide
Prophecy), not discredited by
the soldiers' tale, xiv. 14, Rock
of our faith, xiv. 7, 21, glorifies
the Cross, xiii. 4, denied by the
Manichees, xiv. 21.

Its former witnesses, iv. 12
(vide Church), the dead who
rose with Him, xiv. 16, 18, 20,
its present witnesses, xiv. 22, &c.
Baptism a representation of it,

iii. 12, xx. 4.

xviii.

3,
4, man's instinct,

Resurrection of the body ; analogies
for it in nature, iv. 30, xviii. 6,
faith in it the principle of holi
ness, iv. 30, xii. 34, xviii. I, 20,
prominence given to it by the
Church, ib. and opposition of
heresy, ib. objections to its pos
2, answered by
sibility,
justice,
God's power, ib.
5,
ib.
ib.
analogies of nature, ib. 6, 7,
the Phoenix, ib. 8, man's origin,
ib. 9, God's ordering of the
heavenly bodies an intimation
10, proved against
of it,
ib.
objec
ib. 11-13,
Samaritans,
tions from the Prophets an
swered, &c. ib. 14, 15, its fit
ness proved from the Old and
New Testaments, 15-18, xviii.
19.

Revelation, Spirit of, xvii. 5.
parents, vii.
Reverence to

16, to
God, taught by His works,
ix.
16, in the Church, Proc
13, 15, vi. 35, to the ancient
Bishops, iv. 35, xiv. 21, in re
discourse,
ligious
3, &c.
vi.
seeming, may cloak
I,
xvi.
impiety, xi. 12, 17.

Reward given according to men's

labours, i. 5, iv. 24, 27.

Riches, not as heretics thought, the
devil's but God's, viii.
6, 7,
evil only in their abuse, vii. 7,
we may even be justified by
them, viii.
6, belong to the
faithful man, v. 2, viii. 6, who
despises them, v. 2.

Righteous, " the Righteous," t. 10.
Righteousness of Christ greater than
our sin, xiii. 33, we gain right
eousness in Baptism, i. 4, Christ
God's Righteousness personally
subsisting, iv. 7.

Rock, riven ior Christ the Rock,

xiii. 34, still seen, ib. 39, that
followed Israel, x. 7.

Rod of Aaron, xii. 28, of Moses, ib.

(vide Moses).

Romans, conquest of Judaea by them
proof of Christ, xii 17, 18, em
pire succeeded by Antichrist,
xv. 11, 12, wars with Persia,
xv. 6.

•

Sabbaths, Jewish not
served, iv. 37.

to be ob

Sabaoth, a name of God, vi.

7,

viii. 8,
Sabellius, v. iv.

10, confounds
xi.
the Holy Trinity, xvi. 4, con
futed by the very arrangement
of the Creed, xvii. 34, his heresy
and Arianism alike to be avoided,
iv. 8; xi. 13, note 8, 16, 17,18, are
marks of the falling away, xv. 9.
Sacri
fice of the Eucharist, xxiii. 8, 9,
Christ sacrificed offered in the
Intr. p.
Eucharist,
xxviii.

xxiii.

10,

Sacrifice of Christ, x. 3, 5.

Saints of the Old Testament delivered
by Christ from Hades, iv. 11,
xiv. 19, rose with Him, xiv. 16,
18, according to Prophecy, xiv.
17.

Salvation depends on the truth of
Christ's manhood, iv. 9, xiii. 37,
one, xvi. 24, of the Laver, iv.
37, xix. 10, given to none with
out Baptism, iii. 10, to be de
spaired of by none, ii. 5 (vide
Christ, Baptism, Man).
Samaritans, iv. 37, vi. 33, xviii. 1.
meaning of
Samuel,

the name,

Proc. 14, note 3.

Sanctification of all things by the
16, xvi. 3, of
Holy Ghost, iv.
22, of
xvi.
the Church,
Angels and Prophets, xvi. 23
(vide Spirit).

Sarah, her bearing a son as hard as

14,

the Virgin's, xii. 28.

Sarmatians, xvi. 22.
Satan, meaning of the word, ii. 4.
Scripture, its canon to be received
from the Church, iv. 33, as read
in the Church, iv. 35, xv. 13,
and settled and handed down
by Apostles and ancient Bishops,
iv. 35, consists of Old and New
Testaments, iv. 33 (vide Testa
ment), number and names of
its books, ib. 35, 36, history of
the Septuagint version, iv. 34,
note 5, mutilated by Marcion,
xvi. 7, adulterated with forgeries
by the Manichees, iv. 36, vi 31,
spoken by the Holy Ghost, xi.
12, xvi. 1, 2.

Nothing to be received as of
the Faith unless proved by it,
iv. 17, its teaching embodied in
the Creed, iv. 33, v. 12, laith
grounded on it, xii. 16, 17, xiii.
8, 9, xiv. 2. reveals all we know,
or may speak of the generation
of the Sou, xi. 12, of the nature
of the Holy Ghost, xvi I, 2,

CATECHETICAL LECTURES OF

S. CYRIL.

24, we may not speak beyond
it, xii. 5, variously interpreted,
e.g. iii. 16, vi. 28, 29, x.
15,
perverted
xii.
19, xvii. 9-1 1,
by heretics, e.g. iv.
19, vi. 17,
13, xv. 3,
27, 28, 29, vii. 9,
danger of alleging it wrongly
should teach us reverence and
fear, xvi. < . we know not all its
meaning, ib. xi. 12.

Its abundance, xv. 15, xvi.
32, xvii. I, 20, 34, &c. witnesses
every thing concerning Christ,
xiii. 8, 13.

To be diligently searched, iv.

37, ix. 7, xiii. 8.

Scythianus the Saracen, forerunner

of Manes, vi. 22.

Sea, witness of God's glory, ix. II,
of Christ's coming, x.
19, pas
sion, xiii. 39, resurrection, xiv.
17-20, 23.

Seal, the Faith so called, iv. 17.

Baptism,

indissoluble,
seal
Proc 16, marks us for Christ's,
i. 2, through water, iii. 4, Seal
of Salvation, i. 3.

Of the Holy Ghost given in
Baptism, iii. 3, 4, 12. iv. :6, v.
6, xvi. 24, xvii. 35. 36, xxil 7.

Of Circumcision v. 5.
Of the Cross, xiii. 36.
Seasons, their order glorifies God,
ix. 6, of the Resurrection, that
of Creation, xiv.
10, foretold,
xiv. 2, 10.

Semiarians, v. note 3, to iv. 7, Intr.

pp. vi., viii.

Septuagint version, its history, iv. 34,

held inspired, ib. note.

Sepulchre of Christ prophesied of,
xiii. 35, xiv. 9, his witness, x.
19, account of, xiv. 9.

Serpent, the devil, watches candi
dates for Baptism, Proc. 16,
apostate Serpent, iv. 37, brazen
a type of the Crucifixion, xiii.
20.

Session of Christ at God's right hand,
xiv. 27, proved from Scripture,
ib. 28, eternal, iv. 7, xiv. 27. 30.
Sheep, Christ both Sheep and Shep

Shew-bread, a type of the Eucharist,

herd, x. 3, 5.

xxii. 5.

Sick even yet healed by Christ, x.
13, must not have recourse to
amulets or sorcery, iv. 37, xix. 8.
Side of Christ typically pierced, xiii.
21, in respect of Baptism, iii. 10.
Signs of Christ given by the Pro
phets, xiii. 10 (vide Prophecy),
given to Ahaz explained, xii. 22,
signs of Moses correspond to
Christ's acts, xiii. 20, 21, of the
Son of Man, the Cross, xiii. 41,
of the Second Advent given by
Christ Himself, xv. 4, &c. , lying
signs of Antichrist, xv. 11-15,
a trial of faith, xv. 17, of the
Cross (vide Cross). God's free
but great gift, xiii. 36.

Simon Magus, was baptized but not
enlightened, Proc 2, xvii. 35.

father of all heresy, vi. 14.
His
blasphemies agains the Father
and Holy Ghost, ib.
xvi. 6.
His fate, vi. 15, compared with
Manes, xvi. 10.

Sin, ailment of the soul, iL 1, man's
choice, not God's work. ii.
I,
not of necessity, iv. 18-21, not
a thing external but from within,
ii. 2, prompted not forced by the
Devil who is its chief author,
ii. 3, 4, iv. 21, death by sin,
xiii. 2, makes us enemies to God,
and slays us, xiii. 33, leagues us
with Satan, xix. 9, marred God's
world, xii. 5, and ruined man,
xii. 6, &c. all men bound by it,
xiii.
12,
I, 2, dead in it, iii.
xii. 8,
Christ came to destroy it
died for our sins and purged
them. ii. 10, iii. 12, xiii. I, 2, 4,
6, 23, 33, being Himself sinless,
ii. 10, iii. 12, xiii. 3, 5, 23, sin
came by one man, died with one
man, xiii. 2, 28, iii. 12.

Fearful yet not incurable to
the penitent, ii.
1-5, readiness
of God to forgive the believing,
ii. 6, efficacy of repentance, ii.
7, &c.
Instances, ib. collective
sin pardoned, ii. 10, obstinate
sin alone not pardoned, iii. 8.

Completely and freely remit
ted to all in Baptism by faith,
Proc. 8,i. 5, iii. II, 12, 15, iv.
32, xvii. 37, xviii. 20, xx. 6,
Baptism its remedy, iv. 32, re
mitted even in John's Baptism,
iii. 7, Baptism, a death to sin,
Proc. 5, sin cleansed by Exor
cisms, Proc. 9, and the exorcised
oil, xx. 3, by the power of the
Holy Ghost, xvii. 15.

4,
Overcome by Faith, v.
steals on us, ii. 3, after Kaptism
recorded against the Judgment,
xv.
remain,
23,
xviii. 20.

scars

its

Sin against the Holy Ghost, xvi. I.
Sion, its desolation revealed by the
Spirit to Isaiah, xvi. 18.

Sodom, Christ wrought with the
Father in its destruction, x. 6.
Soldiers, their tale about the sepul
chre presignified by Isaiah and
Jonah, xiv.
14, 20, its vanity,
xiv. 14.

Solitaries, order of, iv. 24, xii. 33,
xvi. 22, Christ their example,
xii. 33.

Solomon, instance of the efficacy of

repentance, ii. 13.

Son, Christ the Son of God, with the
Father and the Holy Ghost,
Proc. 15 (vide Trinity).

Implied in the mention of the
Father, vii.
glorified and
4,
worshipped with Him, and the
Holy Ghost, vi.
I, x. 2, with
the Holy Ghost partaker of His
Godhead, vi. 6 (vide Christ).
In a singular sense,

onlybegotten, vii. 5, 10, x. 3, xi. 2,
4, so called by the Father, xi. 2,

by nature, not adoption,
vii.
10, x. 4, or advancement, xi. 4.
7,
13, 15, &c not after the
manner of human generation,
xi. 4, 8, nor as Christians are
God's sons, iii. 14, vii. 7, xi. 9,
19, nor as mind begets thought,
xi. 10, begotten not made, xi. 4,
14, xv. 9, God, xi. 13, incom
prehensibly, iv. 7, xi. 4, 5, II,
as God only knoweth, xi. 11, 12,
13, from eternity, iv. 7, vii. 5,
xi. 4, 8. 13, 14, 17, 19, 20, apart
from time, xi. 5, 7, 14, spirit- .
ually, xi. 5, 7, without begin
ning, xi. 4, 7, 13, the Son never
was not, xi. 8, 14, 17.

vi.

xi.

14,

20,

Like in

all things to the
Father, iv. 7, xi. 4, 9, 18, 19,
of the Father as His beginning,
xi.
xiii. 23, wanting
nothing to the glory of the
13, was
Godhead, iv.
7,
with the Father, x. 6-8.
One
with the Father, xi. 16, neither
to be separated from nor con
founded with the Father, iv. 7,
xi 16, 17, 18, 20, did not be
come the Father, xi. 13, abides
for ever, not absorbed into the
Father, xv. 27. 30, how subject
to the Father, x. 9, xv. 30, not
numbered among the servants
of the Father, viii. S> glorified
with the
I; the
Father,
Father's Word, and Wisdom,
and Power, and Righteousness,
iv. 7. 8, Maker of all things at
the Father's will, xi. 22, Lord
over them, ib. &c, alone with
the Holy Ghost, knows and
sees the F'ather, vi.6, vii. 11, xi.
12, 13.
Father,
vii. II, only way to the Father,
vii.
3, Incarnate to
restore the Father's worship, vi.
11, xii. 15. and save the world,
xii. 4, 5, &c. , Father seen only
in Him, x. 6, 7-
'5- Son
before born in Bethlehem, xi.
20, became Son of Man, x. 4,
Son of David, xi. 5. xii. 23.
Sons of God, Christians by adoption,
iii. 14, vii. 7, xi. 9, 19, by Water
and the Spirit, ib. not of neces
sity, but of faith, vii. 13, works
meet for them, vii. 14.

Makes known the

Soul , free, ii. I, iv. 18. God's fairest
work, immortal by God's will,
made in His image, ib. diseased
and destroyed by its own sin,
ii.
I, originally sinless, wilfully
19, did not sin in
sinned, iv.
another state, ib. purified by
penitence,
ol
alms,
Scripture, iv. 37, cleansed by
exorcism. Proc. 9. sealed, iii.
3.
14, and
baptized, xvii.
brightened by the Holy Ghost,
xvii. 16, its illumination by faith,
v. II, possession by devils, xvi.
15, contrasted with the influence
of the Holy Ghost, xvi. 16.

reading

4.

2,

x.

I,

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

Soul of the world , viii. 3.
Spaniards in the Church, xvi. 32.
Spectacles of the heathen to be

shunned, iv. 37.

Speculation taking the place of sober
ness in S. Cyril's time, xv. 9,
not to intrude beyond what is
written, xi. 12, xvi. 1,3.
Spirit, the word variously used, xvi.
13, IS- yet w'th a distinguishing
term, xv. 15.

I,

xvi.

Holy Spirit, various names,
xvii. 2, 3, 4, yet one only, iv.
16, xvi. 12, xvii. 2, 3, included
in
the Holy Trinity, xvi. 4,
vide iv. 16, vi. 1, 6, xvi. 19, in
the form of Baptism, xix. 9, xx. 4.
A living Person, iv. 16, xvi.
3, 13, 14, xvii. 2, 5, 28, 29, 33,
incomprehensible,
2,
alone with the Son, beholds,
and reveals the Father, vi. 6,
12, not numbered
vii.
xi.
II,
servants,
Father's
among the
viii. 5. partaker of the Father's
Godhead, vi. 6, far above all
creatures, xvi.
the
. Father's glory, vi. I, and Christ's,
xvi. 4, sanctifies and deifies all
intelligent beings, iv. 16, xvi. 3,
the Church, xvi. 14, 22, xvii. 14,
Angels, xvi. 23, xvii. 2, Pro
phets, xvi. 23.

23, shares

Indivisible yet manifold in
working, iv. l6, xvi. 12, xvii. 2,
12.

He was in the Law and the
16, dictated the
Prophets, iv.
Scriptures, iv.
12,
16, 33, xi.
xvi. I, 2, 3, 4 24, same Spirit
witnessed of Christ in the Old
Testament, manifested Him in
the New, xvi. 3, 16, 24, spake
by the Prophets, iv. 16, was in
the Old Testament Saints, xvi.
26-28, on the seventy Elders,
xvi. 25, 26, illuminated the Pro
phets, xvi. 17, 18, witnessed of
by them, xvi. 28, 29, given par
tially before Pentecost, xvi. 26,
xvii. 12, 13, 18.
Descended

visibly on our
Lord, iii. 14, why, xvii. 9, xxi. I,
The Comforter, xvi. 20, xvii. 4,
given partially to the Apostles
before the Ascension, xvii. 12,
fully at Pentecost, xvi. 26, xvii.
12, His Baptism, xvii. 14, 15,
given to us in Baptism, iii. 5, 8,
14, 16 (vide note), iv. 16, xx. 6,
proportionably to each man's
faith, i. 5, iii. 1, 2, more than
the remission of sins, iii. 7, 15,
xxii. 37, illuminates, Proc. 2,
seals the souls in Baptism, iii. 4,
iv.
perfects
xvii. 35, 36,
Baptism, yet requires water, iii.
4. 16, not given to hypocrites,
Proc. 2, 4, iii. I. xvii. 35, con
veyed symbolically in the Chrism
after the Washing, xxi. 1-5, ob
literates sin and brightens the
soul, xvii. 15, trains and com
forts the Martyrs, xvi. 12, 20,

16,

21, gives all graces, xvi. 12, His
inspiration, xvi. 16, and illumi
nation,
ib., gives power over
the flesh, world, and the Devil,
xv'- l°i gives grace to all who
believe, xvi. 22, sanctifies and
changes the Bread and Wine,
xxiii. 7, 19.

Teaching concerning Him in
the New Testament, xvii. I, of
our Lord. xvii. 1 1, in the Epistles
of St. Paul, xvii. 33.

H is teaching one with Christ's,
xvi. 14, His operations by the
will of the Father recorded in
the Acts, xvii. 21, 31, with the
Father and the Son has estab
lished the New Covenant in the
Church, xvii. 29.

Danger of speaking amiss
concerning him, xvi. I,
6,
blasphemies against him of the
Gnostics, xvi. 6, 7, Manes, vi.
25, xvi. 6, 9, Marcion, xvi. 9,
Montanus, xvi. 8, Sabellius, xvi.
4, xvii. 34, Simon Magus, vi.
14, Valentinus, xvi. 6.

2,

Stars have no influence, iv. 18, not
to be heeded by Christians, iv.
37, ix. 8, glorify God, ix. 5, 6,
their uses to man, ix. 8, shall
perchance have a resurrection,
xv. 3.

Stephen, xvii. 3, 4.
Stone of the Sepulchre, xiii. 39,

xiv. 22.

18, xv. 28.

" Stone cut out without hands," xii.

Strangled things forbidden, iv. 28.
Subjection of the Son to the Father,

x. 9, xv. 30.
Susannah, xvi. 31.

Table, spiritual Table of the Lord,

xxii. 7, vide i. 6.

Taverns to be shunned by Christ

ians, iv. 37.

Temple of Jerusalem, vii. 6, to be
rebuilt by Antichrist, xv.
15.
failure of Julian's attempt to re
build it. declared by S. Cyril,
Intr. p. ix.

Temptation, reason of our Lord, iii.
13, xxi. 4, meaning of "Lead
us not into temptation," xxiii.

Terebinthus, successor of Scythianus, and forerunner of Manes,
vi. 23.
Testaments,

the two Testaments
make up the Scripture, iv. 33,
impiously separated by heretics,
vii. 5, xvi. 4, Christ the object
of Prophecy in the Old, of His
tory in the New, xvi. 3, same
Spirit in both (vide S/irit), iv.
16, xvi. 4, 6, xvii. 5, both an
nounce the gift of Baptism, iii.
16, harmony of their doctrine,
ii. 4.

Old Testament necessary as a
witness to Christ, xvi. 7, God of
it the Father of Christ, vii. 5
(vide Prophecy).-Christ, xvi. 1 1,

and His Apostles refer us to it,
xiv. 2, blasphemed by heretics,
iv. 33, e.g. Manes, vi. 27, texts
of it erased by Marcion from
the New, vi. 16, xvi. 7, its wit
ness to the Spirit, xvi. 28-32, to
the Resurrection of the Body,
xviii.
10, &c, History of its
translation into Greek, iv. 34.

Old Testament or Covenant
ended, New began in the Bap
tism of John, iii. 6, Old abol
ished, New established in the
Catholic Church by the Holy
Trinity, xvii. 29.

our

Thief on the cross first-fruits of
Christ's death, and first to enter
Paradise, xiii. 30, 31, saved by
faith, without works, ib. v. 10,
witness of Christ's sinlessness,
xiii. 3.

Thirty pieces of silver, prophecy of
them, xiii.
10, thirty /Eons of
Valentinus, his argument for the
number, vi. 17.

Thomas doubted

sakes
for
through God's providence, xiii.
Thomas the disciple of Manes, his
forged Gospel, iv. 36, vi. 31.
Thorns, crown of, cancelled Adam's
curse of thorns, xiii. 17, 18.
Throne of Christ eternal, not by ad
vancement, iv.
17, He
had it before His suffering, ib.
at the Father's right hand. xiv.
37, 30, not to be curiously dis
puted of, ib. has no end, xv. 27,
-of David, xii. 23.

Till (vide Until).
Time has no place as regards God
and Christ, iv.
7, &c, of
Christ's coming, &c. , prophesied
of (vide Prophecy), of Christ's
second coming unknown, and
not to be curiously examined
into, xv. 4.

xi.

4,

7,

" Time " means a year in the

Prophets, xv. 16.

" To-day," meaning of, in Ps. 110,
xi. 5, timeless and eternal, ib.,
in the Lord's Prayer, xxiii. 15.
Tongues, fiery tongues, xvii. 15, gift
of Pentecost, xvii. 16, instead of
the confusion of Babel, xvii. 17,
a Sign foretold of Christ's Re
surrection, xiv. 7.
Tradition of the Creed, v.

12, 13,

Tradition of interpretations, xiii. 21,

Intr. p. xxi.

xv. 13.

Transfiguration of the Lord, xii. 16, a
glimpse of His awful glory, x. 7.
Tree of the Cross corresponds to the
Tree of knowledge, xiii.
19,
planted in the earth, to bless it,
and release the dead, xiii. 26.
Trinity, iv. 16, xvii. 34, doctrine of,
acknowledged in Baptism, xvi. 4,
19, xx. 4, profession of Faith in,
xix. 9, not to be revealed to
Catechumens or Gentiles, vi. 29,
Heretics divide or conuise it,
xvi. 4 (vide Arius, Sabellius)

•

CATECHETICAL LECTURES OF

not Tritheism, ib.. not a matter
for curious speculation, xvi. 24.
Holy Trinity present in Bap
tism, Proc. 15, have established
the New Covenant in the Church,
xvii. 29. Adoption given us by
the Father's grace, through the
Son and Holy Ghost, vii. 7, the
Son with the Holy Ghost, sees
the Father, vi. 6, vii. II, with
and through the Holy Ghost
reveals Him, vi. 6, all things
serve the Father save the Son
and Spirit, viii. 5, the Father
through the Son, with the Holy
Ghost, bestows all things, xvi.
24, the saving Dispensation to
usward from the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, xvii. 5, Father
spake by the Holy Ghost, xvii.
38, the Father through the Son
in the Holy Ghost gives all
things, xviii. 29. Glory to be
ascribed
indivisibly to Father
and Son with the Holy Ghost,
vi.
1, "in the power of the
Holy Ghost, by the will of
Father and Son," xvii. 31, v.
xvii. 31.

Tritheism, xvi. 4, note 5, xi. 4, note 3.
Truth counterfeited by Satan, that
it may be disbelieved, xv. 1 1,
gTace necessary lest it be re
ceived falsely, xvi. 2, Hatred of
it cause of error, xv. 17.
" Type," Intr. pp. xxxix., xi.
Types, their wonderful truth, xiii.
19, instances, ib. 17-23, differ
ent persons, types of different
offices
in the One Antitype ;
e.g. Joshua and Aaron of Jesus
Christ, x.
11, Joshua how a
type, ib. type of Moses' rod
(vide Moses) ; of Aaron, xii. 28,
types of Baptism, iii.
5, xix.
*. 3-

Jonah, xiv. 17-20.
John the Baptist a type of the
iii. 6, the dove,

ascetic life,
xvii. 9, 10.

Typical exposition of Eccles.

12. 1-6, xv. 20.

xi. 13.

Unbeginning (Sfapyot), said of the
Son, xi. 4 (note 3), 5, 13.
Unbegotten, said of God, iv. 4, vi. 7,

Unbilief, mars the power of Bap
tism. Proc. 2 (vide Failh), only
reason why men are not en
lightened by the Holy Ghost,
xvi. 22.

Unity of God (vide God).
Unlearned, the Creed a help to

them, v. 12.

Unoriginate {tpxv ioapx05)' sa'd of
the Father only, iv. 4 (note 3).
" Until," " Unto," does not limit,
xv. 29. 31, note 7, 32 (vide
Hooker, E.P.V. 45, § 2).

Usury forbidden, iv. 37.

Valentinus, vi. 17-19, argues from
the number of our Saviour's
years that there are thirty /Eons,
ib. his blasphemies against the
Holy Ghost, xvi. 6.

Veil of Christ's flesh, xiii. 32.
Veiling of the face in Exorcisms,

Proc. 9, Intr. p. xx.

"Very God," Christ begotten, x. 6.

Vesture of Christ parted, a sign fore

xi. 9, 14, 21.

told, xiii. 26.

Vine ofJudah, xiii. 29, Christ the true
Vine, x. 5, xiv. II, xvii. 19. with
which we have communion in
Baptism, i. 4, the Holy Spirit so
called, xvii. 18.

Virgin, meaning of the word in Is.
vii. 14, gainsaid by the Jews, xii.
21, prophecy that Christ should
be born of one, xii.
2, objec
tions, xii. 4, not harder than
things believed by Jews and
Pagans, xii. 27-30, God born
of a Virgin, xii.
I, x. 19, to do
honour to purity, xii. 25, to re
pair the loss of the virgin Eve,
xii. 15, 29 (vide Mary the Vir
gin).

Christ makes souls virgins, xii.
24,
31, Order of Virgins, iv.
xii. 33, xvi. 22, have their part
with Mary, xii.
34, must not
despise married persons, iv. 25.
Parable of the ten virgins,

Virginity, its excellence, and glory,
xii. 33, xv. 23, an angel life on
earth, iv. 24, vi. 35, xii. 34, gift
of the Holy Ghost, xvi. 19.

xv. 26.

Wars, signs of Christ's coming, xv. 6.
Washing of hands before the Com

munion, xxiii. I.

ii.

Watchfulness against first approaches
of sin,
3, against deceivers
and Antichrist, xv. 4, 18, for
Christ's coming, xv. 4.

Watching, preparatory to Baptism,

xviii. 17.

Water, one in nature and manifold
in operation, shews forth God's
glory, ix.
9, 10, and is a fit
emblem of the Holy Ghost, xvi.
II, 12, principle of plants, things
10,
flying and creeping,
heavens are of water, iii. 5, ix.
5, why chosen as the instrument
of Baptism, iii. 5, its uses in the
Old covenant,
ib. means of
rescue to Israel, ib. xix. 3, sanc
tified by Christ's Baptism and
miracles, iii. n, xii. 15.

ix.

Waters of Baptism gain a
sanctifying power by the invo
cation of the Holy Ghost, iii. 3,
though despised by the world,
Proc. 16, Water and the Spirit
answer to Man's double nature,
iii. 4, vide iii. 16, inseparable,

in them,

iii. 4, Waters of Baptism have
Christ
Xptarodidfia,
Proc. 15, "the grave and the
mother " of the Baptized, xx. 4.
Water and blood from Christ's
its symbolical meaning,

side,
xiii. 21.

Waters of Life, xvi. 11.

Way, Christ the Way, x. 3.
West, the region of darkness, xix. 4,
symbolical meaning of facing it,
when renouncing Satan, ib.

White raiment, v. xxii. 8.
Widowhood, iv. 26, x. 19, xv. 23.
Wife, meaning of the word in Matt,

i. 24, xii. 31.

Will, (64\i)ii<i, »*vna,) of God the
Father, Christ made all things
by it, x. S, 9, &c (v. Son), v.
xvii. 21, 31.

Wine, new, the grace of the Holy
Ghost, xvii.
18, water turned
into it, compared with the Eu
charist, xxii. 2, Spiritual Wine,
xxii. 8, becomes Christ's blood,
xxii. 1-6, xxii. 7.

Wisdom, Christ God's Wisdom per
sonally subsisting, iv. 7.
Witchcraft, forbidden, iv. 37.
Witnesses to Christ, x.

17-20, of
the Crucifixion, xiii. 38, of the
Resurrection,
to be
xiv.
sought for in the Prophets, xiii.
8, xvi. 7.

Woman, life, as death, through a
woman, xii. 15, 29, piercing of
Christ's side has reference to
woman, xiii. 21, conduct of the
women who sought Christ, xiv.
12-14.

Works, good works and true doc
trines make up religion, iv. 2,
without Baptism of no avail, iii.
4, after Baptism, our works re
corded against the Judgment,
xx.
xviii. 20, vid. xix. 5,
good works must follow Bap
tism, xvii. 37, 38, vii. 14, a pre
paration for Judgment, xv. 25,
26.

22,

23,

Of Satan, xix. 5.

Word, Christ the Personal Word of
God, iv. 8, xi. 10, Himself God,
xi. 3, 16, in all reasonable crea
tures, iv. 8, not like human
words conceived in the mind or
spoken, iv. 8, xi. 10, Intr. p. xlix.
World, the work of God, iv. 4, made
by the evil God according to the
Manichees, vi. II, made by the
Son, xi. 21, 22, for man, xii. 5,
mirrors forth God's glory, ix. 2,
&c. its lessons, ix. 16, marred by
man's sin, xv. 3, shall perhaps
be renewed at the last day, ib.
" God of this world," vi. 28, 29.
Soul of the world, viii. 2.

Xanthicus, the month, season of the
Passover, Resurrec

Creation ,
tion, xiv. 10.

INDEX OF GREEK WORDS.

An asterisk marks a reference to a note : for other passages refer to the Greek Text.

LECT AND CH.
iv. I
a?\cl(a,
ayawT), xvii. I* ; xviii. 32*
iytyrjroSt a.-, ei 1

<; 1 us,

Aw. 3 ;

aytutrvyrj,
AyKiffrpfvwt
hywfioovvi\,

a cavQotptpos,
AicaTajyoeffTOI,
aicaTaAi/TOf,
iicaT<ip8»Tof,
ihOTOl'6lAaa-T01,
aKap^r, AfCapiuios,
Sk^uc,
dvpaupKifc,
S<pirot,

xi. 13*
ii. 17
Proc. 5
vii. 2, 12
Xl'ii. I3
xviii. 4
a-KopoflfTJn,
iii. 17*
a*<A<pio^v,
ii. 7
a8f\<poirrOKoTf
xviii. 4
aSiitoxos,
Proc. 7
dSiopOuTOf,
xxiii. 17*
aSnitiMoj,
iii. 7
d5wffw»^T0jf
Proc. 10
anrTTrrof,
xi. 4*
dttioj.
11. 17
a.'
VOT,
aiVSnT^pio,
xxi. 4*
ai<7Snr<fj, x. 13* ; xiii. 33 ;
xv. 1 1 ; xix. 2 ; xxii. 9
ii. 4
V. 7
Proc. 16
xvii. 36
xvi. 22*
VI. 2
iv. 1*
vii. II
iii. I ;
xviii. i
xvi. 32
vi. 5
iv. 17
xvii. 24
xiii. 29
xiii. 5 ;
xvi. 22
iii. 6 ; xvi. 10"
XV. II
xi. 9*
Xxii. 7*
Xvi. 7
vi. 29
Xxiii. 22*
Xxiii. 3
ii. 6
xiv. 24*
iv. 20
Proc. 16;
vit 9
iii. 4
iv. 33 ;
xiii. 7, 19
iv. I ; x. 10 ;
xiv. 24*
Titles
ii. 9

aAr|flii/or,
d\iiT7«!»,
du&prvpos,
a , 3 \ va a ci*
dut)v,
a u fimiKiJ,
auir^TTia,
A*A#
aradidw,
dvaytiyqiTi3t

anpSafftt,
aitpdtpu >t (
AYpo0i7w*,
AirpofliVio,
avfwrwitos,
cbrTffuotruFT},

Aril Mtra,
Arj-jpairToi,

dvaytvvwual,
jfa^iruir/cw,

dviyruafta,

htThum,

ara'iMjufj'O!,

ivipxut,
awrrprxw
AroipaipfTo»,
&iia(puadit,
kvaivxh,
Ar(KSi^yirr«tt

dvadi/Atfatrifi
iyuKynrt
dfaAAo/cvTOf,
dvaXdyoi,
AroAiWitai,
dcauaorqa-iii,
Ava/urfpTTjTot,
drcEirAfWf
iyaro\6yijTo*.
Sropxoi,

LECT. AND CH.
xxii. 3* ;
xxiii. 15*
iv. 22
XX. 5
iv. 4*
ix. 2
xv. 27, 30
xiii. 3
iv. 19
vii. 2
xvi. 8
iv. 4*; xi. 4,
note 3 ; xi. 20
xi. 7*
ii. 4
ii. 19
Proc. 9
xxiii. 17
iv. 21 ;
vii. II
iv. 7
kvtWrrt\t,
iv. 22
i»tfiw6turTos,
xxii. 6
Arffr*o(a0>os,
Proc. 17
««{({Afnrros,
viii. 4
Arthurax/a,
viii. 8
Ave{1 ^iiacTToJ,
/"/or. 4
dvfio't,
xiii. 25
d>^Koa>,
iv. I
AiWjAa-ror,
Xv. 20*
iLvdipiov.
x. 3
iyBpurofiipos,
iv. 9
ay0DO>iroT7fls,
iv. 30
Aro/xciof,
vii. 16*
Air^fio-jjffai,
iv. 12
AyrjAirrTiicAr,
vi. IO
ayrifiifjiot,
ix. 6
AiTfTopaMSuui,
imlppriais,
xiii. 7> 8
Ait(twtoj, xx. 6* ; xxi. I* ;
xxiii. 20*
xxiii. 2
iii. 2
Iv. 8 *;
xiii. 37 > xv. 21*
dfi'aua,
xvii. 13*
Ajra77€\A«, V. 12 ; XV. 2*
iv. 1 8
ajraOaiaTtfa
vi. 6*
Ara0£s,
iv. 8*
An-aAAorpuW,
Xvii. 20
&Tav0'i£t>nait
iv. 14
aTa{a*Aws
xi. 18*
AvapaAAafTof,
xvii. 14
airap«ftTo8if7Tws(
xxiii. 8
iwapTt^ofiatf
Xxiii. 17*
dT«i'paTTOj,
ii. 19
ArcA't^w,
ix. 8
Arcpid/xoTtff,
ii. I
Aira'tu,

iurvrtiBwot,
artnrdVpiToi,
Arvrrfffrarosi

d*oO7)p>av<J0atf
a*r<>h- ' \ f'aj,
Airowptd/jpai,
AvAVpi/^a,

AiroraVirouai,
Aitotfipw,
ArOTOITOS,
OTroTp'Jirafoy,
AirnrvyxaVw,
ATfhpatm,

awpoaiptTut,
&TTQrros,
apy»piy5uTotf
ApWa,
apuu'ior,
Appi>^!,

Aroi-Jirf,
cn.if> j otVt'ai,
Ato^'m,
Ai-o*-«ipa,
iwoppr Pcraf,
iwoppijyyvut,
tnro&raala,
ATotrrciT^i,

LECT. AND CH.
xiii. II
iv. 26
ii. 18
XV. II
xii. 19*
»v- 33. 35 i
xv. 16*
xx. 5
v- 3
Free. 11
iv- 34
vii. 5
xxiii 23
xv. 9*
iv. 37
ii. 4
▼i. 13;
vii. 3
xix. 2
xiv. 5, 21
xiv. 15
xix. 3
vi. 8
xiii. 17 ;
xxii. 6
iv- 34
ix. S
xiv 14
ix. S
xxii. 5
xiii. 38
xi. 14, 20
xix. 3
ii. 6
xii. 16*
i. 5 ; iv. 27 ;
xxiii. 19
xxiii. 3*
v- 3
iv. 37 ; ix. 8
iii. 6
xv. 1
ix. 1
viii. 4
dr/Uaffof,
xix. 6
SrpflTOf ,
iv. 4*
auTe£uv<7iuf, ii. I ; iv. 18 ;
vii. 13
x. 8
X. 9
xiii 28
xv. 14
vii. 7
iv. 3
xii. 20
xv. 31*
xi. '4
VI. J I

a4ToA»{*(,
our.»Tpi*ai'p*Tot,
aurowjoaipiTax,
avrOTpoowui,
A<p«'A«io,
i(pt\f)s,
S.Xpai-TUI,
*XP'.
avpivoi,
a \ vpw {HaTa,

&TTP0A07/3,
Affv7*piTi>*,
a-r \ ti'AAw .

atrayi)s,
a-rKTJ'Ils,

d<rira£buaiy

AuxfKafor,

f&atrlXttov
ffiofftpayws,

LECT. AND CH.
Proc. I
xiii. 6, 33
iii. 3
ix. 5

yt rjwoytlaOai,
ytytvBai, npb tov
X, 12*
ytvtnQai t)y,
ix. 2
ytyfaiovpyo!,
yiytati,
ii. 15 ; iv. 18
ytapyos{fl\. yopyi\), ix. 13*
ii. 5* ; iii. 7
yypas,

J roc. 3 ;

*a*cTu\o*«tKTf(V,
SaCrVijy,

xviii. 8*
iii. 2 ;
vi. IO
xxii. 6
SfiriroTiKiif,
vii. 4
Seirrcptvv,
iv. 31
Siaiwyifa,
v. 7
StaKohvufidmf
ix. 9*
Sidwpiais,
iv. I ; x. 3
SiaicpiTiKiiSi
xiii. 14*
StaWdaow,
ii. 13 ; v. II
Sliirvffos,
iv. 12
Oiu.M vw,
xxiii. 10*
Sia«(p«,
SiSatrffaAetOf,
iv. I
Sirai'us (var. led.), vi. 29*
v. 10
SoyfiariK6vt
iv. 9; vi. 14 ;
vj.i,
xiii. 4,37
SoKiueHTTtifOl,
XV. 21*
Sukiuos TpairffiTTjj, vi. 36*
vi. I *
5o*o\oyiat
Soputpopcurdai,
iv. 15
iv. 5 ; xviii. 3
*pa{,
Xvi. 20
ou : an(i,
xiii. 12
Svaxpriffrot,
vi. 12
Su'iwrvnos,
ii. 9
tuowxtw,
xiii. 37
icepiMiaiof,

eaKTau (pleonastic),

xiv. 10*
ii. 9
«Vypa^io»,
^7KaTaTafff(r9»i,
viii. 4*
^7KoAiri'fj|iai, V. 12 ; vi. 3
tyKpnos (tKKpiro*), x. II*
x. 19 ; xv. 23*
^npdreio,
tyx"P'fa<
viii. 7"
^7^wper, /"/w. 5 tt passim.
xiv. IO* ; xxi. I*
•Intr,
vii. 1 1
ftAiffpivfiff
iv. 3
tluttp.uiyllf
iv. 8
flaayuyi).
iv. 32
«tVa^w^iwtSj
ixSea^tiy (var. lect.),
ii. 3
xviii. 24*, 25
ficxAiKxfa,
xviii. z<
fit<Ai|(i-idfo»,

CATECHETICAL LECTURES OF S. CYRIL.

*inf*7j<ri<{f<ij«.i,
«KitAi7irm(TTiK(ii,

Ivrtxyos,
tVvirifoTaToj,

ln\auPivat,
ix\tlwa,
(VAiuiraiO),
J*T<6i)AuirM/rort
^KTpaYTjAff»,
t\tyXos (de liominf)
lnfti\tBii*r,
tuirfipu,
atiriiTH'W,
tp.it\aatpos,

?u<pa<n»,
tnQoptiaBai,
tn&pvvus,
Iu4>u(rat70at,
O'aStn'i uuai,
ei'ayxaA iCoital,
^rav^p^irijfftT,
IrawUptrmur,
^peHTloA^lil',
«rarf 1 ifuj,
^fSiaSerot,
^!ia(Ti7ua,
tvSofot,
tvtoffis,
hipytta,

LECT. AND CH.
xv. 13*
Proc. xv.
7, 13 ; xvii. 10*
ix. I
IX. 15
IV. IO
xix. 6
xix. 6
ii. I
xiii. 19*
xxiii. 17*
vi. 36
Proc, 4 ;
iii. 15
xix. I
iii. 6
vii. 16
/Vw. 9
xili. 41
Xli. 32
iv. 9
xii. 3*
V. 12
Vi. 4
iv. 8*
iii. 5 ; vi. 8*
xiv. 30
ii. 8
iv. 9 ; vii. 7* ;
xiv. 17*
iytpyrtTiK^s, V. IO; xxi. 3*
iii. II ; xii. 15,
(vtraptot,
32 i xiv. 27, 30*
iv. 22
iv. 7* ;
xi. IO* ; xvii. 5*
xv. 9
ix. 15
xiv. 24
il. 13 ; viii. 8
xii. 17*
xiii. 9
xvi. 6
iv. 34
iv. I
ii. 15 ;
xviii. 14
(topKirruos, Introd, p. i. 5
xi. 22
i\ov<ria,
tnatytKia, v. 12 ; xvi. 19
xv. 2*
iway/tWm,
Xvi. 9
/Ttryeoviio/iai,
ii. 4
iidmyicts,
ii. 19
liragi'ut,
iv. 37
i-waotSon,
Proc. 4
iwix't't
iii. 1
lin7aufcif
xxiii. II
iriypd<pta8at,
vi. IO
iTtiaijti\tvfa8alt
iv. 37
^Tt5*'(TMOTa,
iv. 13
/WicXTjim,
T. 8
f irn-f ufut'ai,
iii. I
inrtvco,
xxiii. 15*
t'riovoiof,
iwifflju fi-iyiiai,
XIV. 3*
/rior^ij, /V<?f. 4* ; vi. 35 :
xi. 15*
xvii. 29*
ii. 8
xxi. I*, 4;
xxiii. 19
xiv. 6
iv. 36

06* Svruy,
^{oi^oToiiffflai,
i(aiptr»s !f,
/Jau
{(«raflfMraf,
^{<77)cris,
^{i)TjjTj)t,
«^iAtoCaSai,
l£<motovaBai,
/{o/uoA<i7i|<rif,

'TIUT0A17,
/-(tt7S«»,
i*t<polTj)irts,
f'r.r-pi/AAlj,
mxptmuu,

iropKttru6t,
iptiiVTl<rt1,
Ei'i.Tii ei a;,
eua77eAia,

*bap*tiTT\ffiit
fiyAniTT/n,
nr. ru'Ufij a'f,
tbyvufxoavVTjt
(MtiwiV,
fv8virope?rf
«uAffyia,
ti*appri<Tii(TTiet,
f4irfi87)f,
t6ptat\oyt'y,

tiptiriXoyta,
tvaiRna,
tbirrdBtia,
«vt YTfjuoye?!',
l$<loiai>,
tut (lis),
i<ia<popot

LECT. AND CH.
Proc. 9, 1 4
V. IO*
ii. 4
iv. 4, 7 J
xiii. 21, 35
V. IO*
iv. 2*
V. 9
ii.
1 1
Xiv. 25*
iii. 2
xiii. 6*
xv. 33
x. 9 ; xv. 30
iv. 17, 34 ;
xiii. 19
iv. 17*, 34
xvi. 4
xxiii. 8*
Proc. 3
v. 12 ; xv. II*
xiv. 25*
vii 2; xi. 5*

ffityoj,
fuyof,
fwoirotfi*,

(fwwv),

xii. 32*
/>«■■ 13
XXI. 3
xii. 20*

tryfuornrrf»,
'HKtipH-ros,
3» St« ovk Jiv,

xvii. 5*
xv. II"
xi. 7*, 17*

LECT. AND CH.
xviii. 7*

><wo{<f»,
uvoraywytOf
r^ijAor,
xli. 17*
iv. 57
rfKvy^ai'rffa,
«•«D^a, x. 5* ; xxii. 2*, &c.
r*5poF,
v. 8*
Proc. 17 ; i. 5;
Dtup6a>,
xviii. I
iv. I
Xxiii. 2*
vi. 29*
Pw. i* ;
i. 4* ;
iii. I* ; ii. 17* ; iv. 16 ;
xvi. 31 ; xxi. 2*, &c.

•Tj+aAiof,
i-.-i ini'al,
►li)|un,
«>i)T(it,

ofa«(J>,
nincn,
olicovofLe"»,
oixurouici,

ix. 9*
Xxii. 2*
xiv. 24*
viii. 4; x. 18 ;
xiii. 39; xiv. 17*, 24"
xv. I, 4, &c.
olxovuf t ikA*,
xvii. 29
iv. I
oAc6poiraiii<,
bpioiotaB-hi, iv. 9* ; xii. 1 5
xii. 14
iuotoxpiffwTos,
vi. 7* ;
iuoios iavTtji,
XI. o
Iv warn*, xi. 4*, 9, 18
iv. 7*
■ Kara vdvra,
xiv. 10*
/>»/r. p. xlix. ;
vii. s* ; xi. 17*
iii. 2

buotuan,
6moou<7io>,

hvoua.Toypa4>tivt
ofoaaToypCi'f a, Intr.

KaWuTWTfiit,
Kaudpa,
ffdVlfnt,
Kafovmit,
lfair7jAo5uT«irf
icdVirapis,
KaraAArjAm,
Karapuirrrar,
fcara^io^croi,
Kmairovrovatvoi,
Karaprittv,
KaTao-Kfir^,

LECT. AND CHiv. 29
ix. 5
Xii. 6
Proc. 4*
iv. 37
XV. 20*
ii. 14
ii. 13
xii. I*
xix. 3
vii. 2
iv. 17. 34»
xiv. 26
Vi. 5
JCOT^fTTOfflJ,
KarAtTTijHa,
Proc. 4
Karaabptiy, iv. 2 ; xxiii. 17
iv. II. 12;
KaraxBvvios,
vi. 15
vii. 5* ;
x. s*
KaTfixv" Titles ; xv. 18*
v. 11
KOTOFTflifll',
xvi. 16
ita-roTrrpifcaBai,
ix. 10*
Kavffris,
vi. 10
ntpavnatrn,
vii 9
Ft7)^uon'a,
ix. 13*
KlvTjmi,
xvii. 27*
<fAfiJoCx<"<
Xix. 8
kXtiSoi'KTuo!,
iv. 37
kAtjJux,
ii. 2*
^iu^fai,
iv. 14
*oir<i£Vuai,
xi. 3*
*opvtpaios,
*i/o$ope<V,
iii. 6
XJtiii. 22*
Kbmwv,
X. 12*
KvptoKT6vost
ix. 5
kvtos,
Xvi. 8
KMpbbpiOP

«OToxpjjTTiicS»,

AaumMi',
Aciyuss,
A/{u,
AfofT(£*7jf.
Af u yt luoi uV,

iv. 15
xiii. 26*
v. 12* ; xviii. 21*
ii, 17
Proc. 2 ;
xxii. 8

Qaipdv,
8aAaTT€^a#,
tipvn (var. lect.)
8ot/^OTovp7fti'
0eaTpouar(a,

flf'ATjua,

8foA07*a,
0foA4y«f|
0€<JlTI'*U<TT0Jf
BfowoicTa 8at,
8eairoi6t,
flt^Tiji,
BeorAkuS,
8*pa*ttrr$tf
BtfTfl,
6tr6s,
Bupttcnfiotor,
Bvtrtaar-^piov,

xi

5'

xviii 32

xii. 20*
v. ;
, xiii. 31'
xxii. 2'
xix. 6'
xi. S
x. s
xiii. 40
xxiii. 18
xxiii. 6*
xii. I
iv- 33
xii. 3*
iv. 16
; xxi. 3
x. 19
xiv. 12*
xi. 7
Xi. 2*
ii. 17
vi- 33
; xxiii. 2

fairit,

tttot,

hptvs,
(AaffT^piori
iofibKos,
finrifAaTfU^

X. 4
iv. 5*
xiv. 15*
xvi. 13
v. 12
xxiii. 2
ii. 17
iv. 2
iii. 5
vi- 33
x- 13

itoffffa,
KaBtKtTtiet,
■ axifTptycia
/fdAo/io» (ypa^iitit),

XIV; 27*
Proc. 5
vii. 7
i. 3

xix. 7 ;
xxi. 3
iv. 8 ; x. 3* ;
xvii 2
iv. 37
iv. 1

p. xvi*.

iro.M-/»><>j,
ira'.3<s,

iiriiipp^uAiiKioy,
opi-KirTKOTia,
ouirfo,
(tiNTiu'^is,
bipBahnoQarSs,
oyt'po^at^ui,
xciSci,

/V»r. 1
xiv. 18
iv. 37
xvii. 5*
xxi. I *
xvii. 9"
V. 12
/;;/r. xlix. Co/.
vi. 6* ; vii. 5*
iv. 33
vi. 12 ; viii. 8;
xii. 2 ; xiii. 1 1
ii. 19
Tai5i ' xapiov,
Xvi 19*
TaAaria,
ii. 15
TraA ii-Spop. it,
iv. 23
vaAjioy,
xix. 10
jran)>upffw,
xar^) vpi
xix . 7*
vawoKpirap, viii. 8* ; x. 5
xvii. 1
xvii. 9*
xxii. 2*
iv. 3
ii. I ; xii. 13
v. 13;
xii. 16*
xviii. 17*
iv. 37
iv. 35
i. S
xx. 6
iv. 20
iv. 2
v. 4

xiv. 6 TopajSa'AAo!,
wapaBii\ovv,
irapaSo^oiroii'a,
To^aSoTir,
rapoinos,
TapaKaraBnnii,

xvi. 21*
ii. 15
15 ; xii. 26
xiii. 24
ii. 18
xxiii. II
xv. 31
viii. 4 vapaT^pjfffit,
irrp.:\?p.i < <7<e,
iii. 6
Taptbpevut,
VI. II
7t;ji><
xxiii. 3
7 iviis-,
irapfKTptiir^,
iv, 24
irapf(7)7cl<r0<u
; vi. I*, 36;
jrapOtrf vu,
2* ; xvii. 2
xii. IO* ;
Trap'^eoiTuioi tuv ibvx&v,
xviii. 8*
7*, xvi. 12
xix. 6

xii. 31
vopflfVoi,
xii. I*, 2*
jrapoixfa, xiv. 21* ; xvi. 22*

jrapanmirri,

xiv. 24*

Atuwaaai,
Ami»,

Ao7i*^t,

Aifyior,
Aoi.utuSijr,

fid\itrra p.%99
fiapTvptov,
tiapjvptiv,
fiataioXoyuv,
litkri,
ix.
fxeatp&oXot,
pitTaniAcia,

jUi(raSeA<post
maAv8puxoit
pLio6xpwros,

p.ova%ovTt 5
Hovapxfa, iv. 6*
vii. 1,

/«OVO?*»^J,

porooS^r,

vi.

INDEX OF GREEK WORDS.

•77

wtptwoKti",

vapowrla,

wapiir,
»o(tto»
ir«8ai (var. led.),
irfi8opx«"'i
vtipiai,
vtpiypatp-fl,
TfpiSpdaa*a$at,
rtpitpyos.
vtpitxtf,

LHCT. AND CH.
iii. 11 ; xii. 15 ;
xiv. 27, 30* ; xxi. 3*
xiv. 2* ; xv. 27*
xvi. 19*
xv. 23*
xv. 3°
xix. 8*
V. II
x 16
iv. 29
V. II
vi.8*
»• 7
T. II
ii. 2
iv. 17
Proe. IJ ;
iii. 15 ; xiii. 9
Jntr. p. xv.
V. 12
ii. 15
xxii. 8
ii. 4 ;
xvi. 28*
x. i6*
«• 3
iv. 16
Proc. 2 ;
ii. 3, &c.
xxiii. 6
xiii. 40
vi. 7 ; x. 3*
xix. 6*
xvii. 37*
xii. 34*

voAA&ns,
woXvtvvafios,
To\tmpaypon~r,

woKtr*p6attios,
loAwxiSfo,
ToAucewpos,
ioai»^,
Tpa-tpaTfla,
*P"f»,

TtffTQKQltty,

rurris,
rk&rot,
tAok^,
wrtvpaTtKus,
vrci/fiar^ipopoi,

rpi duwrup,
vpiiaipavfitvos (var.

lect.), vi. 22*
rpoaipfmi, Proc. I ; vii. 16 ;
ix. 13 j xiii. 6, 29 ; xv.
30 ; xvii. 10 ; xix. 8
vpoavAtos, Proc. I J xix. 2*
ii. 19
itporfLvtv6at,
vii. 7
TpoStajrcAAeafcu,
/Vyk:. I
»p<)fle(m,
/V-oc. 4* j
ipoStffjui'o,
xviii. 14
xxiii. 7
x. S* j xi. I, 3*,
7. 13. '5. »7 i xiv. 27
xii. 3
/>w. 16 ;
xii. 13; xx. 6
xx. 6
ii. 9
ix. 8
iv. 18
iv. 27 ;
xvii. 3S

TpoKtlutya,
*poKoirh,
"■poKii^ot,
■plftra*

*po£tyi1TtK6's1

Tpoactyayw,

LECT. AND CH.
irpoff7j7op/a, v. IO* ; xvii. 2
xiii. 22
upooKopiis,
iii. 3
xpoa-oxtf
xvi. 6*
wpoarayiia,
iv. 35 ; vi. Ij
lrpooTOTij»,
Proc. 17*
upoo-TlBtaeu,
xv. 26*
wpocttiiHU,
*poox*wi
iv- 1
TcpotrtevvfjLia,
iv. 36
irp6a<airovt
x. 7
9p6ranitt
iv. 8
■wporporit,
XV. 17
■wpopoptxitt iv. 8* ; xi. 10*
xiii. II
Tpoxatycuai,
ix. IC
vpoXwpiJO'iJ,
xvii. 9*
rpssTfia,
ii. 7
irpwrcfrAaffTOfi
ii. 19*
TrpurutrriTT]St
xi. 4*
vpwToroKos,
xiv. 21*
kpatTOTinrus
vii. 16
TTfpviffTlis,
iii. 6*
TTfjMMpvfir,

fiaBvuttr,
fitfidtoBai,
0o»ii,

ii. 3
/ViW. 9*
V. II ; vi. 2

/V«c. 5
iv. 37
xxii. 4
xxiii. 22
xi. 5*
vi. 35*
*»• 33*
v. 8
xvi. 18*
x. 14*
v-4*
iii. 2
xviii. 4*
iii. 4*
xix. 8
v. 12
iv. 35
v. 12
Proc. I
Proc. 17
iii. 3
xvii. 36*
ii. 13
v. 10*
xxiii. 4
iv. 10
iv. 31
ii. 14
iv. 2
xxi. 1
iv. 26* ;
; xvi. 12
vii. 5

ffTttpaVTJtpopilZf
«ttjjA^,
ffTljAlTtV»

tntx«s,
OTpartla,
crrpciTfvcti*,
arpaTQKoytir%
arpaTo\oyiat
ffuyKara^alveiVf
auyKaraBfaLS,
ffvyKcrarfflcnait
trvyKpotttoOaif
ajrvxoptxmv,
<rvyxptbpnu,
ffvKayuytir,
aufji/Xoptpos,
avp,vfpiipcpto6ait
v. 9 ; vi. 13

triz/ivAOKi),

0-0771»^,

crapvoipcryia,
atBafffia,
c^l/jLtpoy,
trtfivonj',
cttiyvpoucUf

X. 12*
xi. 13

otKvii\aroyt
ffKfVaiTTOS,

<rvvaywvujT4\s,
awaipuf,
avvaKottpT),
ffwafis,

avvairotr&tvvvm,
ovvSvdfa,
awfiByi,
owoAok,
ffvrrtAtfr,
trwTf'Acia,
avvjpixtip,
<r«rj7|ua,
mWu/tof,
ainranti,
atptyya
tvppvylfa
ff^po-yii,

UCT. AND CH.
xvii. 28
xxii. I
iv. 8 ; xvi. 4*
i. 6; x. 14*;
xiv. 26
iv. 13
iv. 34
xxiii. 3
Proc. 17*
ii. 2
xv. 3
iii. 2
vi. 33 ; xvi. 8
xxii. I*
v. 12
i. 1
iii. 3», 4
/V«f. 17 ; i. 2,
"ii- 4
3 ;
<rx«5iafoum, Titles
crxoAofa, P/w. 13* ; i. 5*
l'roc. 15 ;
avfipmot,
xiii. 13
iv. 9
viii. 7*
XV. 2*
iv. 25
v^ 5
iii. 4
IL S ! iv. 9
v. 10
xiv. 10*
v. 13*
vi. 36*
xviii. 5
xii. 28 ; xxi. 6
xxi. 6
xiii. 18, 19, 20 ;
xiv. 20 ; xix. 2, 3 ;
xxii. 3*
xi. 3*
IV. 8* ; xi. 16,
17 ; xv. 9*
XV. 30
iv. 30
xviii. 17* i
xxiii. 6
xxiii. 16
ii. 3
iv. 21 ; V. 4
Proc. 2*
Proc. 14 ;
viii. 4; xvi. 17
vi. 28
xii. 29
iii. 7* ; vi. 7 ;
vii. 5; ix. 9, II » x. 3;
xi. 10* ; xvi 5, 24 ;
xvii. 17
xvii. 2, 5. 28

ff»A^C,
(TiiuaTa,
aUTTiptot
TeKPcryopeiPp
TeKJ'O^OFIO,
TtAeioCoOai,
nrpuhiupot,
TIS (tkvSc Tlfas)|
Tonit,
rpiirffa,
rpa*tfiTTjj,
Tv«0<6pvx°*>
rv*uc4i,
TviriKUf,
t4t*>,

vvOKofaur,
uictiartpxoiuu,
vrtpBtirn,
uwtpKoaiuot,
brtpriStaBat,
6iro/3<iA<v!,
irirvpo^*!»,
unoyptupii,
bw6$tois,

vwoKpoia,
vwonvTi<niK6s,
ir^arcurif,

vloBtiria,
vioiraTopi'a,

v<ptoTwst

(paiviufvOL,
<parri$o)iat,

LKCT. AND CH.
X. 13
V. II ;
vi. 7, 8
xii. 3 ; xiii. 37*
<parra<r(a,
^iajTafTiofCoitfij^xv. IO*. 14*
xiii. 4*
tpavTatrubSTjs,
iv. 9
<$>dvraafiaf
xii. 20*
topiv,
<papfiaKttovt
iv. 37
4>6i*oua(,
iv. 23, 30
tptpunfios, X. 4 ; xviii. 24
iv. I
tpBopowotos,
iii. 6
4>iA(piijuoi,
iv. 25
tpikq&oiitTv,
vii. 2
<pi\iovir8ait
iv. 33
<piA<$Aoyojt
vii. 9* ;
(tiAoffrup-, /j,
xv. 30
xxiii. 17
vi. 11
iv. 6*
vii. 2
xix. 3*,
xx. 3
x. 7*
0WffH,
X. 9
(pVO-iKUIS,
(pvaiokayCa.
1 3
<>«Ta7o>7fiV. x. 13 ; xvi. 1 1
1 itles, 7«/r.
th»ti£vjmi'i»,
xvii*.
xiii. 21 ;
/«//-. xvii.
v. 4

4>iA<>XPW'aT^ai
$iAi!xp<otoi,
<f>opa,
QpudrTtaQat,
QvyaStvrijptoi',

flUTiaTlKdf!

(piTiofiu,

ix.

X<WU<><
Xawii»!
XiipCLyoryftv,
X*tpoOefftaf
Xpnmptvu,
XPto-rot,
Xf>i<rTO<J>upoj,

Iv

xi.

Xponicit,
XpuaoK6\\rjTos,
Xpvo-oxios,
Xpi>na,
XpSrrov,
XU*"'<fTT|I,
X«>v(uTi)pu>v,

xxi. 3*
29; v. 13
v. 7
xvi. 26
xiii. 26
1 ; xvi. 13
Proc. 15* ; .
xxii. 3*
xi. 4*
ii. 12
xiii. 11
Proc. 3*
xxi. I*
xiii. 11
Proc. 9

tfnvlfrliptupa,
Qiao's,

Iv. 36
xii. I ; xiii. 2, 24,
33 i *xi- 3; xxii. 6

vol. vn.

N

S. CYRIL.

INDEX OF TEXTS.

The references are to the page*.

.
Gen. f. 2 .
•
i. S •
.
i. 6 .
.
i. I I .
.
i.
i i .
.
i. 14.
.
1. 24.
.
i. 26.
.
i. 26 .
.
i. 26.
.
i. 26.
.
i. 27.
.
ii. 7 .
•
ii. 7 •
•
ii. 9 •
.
ii. 17
.
iii. 8.
iii. 15
.
iii. 17, 1 8
.
iii. 22
iii. 24 .
.
iv. 1 .
.
iv. 12
.
iv. 26
.
ix. 6.
xv. 6
.
xvii. 5 .
xviii. 1 ff.
xviii. 25
xviii. 27
xix. 24 .
xxi. 12 .
xxi. 21 .
xxii. 2 .
xxiv. 43.
xxix. 21
xxxii. 30
xxxv. 19
xxxvi. 11,
xli. 38 .
xlvi. 29.
xlviii. 7.
xlix. 8 .
xlix. 8, 10
xlix. 9 .
xlix. 9 .
xlix. 11 .
xlix. 17 .

Ex.

.
ii. 8 .
.
iii. 6 .
.
iii 6.
.
iv. 22
.
xi. 5 .
xii. 9
.
xii. 23 .
xiv. 9, 23

rxa*
«5
5*
«37

«37
7«
42 77
«23
7o

in
za
«44

•

•

Ex. xx. 13 .
xx. 19 .
xxi. 17 .
xxviii. 36
xxx. 22-25
xxxi. 1-6
xxxii. 4 .
xxxiii. 13
xxxiii. 17
xxxiii. 19
xxxiii. 20
xxxiii 20
■
xxxiii. 22 •
xxxiii. 22
xxxiv. 5-7 •
xxxiv. 8
■
xxxiv. 9
■
xxxvi. 1
•
xxxvii. 7 it .

■

Lev. iv. 5, 16
.
vi. 22
.
viii. 3
.
xii. 8
.
xx. 9

Num. i. 12

.
xi. 24 .
xi. 26 .
xi. 28 .
xi. 29 .
xxi. 9 .
xxiv. 9
xxv. 6 .

■
■
•

•
•
■
■

■
•
•

PACK

.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.

.
•
.
.
.
.
.
•
•
•
•
•
•
.
•
•
•
.

1 Sam. i. 13, 20 .
.
ii. 6
.
ix. 9

.
2 Sam. vi. 2
xii.
.
xii. 13 .
xvi. 10, 11
xxiii. 2 .

.
47 Josh. vii. 19
.
xiv. 1
xix. 15
.
xxiii. 12 .
122 Judges iii. 10 .
vi. 34 .
xi. 29
5i
60, 96
.
.
.
.
•
.
.
.
.
.
•
•

.
1 Kings i. 4
•
i- 39
v. 4
.
vi 23-26 .
viii. 6, 7 .
.
viii. 27
»
xiii- 6
xviii. 4
B
xix. 8-13 .
.
xix. 10
.
xxi. 29

2 Kings ii. 11

.
.
.

.
•
.

.

.

.
ii. 11 (Us)
.
iv. 34 .
.
v. 25 .
XX. I
.
.
XXiV. 13 .
.
xxv. 7

•

■

•
•
■

,
a
,
m
•

Deut iv. 10 .
.
iv. 15 .
•
iv. 24 .
.
v. 16
.
•
v. 26 .
•
ix. 10 .
•
I Chron. xiii. 6
.
ix. 20 .
xiii. 4 .
.
.
. £ 2 Chron. vi. 18
xiv. 1
.
.
xv. 1
xviii. 10, II .
XX. 7
a
xviii. 15
•
■
xx. 14 .
xix. 15
.
a
xxiv. 20,
xxii. 27
.
a
xxxiii. 6
.
xxviii. 66 .
.
xxxin. 12, 13
xxxii. 6
.
•
xxxvi. 7
a
xxxii. 6
.
•
xxxii. 32
.
•
xxxiii. 2
.
■
xxxiv. 9
.
•

Ezra vi. 15

•
•
•

•

.

.

.
Josh. ii. 11
iii. 1.
.
vi. 5, 20

•
•
■

.
.

Nehem. ii. 1

.

ix. 20

60 ; Esther viii. 13

.
.

•

«

a

■
•

■

.
•

•

■

■

PACE

1 1

«38

*

3°
1 1

Job iii. 6

.
v. 8, 9 .
vii. 9
.
vii. 18 .
.
ix. 8
ix. 8
.
x. 10, 11
.
x. 11
.
X. 22
xi. 7
.
xii. 8 .
xii. 24 .
xiv. 7-10
xiv. 9 .
xiv. 14 (fit's)
xix. 26
xx. 6
.
xxi. 13 .
xxvi. 8
xxix. 16
xxix. 18
xxxi. 26, 27
xxxvi. 27
xxxvii. 10.
xxxvii. 16 .
xxxvii. 22 .
xxxvii 23 .
xxxviii. 2-3
xxxviii. 11
xxxviii. 14
xxxviii. 17
xxxviii 28
xxxviii. 29
xxxviii. 37 (i/j
xxxix. 26
xl. 14 (Sept.),
xl. 23
xl. 26 (Sept.) .
xli. 5
xli. 7
.
xli. 13 (Sept.)
xli. 15 .
xli. 22 .
xli. 24 .

Ps. i. 5 .
ii. 2 .
ii. 3 •
ii. 7 .
ii 7 .
ii. 7 .
ii. 7 •
ii. 7 .
ii. 7 .
ii- 7. 9
ii. 11
v. 9 .

INDEX OF TEXTS.

.

.
>

.
.

•
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

MGI
.
Ps. vii. 6
.
.
vii. 7
.
1 1
.
vii. 9
.
.
.
vii. 9
.
vii. 10 .
viii. 3
.
.
xi. 2 ...
.
.
.
xii. 5
.
.
.
xiv. 3
.
.
xiv. 7
■
.
.
xvi.
.
.
xvii. 8 .
.
i
xviii. 9 .
.
.
xix. 2, s
.
.
xxii. 9 .
.
.
xxii. 15 .
.
.
xxii. 18.
.
xxiii. 1-3
.
IS2
.
xxiii. 5 (U-r)
.
.
xxiv. 7 .
xxiv. 7 .
.
.
. 140
xxvi. 5, 8, 12 .
• '53
.
.
xxvi. 6 .
.
.
xxvii. 14
.
.
xxx. 1-5
.
.
xxxi. 20
.
.
xxxii. 1
.
.
xxxii. 1 .
.
.
xxxii. 5 .
.
.
xxxiii. 9
.
.
xxxiv. 3
.
.
xxxiv. 3
■54
.
.
xxxiv. 9
.
.
xxxv. 18
.
.
xxxvi. 5
• 48
. 128
.
.
xxxvi. 8
.
xxxvi. 9
.
•
. 120
.
xxxvii. 34 .
xxxviii. 11.
.
•
xxxviii. 13, 14
.
xli. 9 ... •
.
.
xiv. 6
. 113
.
xiv. 6, 7
. 149
.
xiv. 7
.
•
.
xiv. 10 .
.
.
xlvi. 10 .
.
.
xlvi. 10.
.
.
xlvii 5 .
. IOI
.
xlviii. 7 .
. 118
.
. no
•
1.3 •
.
.
1. 18 .
.
.
.
1. 21.
. 104
li.7.
.
.
■
li. II ... . 122
.
.
li. 12
• »25
.
.
lii. 10
.
lv. 21
.
.
.
lix. 6 ... •
8S
.
.
Ixii 10 .
lxvi. 10-12 .
.
.
lxvii. 6 (.if, /.) .
. 46
.
lxviii. 5
. IOI
.
lxviii. 17
.
lxviii. 18
IOI
.
lxviii. 25
.
lxviii. 26
.
lxviii. 31
• 130
.
lxix. 21
• 90
.
lxxii. 5 .
•
lxxii. 5 .
.
lxxii.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Title, &c.
.
.

v. 6 .
lxxii 6 .

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
•
.
.
•

.
.
.

.
.

■

,

»

•

,

a

a

PACK
Ps. lxxii. 6 .
.
lxxii. 17
.
lxxiv. 12
.
.
lxxiv. 13
lxxiv. 13, 14
S4
.
lxxvii. 19
.
lxxvii. 20
Ixxx. 1
.
.
Ixxx. 17, 18
lxxxii. 6 .
lxxxii. 6 .
lxxxv. II
.
a
lxxxvii. 4 .
lxxxviii. 1,4 (#/0.5
lxxxviii. 5 . 5 3,91 ,94
lxxxviii. 8, IO, 13
lxxxix. 22 .
lxxxix. 26, 27
a
lxxxix. 29, 36, 37
lxxxix. 35-37
■39
lxxxix. 37 .
.
xciii. 2 .
.
xciv. 11.
.
xcv. 7, 8
.
xcvi. 11
cii. 10 .
.
cii. 25, 26 .
.
cii. 25-27
"3
■55
.
ciii. 20 .
.
.
civ. 2
civ. 4 .
.
civ. 15, 36 (W/ .53 ■52
.
civ. 24 .
.
civ. 25 .
4S
.
civ. 26 .
■ 49
.
.
cv. 15
cvi. 37 .
.
I*
cix. 1-3
.
cix. 25 .
.
cix. 25 .
.
.
ex. I
.
.
ex. I
.
.
ex. 1
.
ex. 3
.
{bit) .
ex.
.
ex. 4 '
.
.
cxiv. 3 .
cxv. 17 .
.
cxviii. 22 (bis)
cxviii. 24 .
,
, ■45
.
cxix. 37
.
cxix. 91
a
.
cxix. 103
.
.
cxix. 176
•
•
exxvi. 5
.
.
exxxii. 6
.
.
exxxii. II
.
exxxii. 17
.
exxxv. 7
exxxix. 8
.
exxxix. 12 .
exxxix. 12 .
■■7
exxxix. 21 .
a 116
.
cxl. 3
.
.
cxliii 10
a 122
. 125
.
cxliii. 10
.
cxliv. 5
a
.
cxlvi. 4 .
. 118
cxlvii. 4
a
cxlvii. 14 .
• 141
.
cxlvii. 16
.
cxlviii. 4
.
cxlviii. 5

#
a
,
a
.
a
a
a
a
a

•
a
a
•
a
v

.
a
a
a

.
.
.
.

«
.

.

a

.

a

.
Ps. cxlviii. 5
cxlviii. 8
.
cxlviii. 12 .

.

el. 6
Prov. iv. 25 .

.

.

-
a
a

►

.
.
v. IS
.
vi.6
.
.
vi.6-8 .
a
.
vi. 27
vii. 3
.
.
xvii. 4, 6 .
.
xvii. 6 .
.
xx. 6
.
.
xxiv. 32
xxx. 21, 22

•

■
■
.
a
a
a
a
a
a
a

PAGR

a

.
70 Isa. xi. 6 .
.
xix 1 .
.
xxv. 6
.
xxv. 7
.
xxv. 8
xxv. 8
.
xxvi. 19 .
xxvi. 19 .
XXVii. I
.
xxvii. II .
xxviii. 15
xxviii. 16
.
xxx. 10
xxx. 15
.
xxxiv. 4 .
XXXV. 4-6
xxxv. 6 .
xxxviii 8

. 118
a
■9
■■7

.
Eccles. iii. 2 .
vii. 29
.
ix. 7, 8 .
x. 4
.
xi. 9, 10 .
xii- i-3. 5
no
xii. 5 (bis)

.

•
a
a
15t
a
.
(bis), 6

■ no

.
xl. 3 .
Xl.9 •
•
xl. 9, 10 .
.
xl. 12 .
xl. 12, 22

PACE
ISO
ISO

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
,
.
.

.
.
.
a
.

.
.
.
.
•
.
.
.

•
.
a
a
a
•
a

.

.
a
.
•
. 20, 134
.
.

.
Cant. 1.3.
.
•
•
i. 4 •
ii 10-14
•
iii. I, 3. 4 •
iii. II. .
iv. 1, 2.
.
iv. 12, 15 .
.
iv. 14

.

a
a
a

a
■4
a
a
a
14, 87
a
16, 112, ■47
.
a
9«
a
a
a

.
a
.
.
.

.

v. 1 (bit)
v. 3 .
V. 12
Vi.3
vi. 11
viii. 5
viii. 7

.
a
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
Isa. i 6
i. 8
.
i. 10 .
i. 16 (bis)
i. 18 .
.
i. 19, 20 .
.
i. 26 .

ii. 3
iii 9 .
iii. 14.

.
.

V. I, 2, 6

vi. I
.
.
.
vi. 2 .
vi. 2, 3 .

.
vii. II
vii. 14
.
viii. 18 .

ix. 7 .

xi. 2 .

.

.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.

a

.
.
.

.
.
.

.

a
.

a

a
.
a

.
a in
a
a
■SO
5»
'54
72, 78
7> 103
■
■23, 125

■
a

.
xliv. 1,3.
.
.
xliv. 17
.
xliv. 22 .
xiv. 7 .
.
.
xiv. 14, 15 .
xiv. 16, 17 .
.
xlvi. 3
.
.
xlvii. 13 .
.
xlviii. 16.
xlix. 1, 2.
.
xlix. 13, 18 .
1.4 .. •
.
.
1.6
.
.
li. 1
.
.
li. 2

.
.
.

lii. 5

.

.

.

liii. 1, 7 .
.
liii. 4, 5. 8, 9
.
liii. 7 .

.

liii. 9 .
liii. 12
lv. 1, 2

.
.
.

.
.
.

.
•
.
4>. 52
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
•
.
91.' 94
.

•
.

I5S
.
9i
•
•
•
82, 94
•
.

.
.

lix. 21
.
.
• "3
Ix. 1, 8 .
.
Ixi. 1
.
.
. ■23. «49
lxi. 10
14, 146, 152
lxii. 11.. .
lxiii. I, 2
a
lxiii. 10 .
.
lxiii. 11. . 99, 123
lxiii. 16 .
5i
lxiv. 1
.
Ixiv. 2, 8
4°
.
. 130, 142
.
.
.
a
.
•

lxv. 15
.
lxv. 15, 16
.
lxv. 18
.
Uvi. I

.
.

.
•

i8o

CATECHETICAL LECTURES OF S. CYRIL.

PAGE

PACE I
122 J Song of the Three
Children v. 4, 24
v. 32 •
.

s>
Bel and the Dragon 33 101

Susanna 45 .

•

Isa. lxvi. 8

Jer. i. S

.
lxvi. 10 .
lxvi. 18, 19
.
.
.
ii. 21 .
.
ii. 27 .
.
lv. 4 .
.
T. 8
.
viii. 1 .
.
xi. 19 (bis )
xii. 7, 8 .
xxvi. 18 .
xxxii.,

18, 19 .
xxxvii. 16
xlix. 7, 20
Lam. iii. 53 .
iv. 20 .

xxxix.

Ezek. i. 6-1 1, 16,
viii. 3
x. I
X. 21
xi. s
xi. 24
xviii. 20-23
xviii. 31
xxv. 13
xxviii. 12xxxvi. 25
xxxvii. I
xxxvii. 12

•

Dan. ii. 26, 31
ii- 35. 45
.
ii. 44
•
ii. 45
.
iv. 9
iv-33
•
iv. 34 .
v. 25
.
.
v. 31
vi. 23 .
vii. 7, 23
vii. 9
vii. 9 14
vii. 10 .
vii. 10 .
vii. 13, 10
vii. 13, 14
vii. 14, 27
vii. 21, 25
vii. 23 .
vii. 24 .
ix. i. 25
x. 6 .
x. 9, 16, ii
X. 11, 18
xii. I (bit),
xii. 2
xii. 3
xii. 7, 11, 12

.

.

PAGE
16, 79
8, 24
(&//.)
9i
.
9i
84, 13a
.
.
5«
■
118, 123
•
7 •
18, 123
123. "34
.
■
,
•
• »3
«23
.
«3. 49
.
•
■
.
, no
.
.
. no
• »3
.
.
.
107, 108
•
•
5«
.
•
2 .
26, 138
«39. Hi

.
.
.
.
.

Hos. 11. 20
iv. 2 .
iv. 12
v. 13
vi. 2 .
ix.7.
ix. 12
x. 6 (Ms)
xiii. 14 .

•
73. >°5
.
.
•
.

Joel ii. 28

ii. 28, 29
.
ii.31

.
Amos i. 12
ii. 8
.
iv. 13 .
viii. 9, 10
ix. 6

.

Obad. 9 .

.

Jonah 1.6.
i. 12
ii. 2, 6, 8

.
.

Mic. iii. 8.
iii. 12
v. 2 .
v. 3 .
vii. 2

.
.
.
.
.

Nahum. ii t .

Hab. iii. 2, 3 .

Zeph. iii. 4 .
iii. 7-10
iii. 14, 15

Haggai ii. 4, 5
ii. 8 .

Zech. i. 6 .

.
.
41, 98
•

.
97, 120
69. 77
.
•

. "7
•
.
•

.
•

.
ii. 10, 11
iv. 10 .
.
ix. 9.
ix. 11
.
xi. 12, 13
xii. 1
.
xii. 10, 12
xii. 12 .
xiv. 4 .
xiv. 6, 7

.
•
•

74. 76
74. 91
•
lis
.
•
no, in

•

(bis)

Mai. i. 7 .

.
i. 10, II
iii. 1 .
.
iii. 1-3. 5
.
iv. 2 .

Apocrypha.

1 Ksdras i. 54.
2 Esdras x. 22

.
.

Wisdom ii. 12

.
vi. 16 .
•
x. 7 •
.
xiii. 5
.
xiii. 5

Ecclus. iii. 21, 22
.
iii. 22
.
iv. 30
.
iv. 31
XXV. I
.
xiv. 12 .

.
Baruch ii. 25 .
iii. 17
.
»i- 35-37
.
.
vi.

9«

5«

*5

»7

1 Mace ii. 58
.
2 Mace. ii. 4 .
.
.
ix. 4
ix. 27 .

•
•
•
•

»s

Matt. i. 1

.
.
.
.
.

•
a
•
■
■

•
•
■
■
•
•

.
.
.
.
.
.
•
.
.
.

.
.
6S
.
i. 20
.
i. 23
So
.
i. 24
i.25
.
ii. 2,4. .
.
ii. 6
.
.
ii. 13 .
.
iii. 5-7 .
iii. 7
.
.
iii. 10, 11 .
iii. 11, 16 .
•
iii. 17
.
.
iii. 17 .
.
.
iv. 9
.
.
iv. II
.
iv. 17 .
«7
. 47. 63, 112
v. 16
26, 62
.
T. 17
.
r. 23
.
43 .83
.
v. 28
v. 45
.
v.48 .
•
vi. 8
.
•
vi. 24 .
•
vi. 26 .
■
vii. 6
.
■
vii. 6 .
•
4»
vii. 13, 14
.
vii. 15 .
viii. 25, 26
ix. 2, 6
3»
•5'
ix. 15 . \
x.8.
.
x. 10, 16 .
.
.
.
x. 20
a
.
.
x. 23
.
.
x. 28
a
.
.
x. 29
•
a
.
.
x. 34
4«
.
.
x. 37
a
.
.
xi. 3
a
.
.
xi. 3
■
•5
.
xi. II
.
a
.
xi. 13 .
B
.
xi. 15 .
•
21, 34, 45,
xi. 27
57. 59. 67, 121
■
.
. 33. "5
.
•
41, 42
.
24. 41
.
.
a
.
3«
. 47. 139
.
a
.
•

xi. 28 .
xii. 28, 31
xii. 29 ,
xii. 32 .
xii. 40 .
xiii. 13.
xiii. 15 .
xiii. 10.
xiii. 32.
xiii. 43.
xiii. 47.
xiv. 29 .

a

.

.

,

,

,
,
.
.

PACE
•
64. «55

Matt. xv. 4 .
xv. 17 .
xvi. 18 .
xvi. 19 .
xvi. 19 .
xvi. 19 .
xvi. 22, 23
xvii. 2 .
.
xvii. 20
3«
34. 46
xviii. IO
xviii. 12
3S
xviii. 19
xix. 21 .
xix. 26 .
xix. 16-18, 29
xx. 12 ff
xx. 18 .
xx. 30 .
7S, 104
xxi. 9 .
xxi. 19 .
6, 60
xxi. 31 .
1, 14
xxii. 12.
xxii. 32
xxii. 43
xxiii. 2 .
xxiii. 37
xxiii. 38
9«
xxiii. 39
60, 10S
xxiv. 2 .
xxiv. 3 (bis),
.
xxiv. 4 .
'9
xxiv. 5 .
.
xxiv. 6
IO5
xxiv. 10-12, 14 106
22, 106
xxiv. 15
xxiv. 16
xxiv. 23
xxiv. 21, 22
xxiv. 23, 27, 30 107
10 i
xxiv. 24
xxiv. 29
110, 111
xxiv. 30
in
xxiv. 31
xxiv. 35, 42, 44 105
xxiv. 42
xxv. 12
XXV. 21
32. 43
XXV. 27
xxv. 29
4'
xxv. 31, 34
xxv. 32, 35
xxv. 35, 36
a
XXV. 41
4>
.
xxv. 46
'4«
•
xxvi. 2
83. 87
.
xxvi. 2 .
.
xxvi. 25
a
XXvi. 26
»5"
.
xxvi. 28
«5«
.
XXVi. 41
«55
39, 85
.
xxvi. 49
.
xxvi. 62
.
xxvi. 63
10Z
Xxvi. 64
.
xxvii. 3-10
xxvii. 5
.
xxvii. 13 .
xxvii. 24 .
xxvii. 24, 25
xxvii. 26 .
xxvii. 45 .
xxvii. 48 .
xxvii. 50, 51

U
S6
Sy
9'

'Si

.
a
.

INDEX OF TEXTS.

John vi. 63

Matt. xxvii. 52 97,99, 138
xxvu. 52, S3
xxvii. 54
xxvii. 45
xxvii. 60
xxvii. 63
»3
xxvii. 63, 65
xxviii. 5
88, 97
60, 97
xxviii. 7
xxviii. 9
94, 97
xxviii. 13,
xxviii. 19
Il6

Mark

i. 1, 4 .
.
1.4.
L 24
.
.
a. 4
iii. 23 .
iii. 29 .
»v. 34 .
ix. 24
x.
x. 17
x.38
X. ;
xL I
xi. 23 .
xiv. 31, ;
xiv. 38 .
xv. 23 .
xv. 46 .
xvi. 19.

Lake i. I

,

.
i. 26, 27, 34
.
i. 32.
>• 33 ■
•
i. 35 (Us)
i- 4«. 43
.
i.44.
•
i. 45 •
.
i.67.
i. 76 .
.
«• 4. 5 •
U. 10, 11
ii. 11
.
ii. 14, 24
ii. 26-35
ii. 29, 30
•
.
ii. 49
•
iii. 3-
.
iii. 11
.
iii. 22
iii. 23
.
iv. 6 (Us)
w-34 •
iv. 41
.
viii. 18 .
ix. 5.
.
ix. 30, 31
x. 18
.
x. 19
.
X. 22
xi. 13
.
xii. II, 12
xii. 28 .
xii. 49 .
xv. 4 .
xv. 5, 6 .
xv. 7
.
xv. 20 .
xvi. 9
.
xvi. 13 .
.
xvii. 5

IS
3»

I, 61
3'
3'
■55
9«

'?S
»3
5S
14S
»7
S3
90, 119
«7
41, 126
9»
3>

PAGE
11 1
.
Luke xvii. 34, 35
.
.
xix. 13
32, 43
xix. 23.
.
xxi. 11 (Us) .
s .
xxi. 28
xxii. 48
.
.
xxiii. 6, 7 (its), 12,

.
xxiii. 14 .
.
xxiii. 40 IT.
9°
.
xxiii. 43 .
.
xxiii. 41 .
xxiii. 43 .
.
xxiii. 46, 50 .
xxiv. 1, 5 .
.
xxiv. 36- 53 .
xxiv. 37, 41 .
. 81, 127
xxiv. 39
.
xxiv. 49
.
.
xxiv. 50 .

John i. 1

.

17, 66, 72
.
... 65
1. 3 . 20, 35, 67, 70,

. j-'-3
.
.
L 10, 11
.
.
.
L 11 .
.
.
.
i. 12.
.
.
i. 12, 13
.
i. 14 .
66, 72, 73
. 34,46,51,
i. 18.

64, 102

i. 29 .
.
L 29 .
.
i. 29.
•
i. 33.
•
"•33-
.
ii. 11
.
ii. 16
.
iii. 3.
.
iii. 5.
.
iii. 8.
iii. 8 .
.
iii. 14 . .
iii. 16, 18
iii. 18
.
iii. 24 .
•
iii. 33
34, 35

: &
.
• »5
17, 126
•
«5
•
.
6, 125
.
.
.
3'
•
.
•
iii. 36
57. 66, 141
iv. 14
.
.
iv. 23
.
.
iv. 24
65, 66, 132
.
.
iv. 29
.
.
.
iv. 36
.
.
.
.
v. 14, 8 .
.
.
.
.
v. 17
45. 7<j
•
»
•
. v. 19
21, 22, 23
.
.
.
.
.
31 (Us), 66,

v. 22
v. 24

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

v. 26
v. 27
v. 34
v. 35
v. 37
v. 43
vi- 32. 33, 5°
vi. 46 .
.
vi. 51
.
»i 53

.
.
•

.
.
•
r
•
.

6l
3S
34. 46
15'

•
.

.

.

.
viL 19 .
vii. 38, 39
viii. 25, 29
viii. 38 .
viii. 39 .
viii. 40 .
viii. 41 .
viii. 44 .
viii. 49 .
viii. 56, 58
ix. 28
x. 7. 9,
x. 9 .
x- 15
x. 18
x. 18
x. 30
xi. 14 ff.
xii 13
xii. 23
xii. 24
,
.
xii.
.
.
xiii.
.
xiii.
.
.
xiv. 6
xiv. 6
.
xiv. 9 (Us)
xiv. II .
xiv. 16 (Us)
xiv. 16, 17
xiv. 23
.
xiv. 25 .
xiv. 26 .
xv. 1
.
XV. I
xv. i, 4, 5
xv. 5
.
XV. 10
.
xv. 26
xv. 26
.
xvi 7, 13
xvi. 7, 8, 12-15
xvi. 13, 14 .
xvii. 5
xvii. 10, 24
li. 25 .
xvii,
xviii
Ii. 8 .
xviii. 18
.
xix. 11
xix. 15
.
xix. 17 .
xix. 24 .
xix. 26, 27
xix. 29 .
xix. 30, 41
xix. 34 .
xix. 37 .
xix. 39 .
xix. 41 .
xx. I, 13
xx. 17
XX. 22

46,

.
.

.

PAGE
Il8, 119
8l
"7
«3
«7
S3
3«
ll
25. 86, 141
• 4. 72
31.83
44. 57

a
»32
119, 125
•29
n6
125, 127
69,83
at, 38
u
■4
45, 69

.
•

.
Acts i. 5
i. 7
•
ii. 2 .
ii. 4, 8 .
ii.9
.
ii. 13. '5
ii. 25, 15
•
ii- 34
•
ii- 37 •

.

16,

"7

', 128

PAGE
»7
I3O
««7
«30
«5
«3«
»5
»3«
■34

.

•

Acts ii. 41
ii. 42
ii. 58
iii. 1
iii. 15
iv. 8,
iv. 13
v- 3
v. 8
v. 9
v. 15
v. 4
V. 12, 13-16, 32
v. 42 .
.
vi. 3, 8, 10, 15
•
vii. 37
vii. 51. 55 .
.
.
viii. 5
.
viii. 13
.
viii. 18 .
.
viii. 18-21 .
viii. 17, 19, 20
.
viii. 27 .
,
viii 29 .
.
viii. 32 .
.
.
ix. 17
.
.
ix. 21
ix. 41
.
.
x 11-16, 19
•
•
x. 36
.
.
x. 38 .
.
•
X. 44 •
.
x. 48 .
.
.
xi. 24, 26
.
xi. 28
.
.
.
xiii. 2
.
xiii. 2-4 .
xiv. 15 .
.
xv. 20, 29 ,
xv. 28, 29 .
xvii. 32 .
.
xix. 1-6, 12, 19
xix. 12
xix. 14
xx. 9-12
xx. 23
xxvi. 24
xxviii. 25, 28
.
xxxv. 6 .

Romans i. 3

118, 131
'34
«3«

»3
'55

1. 3, 4 •
.
i. 4 .
i. 19
•
.
i. 28
ii. 15, 16
.
ii. 20
ii. 24
.
iii. 12 .
iii. 30 .
iv. 11, 17
18, 19
• 12, 17
T. 14
.
T. 17, 18
.
V. 20
V. 20
.
.
Vi.3.
vi. 3. 4vi. 3"'4
vi. 4
vi. 5
vi. II, 14 .

'47
1, '7, '48
17, 148
.
t

CATECHETICAL LECTURES OF S. CYRIL.

2 Tim. vi. 20
i. 14 .
it 4 .
ii. 8 .
ii. 13.
iii. 7 .
iv. 3 •

Titus ii. II
iii. 4 .

.
.

Heb. i. I

•

.
.
.

.
.
.
i. 2 .
•
i-3 •
i. 6 .
.
i. 8, 9 .
i. 10-12 .
•
i. 13 •
i 14 .
.
ii. 12
it 13
ii. 14
ii. 14, 15
iii. 1 .
.
iii. 7
iii. 13
iii 14
iii. 15
.
iv. 16
v. 4. 5. 6
.
v. 14
vi. 18
.
vii. 21, 24
.
ix. II
.
ix. 19
.
ix. 24
.
ix. 26
x. I
.
.
X. 12
x. 15
x. 19
X. 22
x. 29
xi. I, 2, 6
xi. 5 .
.
xi. 8-12, 19
xi. 26, 27
.
xi. 27
.
xi. 34
.
xi. 37
xii. 2
.
xii. 9
xii. 15
.
xii. 16 .
.
xii. 21
xii. 23 .
.
xiii. 4
xiii. 8
.
xiii. 20 .

.
.

Romans vi. 12
vi. 13
vi. 13
vi. 17
vi. 19
vi. 22
vii. 16
vii. 23
viii . 9
viii. 9,
viii. II
viii. 14
viii. 15
viii. 17
viii. 1 8,
viii. 28
viii. 34
viii. 35
ix. 5.
x. 6, 7
xi. 16
xi. 17, 24
xi. 20
xi. 24
*>• 33
xiv. 9
xv. 12
xv. 19
XV. 21
xvi. 17

PAGE
«55
»9
13a
47. '25
"3
«47
«32
"378
«9

I Cor. i. 9

.

46,

2, 29
i. 18, 23
.
i. 23
.
i. 24
.
ii. 4
ii. 4
13a
ii. 8
ii 9
ii. 10 .
23. 34
ii. 10, 11
67, 121
.
ii. 11
ji. 13
.
iii. 6
iii. 13 .
iii. 12, 13
iii. 12, 15
iv. 3
.
.
iv. 9
iv. 15 .
66, 110
vi. 9, 10
vi. 19 .
24. 79
vii. 5, 8,
vii. 9 .
in
viii. s, 6
57. 60
ix. 22 .
.
x. 4
x. 11
.
x. 14-21
x. 20 .
X. 21
.
xi. 2
xi. 3
, 88 (Ins)
xi. 7
xi. 23 (bis)
15'
xii. I, 4
"5
xii. 3 .
xii. 7- 1 1
xii. 8 (bis)
xii. 8, 9
3<
xii. 9, 10
xii. 11 118, 121, 124
.
xii. 28 .

.

1 Cor. xiii.

.

.

.
.
.
.

.
xiv. 29
.
xiv. 34
.
.
xv. 1-4
xv. 3, 4 .
xv. 4 .
.
xv. 5-7, 8 .
xv. 9
.
xv. 14, 15
xv. 16 .
xv. 17 .
xv. 20 .
xv. 25 .
xv. 27, 28
xv. 28 (I/is)
•
xv. 35 •
.
xv 36 .
.
xv. 49 .
.
xv. S3 .
.
xv. 55 .
.
xvi. 20
.
.
•

.
.
•

2 Cor. i. 3
i. 22
ii. 15
iii. 14, 15
iii. 18 .
iv. 3, 4 (bis) .
.
iv. 5
,
iv. 7
vi. 2
,
vi. 7
vi. 7, 8
vi. 14 .
vi. 16
x. 14. 15, 16
xi. 14 .
.
xii. 2, 4 .
xii. 2, 4 .
xiii. 3 .
.
xiii. 5, 6, 7
.
xiii. 14

■

9«
100, 138
"3. »4
•
■
«39
•
26, 139
•
«39
•
«7. 99
'53
33. 45
6, «32
.
■ »4
150, 152
.
.
.
.
-5. '7
.
.
.
•
37. 43
• 8i, 155
19. 32
«55

.
Gal. i. 8, 9
.
ii. 18
.
iii. 24
.
iii 27
.
iv. 2 .
.
iv. 4 .
.
iv. 6 .
.
iv. 10
.
iv. 25
iv. 26
.
v. 22, 23
vi. 14

.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

.

Ephes. i. 3

.
.
iS-.
.
i. 7
•
i. 11 .
.
i- 13. '7-
•
i. 13 •
i. 17, 18.
i. 19, 20 .
•
ii. 4 ■
.
ii. 10 .

111. 6
in. II
iii. 14, 15
iii. 14-16
.
iv. 5 .
.
iv. 11.

3»
«45
«49
I2S
•84
«33
S>2

«49
«42
«43
«5«
44, 45

PAGE
«33
«4
«5
3°
13a
. 125
in
S8
.«42
«49
«42

20,

23, 7°
7«
9«
19 (bis)
92, 147
16, 147
no
«39
no
102, 141
«57

F.phes. iv. 22.
iv. 22
iv.'27
iv. 30
»• 7
v. 11 .
v. 18, 19
v. 25
v. 26
v. 26
vi. 1
vi. 14, 11
vi. 15.
vi. 16.
vi. 17.
vi. 17.

Philipp. i. 19
ii. 6 .
ii. 7.
ii. 9.
ii. 10
ii. II
iii. I
iii. 13
iii. 21
iv. 4
iv. 13

Col. i. 1 5, 18
i. 16.
.
i. 16, 17,
.
i. 20 .
•
ii. 5 •
ii. 8 .
.
ii. 10
ii. 11, 12
ii. 12
ii. 14
»• 15
iii. 1.
iii. 9.
iii. 10
iii. 20

.
»
.
.
.
.

1 Thess. ii. 16
iv. 13.
iv. 16
«7.
iv. 17
v. 21,
v. 23

2 Thess. ii. 3-10

ii. 4 .
ii. 7 .
ii. 8, 9
ii. 11, 12
ii. 15

1 Tim. i. 13 .

13, '4

ii. 2 .
ii. 6 .
ii. 12 .
ii 16 .
iii. 15
.
iv. I
iv. 3 .
v. 21 .
v. 23 .
vi. 8 .
vi. 13-16

S. James i. 2, 12

i. 5 .
i. 17
i. 21
ii. 21,
iii. 9
v. 17

1 S. Peter i. 11
i. 17
i. 19
ii. I (bis) .
ii. 4-6

INDEX OF TEXTS.

I S. Peter ii. 6

TAGE
QI
8.5
«53
.5, 19, 58

.
ii. 22 .
ii. 22, 23
ii 24 .
iii. 15
iii. 22
v. 4
»• 7
t. 8

.

1 S. Peter v. 9

PAGE
. 30, 146

.

v. 14 .

2 S. Peter i. 4
i. 19

1 S.John i. 8 .
i- 9
ii. 2

»55

1 S. John ii. tS

.
ii. 19 .
ii. 20 .
ii. 20-28
ii. 22 .
ii. 23 .
iii. 8
.
iii. 10 .
iv. 10 .

45. 6>
9|
47,
«54

1 S. John iv. 18

2 S. John 7

v. 1
.
10 .
.
.
Rev. i. 1
v. s
.
.
vii. 17
xii. 7, 17
xvii. II

.

SELECT ORATIONS

OF

SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN,

SOMETIME ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE.

TRANSLATED BY

CHARLES GORDON BROWNE, M.A.,
Rector of Lvmpstone, Devon;

AND

JAMES EDWARD SWALLOW, M.A.,
Chaplain of the House of Mercy, Horbury.

CONTENTS.

PROLEGOMENA.

Division I.-The Life
Division II.-The Writings

Division III.-Literature.

ORATIONS.

t.
2.

On Easter and his reluctance
In defence of his flight to Pontus. and his re
turn, after his ordination to the priesthood,
with an exposition of the character of the
priestly office
To those who had invited him. and not come
to receive him
Panegyric on his brother, S. Ccesarius
8. On his sister Gorgonia
12. To his father, when he had entrusted to him
the care of the church of Nazianzus
16. On his father's silence, because of the plague
of hail
18. On the death of his father
21. On the great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexan
27. The first theological oration-a preliminary

dria
discourse against the Eunomians

second concerning the Son
Spirit

28. The second theological oration
29. The third theological oration-on the Son
30. The fourth theological oration, which is the
31. The fifth theological oration-on the Holy
33. Against the Arians, and concerning himself. ..
34. On the arrival of the Egyptians
37. On the words of the gospel, " When Jesus
had finished these sayings," etc.-S. Matt,
xix. 1

38. On the Theophany, or birthday of Christ
39. Oration on the Holy Lights
40. The oration on Holy Baptism
41. On Pentecost
42. "The Last Farewell"
43. The Panegyric on S. Basil
45". The second oration on Easter

LETTERS.

Controversy

Division I.-Letters on the Apoi.i.inakian
202. To Nectarius, Bishop of Constantinople
101. To Cledonius the Priest against Apollinarius. .
102. Against Apollinarius ; the second letter to Cle
donius
125. To Olympius
Division II.-Correspondence with Saint
Bash, the Great, Archbishop ofCesarea

1. To Basil his comrade
2. To the same
4. In answer to Epistle xiv.. of Basil, about 361. .
5. Circa A.i». 361
6. Written about the same time, in a more serious
vein
8. To S. Basil after his ordination as priest
19. To Eusebius of Caesarea
16. To the same
17. To Eusebius, Archbishop of C.xsarea
18. To Eusebius of Oesarea
40. To the Great Basil
41. To the people of Caesarea, in his Father's name
43. To the Bishops
42. To Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata
45. To Basil
46. To the same
47. To the same
48. To the same
49. To the same, the praises of quiet
50. To the same
58. To the same
59. To the same
60. To the same
Division III.-Miscellaneous Letters
7. To his brother Cxsarius
i. To S. Gregory of Nyssa
72. To the same
73. To the same
74. To the same
76. To the same
81. To the same
182. To the same
197. A letter of condolence on the death of his sister
Theosebia
42. To Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata
44. To the same
64. To the same
65. To the same
66. To the same
31. To Sophronius, Prefect of Constantinople
22. To the same
29. To the same

45°

'.

relative

37. To the same
39. To the same
93. To the same
135. To the same
9. .To Amphilochius the Younger
13. To the same
25. To the same
26. To the same
27. To the same
28. To the same
62. To the same
63. To Amphilochius the Elder
171. To Amphilochius. Bishop of Iconium
184. To the same
88. To Nectarius. Archbishop of Constantinople.
91. To the same
151. To the same
185. To the same
186. To the same-A letter of introduction for
202. To the same
77. To Theodore, Bishop of Tyana
115. To the same
Wl. To the same
122. To the same
123. To the same
124. To the same
152. To the same
153. To Bosporius, Bishop of Colonia
157. To Theodore, Archbishop of Tyana
163. To the same
183. To Theodore of Mopsucstia
139. To Theodore
12. To N'icobulus
51. To the same
52. To the same
53. To the same
54. To the same, on Laconicism
55. To the same, an invitation
104. To Olympius
105. To the same
106. To the same
126. To the same
131. To the same
140. To the same
141. To the same
142. To the same
143 To the same
144. To the same
145. To Varianus.
,
146. To t
154 To the s

PACK

3°9
3>8

3°°

4°7
47i
47i

PROLEGOMENA.

SECTION I.

The Life.

S. Gregory Nazianzen, called by the Ecumenical Council of Ephesus "The Great,"
and universally known as " The Theologian " or " The Divine," a title which he shares with
S. John the Evangelist alone among the Fathers of the Church, was, like the great Basil of
Casarea and his brother Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa, by birth a Cappadocian. He was born at
Arianzus, a country estate belonging to his father, in the neighbourhood of Nazianzus.

This latter, sometimes called Nazianzum, is a place quite unknown to early writers, and de
rives all its importance from its connection with our Saint.
The Romans seem to have
This would place it in the south-western portion of the district called
called it Diocasarea.
Cappadocia Secunda, a sub-division of the Province, which had previously included the
whole country of Cappadocia under the Prefect of Caesarea.
The Emperor Valens made the
division for financial purposes about a.d. 371, and assigned Tyana as its civil Metropolis,
and, as we shall see, thereby caused an ecclesiastical quarrel which had considerable effect on
the life of S. Gregory. Tyana was situated at no great distance south and east of Nazianzus,
which place is usually identified with some interesting ruins about eighteen miles south-east of
Ak Serai, on a rocky platform at the foot of the mountains called Hassan Dagh. Amongst other
ruined buildings here are the remains of three Byzantine churches of great age, but more re
cent than the rest of the town.

His father, who bore the same name with himself, had originally belonged to an obscure
sect called Hypsistarians or Hypsistians, of whom we know little except what we learn from
They seem to have held a sort of syncreGregory of Nazianzus and his namesake of Nyssa.
tist doctrine, containing elements derived from heathen, Christian, and Jewish sources. They
were very strict monotheists, rejecting both polytheism and the doctrine of the Trinity, and
worshipping the One Supreme Being under the names of The Most High and The Almighty,
and the emblems of Fire and Light, but with no external cultus ; for they rejected sacrifice
and every outward form of worship, holding adoration to be an exclusively interior and spir
With singular inconsistency, however, they adopted the observance of the Jewish
itual act.
Sabbath, and the Levitical prohibition of certain kinds of food.
They were but few in num
ber, and their influence was insignificant even in Cappadocia, which was the headquarters of
From this form of error the elder Gregory was converted by the influence of his
the sect.1
wife, Nonna; and soon after his conversion was consecrated to the bishopric of Nazianzus.

Nonna, the mother of our Saint, was the daughter of Christian parents, and had been
Like S. John Chrysostom and S. Augustine, Gregory had the in
There

very carefully brought up.
estimable advantage of being reared at the knee of a mother of conspicuous holiness.

Trjf
1 « 8voo* ivavTuoTaroiv avyKtKpapivris, c\Aijvuejjc re icoi vonunfc Teparctaf ' Siv atifartpwv rd fiipi) Qtvyitv, «k ixiptav avvtrifrii.
ttiv ydp rd ei&uAa not rdc 0v<rt*s anoirtfixintvot, riftStrt rb irup itat rd Avgra ' Tr)i Si rb ?a00aror aidov/iepoi Ktu rd frtpt rd ^pwpard
forty & pixpoAoytar. tV irtpiro^i)*' dripd^ovffM'.-Or. xviii. 5.

PROLEGOMENA.

The precise date is uncertain.

were three children of the marriage-a sister, Gorgonia, probably somewhat older than Greg
ory, who was devotedly fond of her ; and a brother, Caesarius, perhaps younger, who was a dis
tinguished physician, and occupied a post of confidence at the Court of Constantinople. Greg
ory was certainly born at a late period of the life of his mother. He tells us that, like so many
other holy men of whom we read both in the Bible and outside its pages, he was consecrated
to God by his mother even before his birth.
There are two
lines in his poem on his own life which seem to indicate clearly that it took place after his
father's elevation to the Episcopate, or at any rate after his ordination to the Priesthood.
Speaking of the great desire of the elder Gregory to see his son ordained to the Priesthood, in
order that he might have him as a coadjutor and aid to his own declining years and failing
strength, he gives the arguments by which the old man sought to persuade him to take upon
himself a burden which he dreaded ; and among them we find the father saying to the son : 3
" You have not been yet so long in life as I have spent in sacrifice."
And though the Roman
Catholic writers on the subject strain every nerve to get rid of the obvious meaning, by inge
nious manipulation of the text or by far-fetched interpretations, yet the conclusion remains
unshaken, and is supported also by another passage, to be cited presently, that he was at any
rate born during the Priesthood of his father. He tells us that he left Athens in or about his
thirtieth year,3 and also that the Emperor Julian was his contemporary there.
Now Julian
was at Athens in 355 ; so that we must place Gregory's birth not earlier than 325; and if
we give its natural meaning to the first passage quoted, not earlier than 330, the latest date
This is not inconsistent with the Athenian
available for his father's consecration as Bishop.
chronology of his life, as he certainly spent many years there, and probably did not leave the
place till 357.

As soon as the children's age permitted, Gregory and his brother Caesarius were sent to
school at Caesarea, under the care of a good man named Carterius, who as long as he lived re
tained a great influence over the mind of his elder pupil.
This is perhaps the same Carterius
who afterwards presided over the monasteries of Antioch in Syria, and was one of the in
structors of S. John Chrysostom.
The following is a free rendering of one of four funeral epi
grams written in later years by our Saint in honour of his old friend and tutor:

" Whither, Carterius, best beloved of friends,
O whither hast thou gone, and left me here
Alone amid the many toils of earth ?
Thou who didst hold the rudder of my youth,
When in another land I learned to weigh
The words and stories of a learned age ;
Thou who didst bind me to the uncarnal life.
Truly the Christ, whom thou possessest now,
Took thee unto Himself, the King thou lov'st.
O thou bright lightning of most glorious Christ,
Thou best protection of my early days,
Thou charioteer of all my younger life ;
Remember now the Gregory whom erst
Thou trainedst in the ways of virtuous life,
Carterius, master of the life of grace."

It was probably at Caesarea that the acquaintance between Gregory and S. Basil the Great
But their association did

began, which was afterwards to ripen into a lifelong friendship.

9 Carm. de vita sua. 51Z.

THE LIFE.

not last long at this period, for Basil soon went to Constantinople to continue his education,
while Gregory and his brother removed to the Palestinian Csesarea ; probably as much for the
sake of making a pilgrimage to the Holy Sepulchre, as for the advantage of the schools of that
Coesarius soon went on to Alexandria ; but Gregory was tempted by the
learned resort.
flourishing Palestinian school of rhetoric to remain a while and study that art.
One of his
fellow-students here was Euzoius, the future heresiarch.
From Palestine he too went on to
Alexandria, where he found his brother enjoying an excellent character, and highly distin
S. Athanasius was at this time the Bishop,
guished among the students of the University.
and Didymus head of the famous Catechetical School; but as Gregory, though one of his
orations is a panegyric on S. Athanasius, does not mention having ever met either of these
two great men, we must suppose that the former was at this time suffering one of his many
Gregory does not seem to
]>eriods of exile-his second banishment lasted from 340 to 347.
have remained very long at Alexandria ; the fascination exercised on his mind by a yet more
famous seat of learning-Athens-soon drew him thither.
He could not even wait for a
He took passage in the month of November
favourable time of year, but must start at once.
They had a pros
in a ship bound for ALgina, with some of whose crew he was acquainted.
perous voyage until they were in sight of Cyprus, when they were assailed by a tremendous
storm, and the ship, swept by the heavy seas, became waterlogged, and would not answer her
At the same time the violence of the sea burst the water-tanks, and the ship's company
helm.
Gregory, who was not yet baptized, was thrown into terrible dis
were left in dire distress.
tress at thus finding himself in peril of death while yet outside the Covenant of*God.
In
earnest prayer he renewed his self-dedication, and vowed to give himself wholly to the service
of God, if his life might be spared to receive Holy Baptism.
He tells the story at some
length and with great graphic power in his long poem on his own life, from which we subjoin
a cento,1 and also in his oration spoken at his father's funeral (Orat. XVIII, c. 31, p. 352
It is, however, uncertain whether he was baptized immediately after this deliver
Ed. Ben.).
ance, or whether he waited till his return to Nazianzus.
At any rate he reached Athens in
safety, and shortly afterwards was joined there by Basil ; when the early acquaintance which
was now renewed soon deepened into an intimacy of brotherly affection, which, though often
In the funeral oration which he pronounced
sorely tried, never grew cold in Gregory's heart.

* What time I parted from Egyptian shore*.
Whence I had somewhat called of ancient lore.
We weighed, and under Cyprus cut the waves
In a straight course for Hellas, when there rose
A mightv strife of wind*;, and shook the ship :
And all was night ; earth, seas, and darkened skies ;
And thunders echoed to the lightning's shock.
Whistled the rigging of the swelling" sails.
And bent the mast ; the helm had lost ift power,
Kor none could hold it in the raging seas.
The ship was filled with overwhelming waves ;
Mingled the shout of sailor, and the cries
Ot helmsman, captain, and of passenger,
AnJ those who till that fearful hour had been
Unconscious of a God; for fear can teach.
And, worst of all our dread impending woes,
No water had we, for the ship began
To lalwur. and the beakers suon were broke
Which held our treasure of sweet water scant ;
And famine fought with surging and with storm
To slay us.
For Punic sailors suddenly appeared.
Who in their own sore terror soon perceived
Hy our sad cries our danger, and with oars
(For they were strong) came up and saved our barque
And us who now all but sea-corpscs were ;
Like fish forsaken of their native wave.
Or Limp that dies for want of nourishment.
Hut while we all were fearing sudden death,
Mine was a worse, because a secret, fear.
The cleansing waters ne'er had passed on me,
That slay our foe and join us to our God.
This was my lameniation, this my dread.
For this I stretched my hands and cried to God,

Hut God sent a swift release.

And cried above the noise of surging waves,
And rent my clothes, and lay in raiserv.
But, though ye scarce believe it, yet 'tis true,
All those on whom our common danger pressed
Forgot themselves and came and prayed with me.
And Thou wast then, O Christ, my great defence,
Who now deliverest from the storm of life.
For when no good hope dawned upon our eyes,
Nor isle, nor continent, nor mountain top,
Nor torch, nor star to light the mariners.
Nor small nor great of earthly things appeared.
What port was left for troubled sailor-folk?
Despairing of all else, T look to thee :
Life, breath, salvation, hcht, and strength to men.
Who frightest, smitest. smilest, healest all.
And ever weavest good from human ill.
I call to mind Thy wonders of old time,
Ky which we recognize Thv mighty hr.nd ;
The sea divided-Israel's host brought throughTheir foe* defeated by Thy lifted handAnd Egypt crushed by scourges, chiefs and allNature subdued, and walls thrown down by shout.
And. adding mine to those old famous acts.
Thine own, I said, am I, both erst and now ;
Twice shalt Thou take me for Thine own, a gift
Of earth and sea, a dnubly hallowed gift,
Ky prayers of mother and by fateful sea.
To Thee I live, if I escape the waves.
And gain baptismal dews ; and Thou wilt lose
A faithful servant if Thou cast me off.
K'en now Thine own disciple, in the deep ;
Shake off for me Thy slumber, and arise.
And stay my fear.
So prayed I-and the noise
Of winds grew still, the surges ceased, the ship
Held straight upon her course ; my prayer was heard.

PROLEGOMENA.

over his friend, Gregory has left us a most interesting account of University life in the middle
of the fourth century, of which we give a summary here, referring the reader for details to the
oration itself, which will be found in the present volume.
Basil's reputation, he says, pre
Many of the silliest
ceded him to Athens, where he was received with much enthusiasm.
students there are mad upon Sophists, and are divided upon the respective merits of their
teachers with as much excitement as is shown by the partisans of the various chariots in the
Hippodromes.
First of all, he
And so a new-comer is laid hold of by them in this fashion.
is entertained by the first who can get hold of him-1-either a relation or a friend or a fellowcountryman, or a leading Sophister, who is in favour with his master, and touts for him.
There he is unmercifully chaffed, and with more or less of rough horseplay, by everybody, to
take down his pride ; and is then escorted processionally through the streets to the Baths :
Basil, however, through the
after which process he is regarded as free of the students' guild.
good offices of his friend Gregory, was spared this trial of his nerves, out of respect for his
great attainments ; and this kind action was the beginning of their long and affectionate in
Among the students, however, were a number of young Armenians, some of whom
timacy.
These young men, with the
had been at school with Basil, and were very jealous of him.
object of destroying his reputation if possible, were continually harassing him with disputa
tions upon hard and sophistical questions.
Basil was quite able to hold his own against them ;
but Gregory, jealous for the honour of his University, and not at first perceiving the malice
As soon, however,
of these young men, sided with them and made the conflict more equal.
as he began to see their real purpose, he forsook them and took his stand by his friend, whose
victory was thus made not only assured but easy.
The young gentlemen naturally did not
like this, and Gregory became, much to Basil's distress, very unpopular among them, as they
chose to regard his conduct in the matter as treason against his University, and especially
against the students of his own year.

The city of Athens at this time was full of dangerous distractions for young men ; feasts,
theatres, assemblies, wine parties, etc. Gregory and his friend resolved to renounce all these,
and to allow themselves to know only two roads-one, that which led to the Church and its
holy teachers; the other, that which took them to their University lectures.5 Amongst
other famous students of Gregory's day was Prince Julian, afterwards the Emperor who apos- •
tatized and endeavoured to restore the ancient heathenism, and galvanize it into something
Gregory claims even at this early period to have foreseen and dreaded
like a new life.
"I had long foreseen," he says, " how matters would be,
the result of Julian's accession.
from the time that I was with him at Athens.
He had come there shortly after the violent
measures against his brother, having asked permission of the Emperor to do so. He had two
reasons for this sojourn-the one more honest, namely, to visit Greece and its schools ; the
other more secret and known only to a few persons, namely, to consult with the heathen
priests and charlatans about his plans ; because his wickedness was not as yet declared.
Even
then I made no bad guess about the man, although I am not one of those skilled in such mat
ters; but I was made a prophet by the unevenness of his disposition and the very unsettled
' What an evil the Roman State
condition of his mind.
is nourishing,' though I prefaced them with a wish that I might prove a false prophet."

I used these very words about him :

• Of this early friendship with Basil, Gregory speaks

For God had given me yet one priceless gift
Uniting me with Wisdom's wisest son.
Himself alone above all life and word :
Who this could be, ye soon shall know full well;
Basil his name, our age's great support.
He was the comrade of my words and roof.
And of my thoughts, if [ may boast so much.
A pair were wc not all unknown in Greece ;

thus :

All things we shared >n common, and one soul
Linked us together, though in body twain.
One thing there was which joined us most of all,
The love of God and of the highest good.
For. soon as courage came to us to speak
Each to the other of that we had at heart.
More closely were our spirits knit in love,
For fellow feeling makes us wondrftus kind.

(Carm. de Vita Sua. L aal.)

THE LIFE.

Gregory must have been a long time at Athens.

He seems to have gone
(Orat. V. 23, 24.)
there at about the age of eighteen, and not to have left till he was past thirty.
Basil left
before him and returned to Cappadocia ; and as soon as he could follow he went to Constan
tinople, where he met his brother,6 who had just come there to practice as a Court Physician,
but resolved to throw up his practice and return with his brother to Nazianzus.
They found
their parents still living and their father .occupying the Episcopal Throne. From this time on
ward Gregory divided his time between his parents and his friend ; living partly at Arianzus,
and partly with Basil in Pontus, in monastic seclusion.
At his Baptism, which it seems most
probable took place at this period, he made a solemn vow never to swear, and to devote his
whole energies and powers solely to the glory of God, and the defence and spreading of the
faith.
Coesarius did not remain long in the retirement of home, but soon returned to the
Gregory, whose mind was
Capital, where a brilliant career seemed opening before him.
strongly impressed with the dangers and temptations of a life at Court, did not altogether ap
prove of this step, yet he does not very severely blame it. He himself, however, felt very
strongly drawn to the monastic life ; but as retirement from the world did not seem to him to
be his vocation, he resolved to continue to live in the world, and to be a help and support to
his now aged parents, and especially to his father in the duties of his Episcopate, but at the
same time to live under the strictest ascetic rule. He had, however, always a secret hankering
after the Solitary life, which he had once (Ep. i.) promised Basil to share with him ; and he
did find himself able for some years to spend part of his time with his friend in his retirement
in the wilds of Pontus.
They portioned out their days very carefully between prayer, medita
tion and study, and manual labour, on the principles laid down by Basil in a letter to his
friend, which afterwards were developed into the celebrated Rule still observed by the entire
Retirement, he says, does not consist in the
body of the Religious of the Eastern Church.7
act of removal from the world in bodily presence, but in this, that we tear away the soul from
those bodily influences which stir up the passions ; that we give up our parental city and our
father's house, our possessions and goods, friendship and, wedlock, business and profession,
art and science, and everything, and are quite ready to take into our hearts nothing but the
impressions of the divine teaching.

In solitude, Basil thinks, it is possible altogether to tame the passions, like wild beasts, by
gentle treatment ; to lull them to sleep, to disarm them.
By turning away the soul from the
enticements of sense, and withdrawing into one's self for the contemplation of God and of
Eternal Beauty, it is possible to raise man to a forgetfulness of natural wants, and to a spiritual
freedom from care.
The means to this spiritual elevation are in his view the reading of Holy
Scripture, which sets before us rules of life-but especially the pictures of the lives of godly
men ; Prayer which draws down the Godhead to us, and makes our mind a pure abode for It;
and an earnest silence, more inclined to learn than to teach, but by no means morose or
unfriendly.
At the same time Basil desires that the outward appearance of one who thus
practises solitude shall be in keeping with his inner life; with humble downcast eye, and
dishevelled hair, in dirty untidy clothes he must go about, neither lazily loitering nor passion
His garment, girt upon his loins with a belt, is to be coarse, not of
ately quick, but quietly.
a bright colour, suited for both summer and winter, close enough to keep the body warm with
out additional clothing ; and his shoes adapted to their purpose, but without ornament.
For
food, let him use only the most necessary, chiefly vegetables ; for drink, water-at least in
Sleep is
For mealtime, which begins and ends with prayer, one hour is to be fixed.
health.
to be short, light, and never so dead as to let the soul be open to the impressions of corrupt
ing dreams.8

• Or. vii. 8.

' UUmann G. v. N.

Bas. Kp. ii. UUmann 11. s.

a

PROLEGOMENA.

They gave themselves especially to the study of Holy Scripture, and to the practice of
devotional exercises.
In their study their great principle was to interpret the holy writings
not by their own individual judgment, but on the lines laid down for them by the authority
of ancient interpreters.9 Of uninspired commentators they had the greatest respect for Origen,
whose errors, however, they happily avoided.
From his exegetical writings they compiled a
book of Extracts, which they published in twenty-seven books, to which they gave the name
of Philocalia, i.e., what in modern language is called a Christology.
This is happily still
extant, and is valuable as preserving for us many passages otherwise lost, or existing only in a
Latin translation.
Gregory sent a copy of this work to his friend and subsequent com
panion at Constantinople, Theodore, Bishop of Tyana, as an Easter gift many years after
wards, and accompanied it with a letter,10 in which he speaks of the work as a memorial of him
self and Basil, and as intended for an aid to scholars ; and begs that his friend will give a proof
of its usefulness, with the help of diligence and the Holy Spirit.
Socrates 11 says that this care
ful study of Origen was of the greatest service to the two friends in their subsequent con
troversies with the Arians ; for these heretics quoted him in support of their errors, but the
two Fathers were enabled to confute them readily, toy shewing that they were completely
ignorant of the meaning of Origen's argument.

But Gregory does not appear to have stayed long in Basil's Monastery;-although Ruffinus
speaks of a sojourn of thirteen years.
This cannot for chronological reasons have been a con
tinuous stay, although it is true that Basil's monastic life in Pontus, and Gregory's various visits
to him there extended over a period of about that length, from his first retirement in 357 to
his consecration to the Episcopate in 370.
It was after about three years that Gregory
returned to Nazianzus (360), possibly, as Ullmann suggests, because of circumstances which
had arisen at his home, which seemed to call imperatively for his presence in the interests of
the peace of the Diocese, and for the assistance which he might, though a layman, be able
to give to his aged Father, who had got into trouble through a piece of imprudent con
duct.

,

The Emperor Constantius, who was an Arian, had in 359 assembled at Ariminum (the
modern Rimini) a Council of 400 Western Bishops,12 and these, partly duped, partly compelled
by the Imperial Officers, had put out a Creed, which, while acknowledging the proper Deity of
the Son, and confessing Him to be Like the Father, omitted to say Like In All Points, and
refused the word Consubstantial-; thus, while condemning the extreme followers of Arius,
At the same time another ' Synod, of 150
favouring the views of the Semi-Arian party.
Eastern Bishops, was assembled under Court influence at Seleucia, and promulgated a similar
formula.
The Bishop of Nazianzus, though still as always a staunch upholder of Nicene or
thodoxy, was in some way induced to attach his signature to this compromising Creed ; and
The Monks of his Diocese took the matter
this action led to most important consequences.
up with the usual earnestness of Religious, and, with several also of the Bishops, withdrew
from Communion with their own Bishop.
This may have been the reason for his son's return.
He induced his Father to apologize for his involuntary error and to put out an orthodox Con
To this period belongs his first Oration on Peace; in
fession, and so he healed the schism.
which, after an eloquent encomium on the Religious life, he sets forth the blessings of peace
and concord, and contrasts them with the misery of discord ; begging the people to be very
slow indeed on this account to sever themselves from the Communion of those whom they
He concludes
think to be erring brethren ; and thanking God for the restoration of peace.

'Brev. Rom. May 9.
!a The reign of Cunstantius was says Dr. Ullmann. in a very special way the age of Synods. By his cndlcs summoning of Synods
he not only furthered doctrinal disputes, but alia injured the finances of the State, destroyed the existence of the Posts, and brought
everything into confusion.

11 H. E. IV.. xxvi.

10 F.p cxv.

THE LIFE.

the whole with a splendid setting forth of the Catholic doctrine concerning the Trinity, in
the following terms : -

" Would to God that none of us may perish, but that we may all abide in one spirit, with
one soul labouring together for the faith of the Gospel, of one mind, minding the same thing,
armed with the shield of faith, girt about the loins with truth ; knowing only the one war
against the Evil One, and those who fight under his orders ; not fearing them that kill the body
but cannot lay»hold of the soul ; but fearing Him Who is the Lord both of soul and body ;
guarding the good deposit which we have received from our fathers ; adoring Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; knowing the Father in the Son, and the Son in the Holy Ghost-into which
Naples we were baptized, in Which we have believed ; under Whose banner we have been en
listed ; dividing Them before we combine Them, and combining before we divide; not receiv
ing the Three as one Person (for They are not impersonal, or names of one Person, as though
our wealth lay in Names alone and not in facts), but the Three as one Thing.
For They are
One, not in Person, but in Godhead, Unity adored in Trinity, and Trinity summed up in
Unity ; all adorable, all royal, of one throne and one glory ; above the world, above time, un
created, invisible, impalpable, uncircumscript ; in Its relation to Itself known only to Itself; but
to us equally venerable and adorable; Alone dwelling in the Holiest, and leaving all creatures
outside and shut off, partly by the First Veil, and partly also by the Second; -by the first, the
heavenly and angelic host, parted from Godhead ; and by the second, we men, severed from
This let us do; let this be our mind, Brethren; and those that are otherwise
the Angels.
minded let us look upon as diseased in regard to the truth, and as far as may be, let us take
and cure them ; but if they be incurable let us withdraw from them, lest we share their disease
before we impart to them our own health.
And the God of Peace that passeth all understand
ing shall be with you in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Amen.13"

Gregory the Elder was now aged and infirm, and began to feel his need of a Coadjutor in
So, by the great desire of the people of Nazianzus, he ordained his son
his pastoral duties.
This Ordination took place at some
to the Priesthood, much against the will of the said son.
Gregory the Younger was much ag
great Festival, probably at Christmas of the year 361.
grieved at this gentle violence, which even in after years he describes as an act of tyranny,14 and
says he cannot bring himself to speak of it in other terms, though he asks pardon of the Holy
Immediately after his Ordination he made his escape to Pontus, ap
Spirit for his language.
Here he had time for reflection on the obedi
parently reaching Basil about Epiphany, 362.
ence he now owed to his father, not only as son to father, but as Priest to Bishop ; and with
a truer view of his duty he returned to Nazianzus, where he was present in the Church on
Easter day 362, and preached his first Sermon as a Priest, in apology for his reluctance.
Strange to say, though it was so great a Festival, and though the preacher was so well known
and so much beloved in Nazianzus, the congregation was very small ;-probably many refrained
from going to Church in order to mark their feeling about Gregory's flight to Pontus. Any
how he felt the discourtesy keenly, and in his next sermon took occasion to reprove them
severely for their inconsistency in receiving him so badly after having compelled him for their
Of this discourse the Abbe Benoit
sakes to finally renounce the solitude he loved so well.
speaks as follows : -

" It is not very long, and it seems to us a model of the tact and art which a Minister of the
Gospel ought to use in his speech when just grievances compel him to address deserved re
It would be impossible to blame with greater force, to complain with
proaches to the faithful.

I have followed Ullmann and Nirschl in placing this occurrence here. The Benedictine Editors apparently in order to anil priestly
authority to this Oration (VI.). have put it four years later, on what I cannot hut think to he insufficient grounds.
Their date would
bring it to the close of the reign of Julian or the beginning of that of Jovian, neither of which periods would oftcr any inducement to
Arianizing.
'3

14 Carm. de vita, 1., 345

PROLEGOMENA.

more frankness, and yet to do it in a way less offensive to the hearers.
Praise, indeed, is so
mingled with blame in this discourse, and there is in its tone something so earnest and affec
tionate, that the audience, though sharply reprimanded, not only could not take offence, but
was compelled to conceive a yet greater affection and admiration for him who so reproved
them."

Gregory took the opportunity to write another very long Oration as his apology for
his flight.
In it he sets forth at great length his conception of the nature and* responsibilities
of the Priestly Office, and justifies himself both for having shrunk from such a charge, and for
having so soon returned to take it up.
It is very improbable that this Oration, numbered II.
in the Benedictine Edition, was ever delivered viva voce ; but it was published, and is a com
plete Treatise on the Priesthood, used both by S. John Chrysostom as the foundation of his Six
Pooks on the Priesthood, and by S. Gregory the Great as the basis of his Treatise on the
Pastoral Rule.
It has also furnished material to many of the best Ecclesiastical writers of all
ages.

Julian had now succeeded to the Empire, and had entered Constantinople in 361.
He
had by this time completely broken with the Church, and renounced even the outward sem
He persuaded Caesarius, however, to retain his position at Court ;
blance of Christianity.
hoping perhaps that he might succeed in perverting him.
This was a matter of deep regret
to his father and brother, and they felt, the latter says, obliged to keep the fact from the
Gregory wrote his brother a letter of most affectionate though
knowledge of his mother.
earnest remonstrance ; with the result that Ca?saritis soon made up his mind to retire ; and
put his resolution in practice on the opportunity afforded by the departure of the Emperor
from Constantinople to assume the direction of his campaign against the Persians.
Nazianzus
was not allowed to remain without attempts being made against its Christianity, for the Pre
fect of the Province was sent with an armed escort of considerable strength to demand posses
sion of the Church.
But the aged Bishop, supported by his son and by his people, boldly
refused to comply with the Imperial commands, and there seemed such a probability of
powerful resistance that the Prefect felt compelled to withdraw his force, and never came
The Gregorys, father and son, frequently came into
to Nazianzus again on such an errand.
collision with Julian during his stay in Cappadocia on his way to Persia; and indeed it is not
too much to say that the firm stand which they made on behalf of the right was, under God,
the means of diverting the Emperor from his purpose of making a vehement assault upon the
As the Abbe Benoit 15 remarks, Julian saw
faith and rights of the Church in that Province.
that he must be careful in dealing with a province where Christian faith was such a living
power, and where a simple village Bishop could dare to make so stout a stand against Im
perial Authority ; but he declared his intention of avenging himself upon his opponents on his
The Providence of God, however, interfered, and he never did
return from his expedition.
return, but was defeated and killed.

In 363 or 364 Basil, like Gregory, was ordained Priest much against his will.

The
Bishop of Cxsarea, Metropolitan of Cappadocia, was Eusebius. He had been elected in 362
by a popular clamour, while yet only a Catechumen, and was very unwillingly consecrated by
the Bishops of the Province.
He felt it necessary to have at hand a Priest who by his skill
in Theology would be a help to him in the controversies of the times, and he selected Basil.
But for some unknown reason, possibly no more than a certain jealousy of Basil's superior
reputation and influence, within a very short time Eusebius quarrelled with him, and
endeavoured to deprive him.
This might easily have led to a serious schism, had Basil l>een
a self-seeking man, but as it was, he quietly retired to his Community in Pontes, accompanied

11 S. G. dc N.

.

THE LIFE.

by his friend Gregory, who, however, was not able to remain long in that congenial society,
as his presence was still much needed by his father.
On the succession of Valens, an Arian,
to the Throne of the Empire, Eusebius wrote to Gregory, entreating him to come to
Ciesarea and give him the benefit of his advice.
Gregory, however, respectfully declined the
invitation on the grounds of his sense of the wrong which his friend had suffered ; and after
some correspondence he succeeded in effecting a reconciliation between the latter and his
Metropolitan, in the year 365.

Gregory wrote him a letter of congratulation ;

Caesarius meantime had returned to the Court and had received from Valens a valuable
piece of preferment in Bithynia; but in the end of 368 or beginning of 369, having been
terrified by a great earthquake, during which he had been in considerable danger, he was
arranging matters for his final retirement, when he was seized with illness, and very soon
died, leaving all his property, which must have amounted to a considerable sum, to his
brother in trust for the poor. He was buried at Nazianzus, and on the occasion of his
funeral his brother preached the Sermon which is numbered VIII. in the Benedictine Edition.
About the same time, but a little later, Gorgonia also departed, and he preached a funeral
Eusebius of Casarea died in 370, and Basil at once wrote an urgent
sermon on her too.
letter to Gregory, begging him to come to Caesarea, probably in order to get him elected
Archbishop.
Gregory, however, declined to go, and he and his father exerted themselves to
the utmost of their power to procure the election of Basil ; the elder Gregory writing through
his son two letters, one addressed to the people of Ccesarea, the other to the Provincial
Synod, urging Basil's claims very strongly.
Though ill at the time, he managed to convey
himself to the Metropolis in time for the meeting of the Synod ; and Basil was elected
and consecrated.
not, however, a very warm
one ; but when troubles began to arise h'e spoke out with all the fervour of their early
friendship in support of the Archbishop.
About this time Valens divided the civil
Province of Cappadocia into two, one of which had Caesarea, the other Tyana, for its
Metropolis.
Anthimus, Bishop of the latter See, thereupon claimed to be ipsofacto Metro
politan of the new Province; a claim which Basil strenuously resisted, as savouring of what
we call Erastianism. A long dispute followed, in the course of which Basil, to assert his
rights as Metropolitan, and to strengthen his own hands, erected several new Bishoprics in the
disputed Province ; and to one of these, Sasima, a miserable little village 16 he consecrated his
friend Gregory, almost by force.
Gregory was, not unnaturally, indignant at this treatment ;
while Basil, whose great object had been to strengthen himself against Anthimus, took it as
unkind of Gregory to be so reluctant to comply with his friend's wishes.
So the two were for
a long time in very strained relations to one another.
Although, however, Gregory ultimately
yielded to the earnest wisli of his father, and submitted to the authority of the Archbishop,
yet he did not disguise his reluctance ; and in the Sermons which he preached on the occasion
(Or. ix. x.) he spoke very strongly on the point.
Anthimus, however, occupied the village
of Sasima with troops, and prevented Gregory from taking peaceable possession of his See,
which it is probable he never actually administered, for his father begged him to remain at
The contest about the MetropoliNazianzus and continue his services as coadjutor Bishop.
tanate of Tyana went on for some time, but in the end, mainly by Gregory's mediation, it
In 374 Gregory the elder died, and his wife also, and thus our Saint
was amicably settled.
was set free from the charge of the diocese.
He spoke a panegyric at his father's funeral, and
wrote a number of little " In Memoriam " poems to his mother's memory ; and out of respect

,a The following is Gregory's mvn description of his new diocese fCarm. de vita sua. 419):
"There is a little station on a high road in Cappadocia. situated where the road is divided into three ; without water, without grass,
with nothing of freedom about it ; a frightfully horrible and narrow little village : everywhere dust and noise and carts, weeping and
shouting, lictors and chains. The people are all foreigners and vagabonds. Such is my Church of Sasima, to which I was presented
by a man who is not content with fifty choreptscopi. What munificence ! "

PROLEGOMENA.

for his father continued to administer the See of Nazianzus for about a year, making great
efforts meanwhile to secure the appointment of a Bishop.
But, perceiving that his efforts
would be fruitless, because of the devotion of the people to himself, he at length withdrew,
after a very serious illness, to Seleucia in Isauria (375,) where he lived three or four years,
attached to the famous Church of S. Thecla.
Very little is known of his life there ; but it
must have been at this period that he heard of the death of Basil, upon whom two years later
in the Cathedral of Caesarea he pronounced a splendid panegyric.

In 379 the Church at Constantinople, which for forty years had been oppressed by a suc
cession of Arian Archbishops, and was well nigh crushed out of existence by the multitude of
other heresies, Eunomian, Macedonian, Novatian, Apollinarian, etc., which Arian rule had
fostered, besought the great Theologian to come to their aid.
Theodosius the new Emperor,
Gregory
who was a fervent Catholic, backed their entreaty, as did also numerous Bishops.
resisted the call for a long time ; but at last he came to see that it was the will of God that
he should accept the Mission, and he consented to go and fill the gap, until such time as the
Catholics of the Capital might be able to elect an Archbishop.

The following account of the religious condition of Constantinople at this time is con

densed from Ullmann : -

" Religious feeling like everything else had become to the idle and empty mind a subject
of joke and amusement. What belonged to the theatre was brought into the Church, and what
The better Christian feelings were not seldom held
belonged to the Church into the theatre.
up in comedies to the sneer of the multitude.
Everything was so changed by the Constantinopolitans into light jesting, that earnestness was stripped of its worth by wit, and that
which is holy became a subject for banter and scoffing in the refined conversation of worldly
Yet worse was it that the unbridled delight of these men in dissipating enjoyments
people.
threatened to turn the Church into a theatre, and the Preacher into a play actor.
If he
would please the multitude, he must adapt himself to their taste, and entertain them amusingly
in the Church.
They demanded also in the preaching something that should please the ear,
glittering declamation with theatrical gesticulation ; and they clapped with the same pleasure
And alas there were found at that
the comedian in the holy place and him on the stage.
period too many preachers who preferred the applause of men to their souls' health.
At this
period the objects of the faith excited, particularly in Constantinople, a very universal and
lively interest, which was entertained from the Court downwards, though not always in the
most creditable manner; but it was in great part not the interest of the heart, but that of a
hypercritical and disputatious intellect, where it was not something far lower, to which the
dispute about matters of faith served only as a pretext for attaining the exterior aims of
avarice or ambition.
While the sanctifying and beatifying doctrines of the Gospel, which are
directed to the conversion of the whole inner man were let lie quiet, everyone from the
Emperor to the beggar busied himself with incredible interest about a few questions con
cerning which the Gospel communicates only just so much as is beneficial to the human spirit
and necessary to salvation, and whose fuller expression at any rate belongs rather to the
But the more violently these doctrinal disputes were kindled,
school than to practical life.
disturbing and dividing States, cities, and families, so much the more people lost sight of the
practical essentials of Christianity ; it seemed more important to maintain the Tri-unity of God
than to love God with all the heart ; to acknowledge the Consubstantiality of the Son, than
to follow Him in humility and selfdenial ; to defend the Personality of the Holy Spirit, than
to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, love, peace, righteousness. ... In addition to these
religious disputes came also political struggles, namely, the hard-fought wars of the Roman
Empire with the Goths ; so that the Empire at large presented the picture of a sea, tossed by

THE LIFE.

But the unhappy schisms which at this time were severing Christians every
violent storms.
where, shewed themselves in a particularly discouraging form in the Capital.
Under the late
reigns several parties had been favoured ; but especially those which, though again divided
among themselves by differences of opinion, yet agreed in this that they all rejected the
Constantius had bestowed his favour on the Arians ; Julian
Nicene system of doctrine.
during his short reign on all parties, at least in appearance,-to crush them all.
After Jovian's
early death Valens succeeded to power in the East, and with him, even more than with
Constantius, Arianism, which he not only protected, but also sought to make predominant by
horrible atrocities against the friends of the Nicene Decrees.
These had now been forbidden
the use of all Churches and Church property ; and the Arians had been put in possession of
them.
But Constantinople still remained the scene of ecclesiastical strifes and partizanships.
Here where with a little good so much evil flowed from all three parts of the world, all opin
ions had their adherents : but the following parties in particular shewed themselves : -The
Eunomians, professing an intellectual theology, which claimed to be able completely to
explore the Being of God by logical definitions, and maintained in strict Arian fashion the
Unlikeness of the Son to the Father, were very numerous in Constantinople (as is shewn by
the fact that most of Gregory's polemical utterances were directed against them), and injured
earnest religious thought principally by this, that they used the doctrines of the faith exclu
sively as subjects for an argumentative dialectic. The Macedonians, addicted to the SemiArian dogma of the Like Substance, and thereby somewhat more nearly approaching the
Orthodox, and distinguished besides by an estimable earnestness of demeanour, and a monk
like strictness of manner, were indeed themselves excluded by the pure Arians from the
property of the Church, but were ever being abundantly multiplied, partly in Constantinople
itself, partly in the neighbouring regions of the Hellespont, Thrace, Bithynia, and Phrygia.
The Novatians, who even overstepped the Macedonians in the strictness of their practical
principles, had somewhat earlier been on the point of uniting themselves with the Orthodox,
from whom they did not differ on the chief doctrine in dispute, and with whom they found
themselves under like oppression from the Arians ; but the malevolent disposition of a few
of the party leaders had stood in the way, and so they remained separate, and swelled the
number of the opponents of Orthodoxy.
Lastly the Apollinarians too began to establish
themselves there.
Their teaching was opposed to the acknowledgment of true and perfect
Manhood in Jesus (for true Manhood lies in the reason especially) ; and there was at that
time, as Gregory informs us, a report that an assembly of Apollinarian bishops was to be held
at Constantinople, with a view of raising their teaching as to Christ into general notice, and
forcing it upon the Churches.

In such a crisis Gregory came most unwillingly to the Capital.

At first he lodged in
the house of a relation of his own, part of which he arranged as a Chapel, and dedicated under
the title Anastasia, as the place where the Catholic faith was to rise again.
There he began
at once to carry out the rule of the Church as to daily service, to which he added his own
splendid preaching.

His constant theme was the worship of the Trinity.

After two Sermons in deprecation
of religions contentiousness, he preached those famous Five Orations which have won for him
the title of the Theologian.
it
will be enough in this place to say, that after warning his audience against the frivolity with
which the Arians were dragging religious subjects of the most solemn kind into the most
unsuitable places and occasions, he proceeds in four magnificent discourses to set forth the
Catholic doctrine of the Trinity, shewing carefully the difference between Sabellian confusion
The Arians, however, persecuted him
of Persons and Tritheistic division of Substance.

To analyse these belongs to another portion of this work ;

PROLEGOMENA.

»
bitterly ; even, on one occasion at least, hiring an assassin to murder him ; and their persecu
tion was all the more bitter because of the wonderful success which attended Gregory's
preaching.
S. Jerome, who came to Constantinople at this time, has left on record the
pleasure with which he listened to and conversed with the great Defender of the Faith.

Unfortunately Gregory now let himself be taken in by a plausible adventurer named
Maximus, who had come to Constantinople in the hope of obtaining the Bishopric for himself.
He attached himself to Gregory and won his confidence, the latter even going so far as to
After a short time, however,
deliver a panegyric upon him as a sufferer for the Faith.
Maximus managed to procure his own consecration secretly from some Egyptian Bishops, who
during an illness of Gregory enthroned him at night in the Church.
In the morning, when
the people discovered what had teen done, they were very indignant, and Maximus and his
Meanwhile the rank and
friends were driven out of the Church and forced to leave the City.
fashion of Constantinople began to dislike Gregory, who would not condescend to the arts of
the popular preacher, and whose simple retiring life and gentle demeanour were made matter
of reproach to him.
Gregory was quite willing to retire, and was only prevented from doing
so by the earnest remonstrances of his friends, who solemnly assured him that if he went away
the Faith would depart with him ; so he consented to remain till a fitter man could be found.
Late in 380 Theodosius came to Constantinople, where almost his first act was to deprive the
Arians of the Churches, and to put Gregory in possession of the Cathedral of S. Sophia.
The
next year the great Council of Eastern Bishops, which ranks as the Second Ecumenical
Council, met at the Capital, under the presidency of Meletius of Antioch.
Its first care was
to sanction the translation of Gregory from the See of Sasima to that of the Metropolis of
the Empire, and to enthrone him in S. Sophia, and thus he became the recognised Archbishop
Meletius shortly afterwards died, and Gregory assumed the Presidency
of the Imperial City.
of the Council.
He failed in his endeavours to heal the schism which was troubling the
Church of Antioch ; and when the Egyptian Bishops on their arrival shewed a disposition to
take up the case of Maximus, and were determined at any rate to oust Gregory ftom the
Patriarchal Throne on the ground of a Nicene canon forbidding translations, which had
He
virtually been rescinded by the act of the Council, he made up his mind to resign.
obtained a reluctant assent to this course from the Emperor, and then took leave of the Synod
in one of the most magnificent of all his Orations, in which he gives a graphic account of his
work in the Metropolis.
Nectarius, Prefect of the City, who was only a catechumen, was
elected in his place, and Gregory went home to Nazianzus. He administered the affairs of the
Church there for a little while, and then, having procured the election of Eulalius as Bishop, he
retired- to Arianzus, where he passed the few remaining years of his life in seclusion, but still
continued to take an active interest in the affairs of the Church.
His own city was greatly
disturbed by Apollinarian teachers, whose efforts to establish themselves within the Church
were very persevering.
Apollinarius, or as he is frequently called in the West, Apollinaris,
was a Bishop of Laodicea in the latter half of the Fourth Century, and was at one time greatly
respected for his learning and orthodoxy by S. Athanasius and S. Basil.
He was even an
instructor of S. Jerome in 374, but he seceded from the Church in the next year, owing to
views which he had come to hold about the nature of our Lord ; these really prepared the
way for various forms of the Monophysite heresy.
He fell into the error of a partial denial
of our Lord's true Humanity, attributing to Christ a human body and a human soul, but not
This
a reasoning spirit, whose place, according to him, was supplied by the Divine Logos.
view had first appeared in 362, when it came before a Council at Alexandria.
Those who
were accused of holding it denied it, and expressed their sense of the absurdity of such a
view, pointing out that our Lord could not be said to be really incarnate if He had no

THE LIFE.

human mind ; but about 369 it assumed a definite form (though even then it was not known
to be the teaching of Apollinarius).
Arguing from the Divinity of Christ that He cannot
have had a human mind, for if he had He would have had sinful inclinations, and the one
Christ would have been two persons, Apollinarius and his followers went on to maintain that
the Incarnation only meant a certain converse between God and Man ; and that Christ's
Body was not really born of Mary, but was a part of the Godhead converted into flesh.
S.
Athanasius wrote two Books against these two propositions, but did not name Apollinarius,
The fundamental
most probably because he did not believe him to be committed to them.
error of the system was the idea that the Incarnation was, not the Union of the two Natures,
but only a blending so close, that in the mind of these teachers all the Divine Attributes were
transferred to the human nature, and all the human ones to the Divine, and the two were
merged in one compound being.

In 377 a Roman Synod excommunicated Apollinarius and his adherents, and S. Damasus
wrote a letter containing twenty-five anathemas, which he sent to Paulinus of Antioch and
others.
This condemnation is in almost the identical words used by S. Gregory in the first
of two letters on the question which he wrote to Cledonius, a Priest of Nazianzus, and which
were adopted as symbolic at the Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon. Of these letters Canon
Bright 17 says that they belong to that class of documents of the Fourth Century which refuted
by anticipation the heresies of the Fifth.
Gregory affirmed True Godhead and True Man
hood to be combined in the One Person of the Crucified, Who was the adorable Son, Whose
Mother was the Mother of God, and Who assumed, in order to redeem it, the entire nature
that fell in Adam.
In his seclusion, says Mr. Crake, his sole luxuries were a garden and a
fountain. He spent his last days in continual devotion. His knees were worn with kneeling,
and his whole thoughts and aspirations had gone before to the long home to which he was
hastening.
His bed
After the manner of the Saints, he was very rigorous in his self-denial.
was of straw with a covering of sackcloth, and a single tunic was all the outward clothing of
him who had been Bishop of Constantinople.
"As a
fish cannot swim without water, and a bird cannot fly without air, he said, so a Christian
cannot advance a single step without Christ."
He died in 391, and in the same year that
he passed from the roll of the earthly episcopate Augustine was ordained Priest at Hippo
Regius in Africa.

Yet his glory was only in the Lord.

Ullmann gives the following description of his character and personal appearance :
" Gregory was of middle height and somewhat pale ; but his pallor became him.
• was thick and blanched by age, his short beard and conspicuous eyebrows were thicker.

His hair
On

his right eye he had a scar.
His manner was friendly and attractive ; his conduct simple.
The keynote of his inner being was piety; his soul was full of fiery strength of faith, turned
This zeal manifested
to God and Christ ; a lofty zeal for divine things led him all his life.
itself above all in a steadfast adherence to and defence of certain dogmas which that age held
to be specially important; as well as in lively conflicts, not always free from partisanship,
with opposing convictions ; but not less in a hearty and living apprehension of practical
Christianity, the establishment and enlargement of which in men's minds was to him all
important.
it injured his health ; yet it did not degenerate
it was to him the means for elevating and liberating the mind, but not in
into hypocrisy ;
An inborn and inbred love of solitude hindered him
and for its own sake a higher virtue.
His seclusion did not allow him to
from turning all his powers to a publicly useful activity.
become familiar with the knowledge of men and of the world ; lacking in knowledge of men,
carelessly confident, sometimes distrustful and bitter in his judgment of others, he demanded

His asceticism was overdone ;

» Ch. HUt., 181.

PROLEGOMENA.

Susceptible of great resolves, and full of fiery zeal
from others much, but from himself most.
for all good, he was not always steadfast and persevering in carrying them out.
In endurance
and conflict he was noble and high-minded ; in victory moderate ; in prosperity humble ;
never flattering the great, but an ever ready helper to the oppressed and persecuted, and
to the poor a loving father.
The most excellent qualities were in Gregory mingled with
faults ; he was not quite free from vanity ; he was very irritable and sensitive, but also readily
forgave and cherished no grudges.
He was a man feeling after holiness, and striving after
the highest good, but not perfect, as no man upon earth is."

Before leaving Constantinople he made his will, in which he bequeathed all his property

to the Deacon Gregory for life, with reversion to the poor of Nazianzus.

DIVISION II.

The Writings.

I. The Orations. -These-forty-five in number-raise him to equality with the best

Orators of antiquity.

a. The Five Theological Orations. -These won him the title of The Theologian.1

They
were delivered in Constantinople, in defence of the Church's faith in the Trinity, against
In the First and Second he treats of the existence, nature,
Eunomians and Macedonians.
being, and attributes of God, so far as man's finite intellect can comprehend them.
In the
Third and Fourth the subject is the Godhead of the Son, which he establishes by exposition of
In
Scripture, and by refutation of the specious arguments brought forward by the heretics.
the Fifth he similarly maintains the Deity and Personality of the Holy Ghost.

b. The Two Invectives against Julian. -These were delivered at Nazianzus after the death
of the Emperor, and present us with a very dark picture of his character.
The orator dwells
upon his attempt to rebuild the Temple a,t Jerusalem, and its failure, and his overthrow in the
From these facts he demonstrates the power of God's Justice, and
campaign against Persia.
sets forth the Christian doctrine of the Divine Providence inculcating a lesson of trust in
God.

In it Gregory dwells on the motive of his flight and his *

c. Moral Orations. -(i) The Apology for his flight.

As was said above, it is most
probable that this discourse was never actually spoken ; if it was, it certainly must have been
considerably enlarged afterwards.
return after his forced ordination ; he speaks of his lcjve of retirement, but most of all lays
stress upon the difficulty of the Priestly Office,
its heavy responsibilities and grave dangers,
His return, he says, was prompted by respect for
and upon his own sense of unworthiness.
his hearers and by care for his aged parents : by the fear of losing his father's blessing ;
and by the recollection of what befel the Prophet Jonas on account of his resistance to the
will of God.
The remainder of the Oration is practically a treatise on the Priesthood, and
was made use of by S. Chrysostom and S. Gregory the Great in their books on the subject.
(2) The Farewell Oration at Constantinople, containing an account of his work there.
(3) On Love of the Poor.
(4) On the Indissolubility of Marriage, the only Sermon of S. Gregory on a definite text

which has come down to us.

(5) Three Orations on Peace.
(6) One on Moderation in theological discussion.

1 In the narrower sense of " Defender of the Godhead of the Word."

LITERATURE.

d. The Festal Orations. -On Christmas, Epiphany (on the Baptism of Christ in the river
Jordan, followed up next day by a long one on Holy Baptism), two on Easter (one of these
his first sermon, the other almost if not quite his last). On Low Sunday, and on Pentecost.
e. Panegyrics on Saints. - The Maccabee Brothers and their Mother ; S. Cyprian of
Carthage (in which there is evidence of the cultus of the Blessed Virgin Mary and of the
practice of invocation of the Saints) ; and on S. Athanasius.

f. Funeral Orations on Eminent People.-On his Father, preached before his Mother and
S. Basil. On Caesarius, in presence of his parents, consoling them by the picture of hisbrother's virtue, especially in having withstood Julian's efforts to pervert him, and in resign
ing his post at Court and leaving the Capital. On Gorgonia, whom he praises as a model
Christian Matron, and whose wonderful cure before the Altar he relates.

On S. Basil.

g. Occasional Orations, of which we mention three : (i) On a plague of hail.

(2) On

the consecration of Eulalius of Doara.

(3) On his own consecration to Sasima.

II. The Letters, of which two hundred and forty-three are extant, are characterised by
a clear, concise, and pleasant style and spirit. Some of them treat of the theological questions
of the day, as for example the two to Cledonius, and one to Nectarius his Successor in the See
of Constantinople; these deal with the Apollinarian errors.
Most of them however are
letters to private friends ; sometimes of condolence or congratulation, sometimes of recom
mendation, sometimes on mere general subjects of interest.
To this section must be ascribed
his Will, which is probably genuine.

III. The Poems, five hundred and seven in number, are in various metres.

While leaving
much to be desired, these verses shew much real poetic feeling, and at times rise to genuine
beauty.
Thirty-eight are dogmatic, on the Trinity, on the works of God in Creation, on
Providence, on Angels and Men, on the Fall, on the Decalogue, on the Prophets Elias and
Elissseus, on the Incarnation, the Miracles and Parables of our Lord, and the canonical Books
of the Bible.
Forty are Moral ; two hundred and six Historical and Autobiographical ;
one hundred and twenty-nine are Epitaphs, or rather funeral Epigrams; ninety-four are
Epigrams.

There is also a long Tragedy, called Christus Patiens which is the first known attempt at
a Christian drama; the parts are sustained by Christ, The Blessed Virgin, S. Joseph, S. Mary
Magdalene, Nicodemus, Pontius Pilate, Theologus, Nuntius, and others.
The Benedictine
Editors however doubt the genuineness of this Tragedy and Caillau, who published the
second volume of this Edition after the troubles of the French Revolution, thinks it is to be
ascribed to another Gregory, Bishop of Antioch in the Sixth Century, and relegates it to an
Appendix.
None of The Theologian's Odes or Hymns have, however, found a place in the
liturgical poetry of the Church.

DIVISION III.

Literature.

There are perhaps more MSS. of the works of Gregory than of any other Father.
The
great Benedictine Edition of his works contains long lists of MSS., and of Versions, and pre
The most famous of these is that of the Abbat Jacobus Billius in 1589,
vious Editions.
In 1571 Leuvenklavius published an
which was accompanied by the Scholia of Nicetas, etc.
edition at Basle containing the Scholia of Elias Cretensis and others.
In 1778 appeared the
first volume of the great Edition of the Benedictine Fathers of the Abbey of S. Maur near
But the Monks were driven away by
Paris, which had been in preparation ever since 1708.

It has been re
the French Revolution, and the second volume did not appear till 1842.
printed in Migne's " Patrologia Groeca ; " vols. 35-38.
Of modern works on the life and
writings of our Saint, the best are those of Dr. Ullmann, and that of the Abbe Benoit. A
valuable comparison of Gregory and Basil is to be found in Newman's " Church of the Fathers,"
and last, but not least in value, may be mentioned the long biographical article by Professor
Watkins in Smith's "Dictionary of Christian Biography," and a useful short summary in
Schaff's Church History (311-600, vol. ii.).

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

ORATION I.

On Easter and His Reluctance.

I. It is the Day of the Resurrection, and my
Beginning has good auspices.
Let us then
keep the Festival with splendour," and let us
Let us say Brethren,
embrace one another.
even to those who hate us ; much more to
those who have done or suffered aught out of
love for us.
Let us forgive all offences for the
Resurrection's sake : let us give one another
pardon, I for the noble tyranny which I have
suffered (for I can now call it noble) ; and you
who exercised it, if you had cause to blame my
tardiness ; for perhaps this tardiness may be
more precious in God's sight than the haste of
For it is a good thing even to hold
others.
back from God for a little while, as did the
great Moses of old,*3 and Jeremiah » later on ;
and then to run readily to Him when He calls,
as did Aaron 4 and Isaiah,' so only both be
done in a dutiful spirit ;-the former because
of his own want of strength; the latter be
cause of the Might of Him That calleth.

II. A Mystery f anointed me ; I withdrew a
little while at a Mystery, as much as was need
ful to examine myself ; now I come in with a
Mystery, bringing with me the Day as a good
defender of my cowardice and weakness ; that
He Who to-day rose again from the dead may
renew me also by His Spirit ; and, clothing
me with the new Man, may give me to His
New Creation, to those who are begotten after
God, as a good modeller and teacher for
Christ, willingly both dying with Him and
rising again with Him.

III. Yesterday the Lamb was slain and the
door-posts were anointed,i and Egypt bewailed
her Firstborn, and the Destroyer passed us
over, and the Seal was dreadful and reveren'd,
and we were walled in with the Precious Blood.

3 Ex. iv. 10.

a Isa. brvi s.
* Isa. i. 6.
{Mystery, according to Nicetas, is frequently used by S.
He also explains the

Gkkgorv in the sense of Festival.
Anointing as meaning the Imposition of hands at Ordination.

6 Ex. iv. 27.

V.ler. i. 6.

n Ex. xii. A line piece of mystical interpretation.

To-day we have clean escaped from Egypt and
from Pharaoh ; and there is none to hinder us
from keeping a Feast to the Lord our Godthe Feast of our Departure ; or from celebrat
ing that Feast, not in the old leaven of malice
and wickedness, but in the unleavened bread
of sincerity and truth," carrying with us noth
ing of ungodly and Egyptian leaven.

IV. Yesterday I was crucified with Him ; to
day I am glorified with Him ; yesterday I died
with Him ; to-day I am quickened with Him ;
yesterday I was buried with Him ; to-day I rise
But let us offer to Him Who suf
with Him.
fered and rose again for us-you will think
perhaps that I am going to say gold, or silver,
or woven work or transparent and costly stones,
the mere passing material of earth, that re
mains here below, and is for the most part al
ways possessed by bad men, slaves of the world
and of the Prince of the world.
Let us offer
ourselves, the possession most precious to God,
let us give back to the
and most fitting ;
Let us
Image what is made after the Image.
recognize our Dignity ;
let us honour our
Archetype ; let us know the power of the Mys
tery, and for what Christ died.

V. Let us become like Christ, since Christ
Let us become God's for His
became like us.
sake, sjnee He for ours became Man.
He
assumed the worse that He might give us
the better ; He became poor that we through
His poverty might be rich ; P He took upon
Him the form of a servant that we might
receive back our liberty ; He came down that
we might be exalted ; He was tempted that we
might conquer ; He was dishonoured that He
might glorify us ; He died that He might
save us ; He ascended that He might draw to
Himself us, who were lying low in the Fall
of sin.
Let us give all, offer all, to Him
Who gave Himself a Ransom and a Reconcili
But one can give nothing like
ation for us.
: oneself, understanding the Mystery, and be-
! coming for His sake all that He became for

ours.

a i Cor. v. 8.

0 2 Cor. viiL 9.

VI. As you see, He offers you a Shepherd ;
for this is what your Good Shepherd," who lays
down his life for his sheep, is hoping and pray
ing for, and lie asks from you his subjects ;
and he gives you himself double instead of
single, and makes the staff of his old age a staff
for your spirit. And he adds to the inanimate
temple a living one ;
to that exceedingly
beautiful and heavenly shrine, this poor and
small one,'3 yet to him of great value, and
built too with much sweat and many labours.
Would that I could say it is worthy of his
labours.
And he places at your disposal all
that belongs to him (O great generosity !-or
it would be truer to say, O fatherly love !) his
hoar hairs, his youth, the temple, the high
priest,
the testator, the heir, the discourses
which you were longing for ; and of these not
such as are vain and poured out into the air,
and which reach no further than the outward
ear; but those which the Spirit writes and
engraves on tables of stone, or of flesh, not
merely superficially graven, nor easily to be
rubbed off, but marked very deep, not with
ink, but with grace.

VII. These are the gifts given you by this
august Abraham, this honourable and reverend
Head, this Patriarch, this Restingplace of all
good, this Standard of virtue, this Perfection of
the Priesthood, who to-day is bringing to the
Lord his willing Sacrifice, his only Son,* him
of the promise.
Do you on your side offer to
God and to us obedience to your Pastors,
dwelling in a place of herbage, and being fed
knowing your
by water of refreshment ; 4
Shepherd Veil, and being known by him ; «
and following when he calls you as a Shepherd
frankly through the door ; but not following a
stranger climbing up into the fold like a robber
and a traitor ; nor listening to a strange voice
when such would take you away by stealth and
scatter you from the truth on mountains,t and
in deserts, and pitfalls, and places which the
Lord does not visit ; and would lead you away
from the sound Faith in the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, the One Power and God
head, Whose Voice my sheep always heard
(and may they always hear it), but with

aNiCETAS says tb.it this refers to S. Gregory's Father, who
had ordained htm Priest, to assist him in the Cure of Souls, and
whose one desire was that his Son might succeed him in the
Kishnpric.
|3 S. Ghegorv's father had. according to the same authority, re
built the Church at Naztanus with great splendour. He thinks
that the expression " heavenly " may refer to the great dome. The
'"living temple" is of course S. Gregory himself.
7 S. Gregory had an elder sister Gorgonm, and a younger
brother Cabssrius, so that this expression must not be taken too
literally, but is rather to 1« read in connection with the '• promise."
his Mother having looked upon his birth as a special answer to
prayer, and having dedicated him to God from his infancy.

€ John x. 14,

£Ezck. xxxiv. 6.

6 1'-. xxiii. 2.

deceitful and corrupt words would tear them
from their true Shepherd.
From which may
we all be kept, Shepherd and flock, as from
a poisoned and deadly pasture ; guiding and
being guided far away from it, that we may all
be one in Christ Jesus our Lord, now and unto
the heavenly rest. To Whom be the glory
and the might for ever and ever.

Amen.

INTRODUCTION TO ORATION II.
It is generally agreed that this Oration was
not intended for oral delivery.
Its object was
to explain and defend S. Gregory's recent con
duct, which had been severely criticised by his
friends at Nazianzus. He had been recalled by
his father probably during the year a.d. 361
from Pontus, where he had spent several years
in riionastic seclusion with his friend S. Basil.
His father, not content with his son's presence
at home as a support for his declining years,
and feeling assured of his fitness for the sacred
office, had proceeded, w ith the loudly expressed
approval of the congregation, in spite of Greg
ory's reluctance, to ordain him to the priest
hood on Christmas Day a.d. 361. S. Gregory,
even after the lapse of many years, speaks of his
ordination as an act of tyranny, and at the time,
stung almost to madness, as an ox by a gadfly,
rushed away again to Pontus, to bury in its con
genial solitude, consoled by an intimate friend's
deep sympathy, his wounded feelings.
Before
long the sense of duty reasserted itself, and he
returned to his post at his father's side before
Easter a.d. 362. On Faster Day he delivered
his first Oration before a congregation whose
scantiness marked the displeasure with which the
people of Nazianzus had viewed his conduct.
Accordingly he set himself to supply them in
this Oration with a full explanation of the mo
At the
tives which had led to his retirement.
same time, as the secondary title of the Oration
shows, he has supplied an exposition of the obli
gations and dignity of the Priestly Office which
has been drawn upon by all later writers on the
S. Chrysostom in his well-known trea
subject.
tise, S. Gregory the Great in his Pastoral Care,
and Bossuet in his panegyric on S. Paul, have
done little more than summarise the material
or develop the considerations contained in this
eloquent and elaborate dissertation.

ORATION II.
In Defence of his Flight to Pontus, and
his Return, after his Ordination to
the Priesthood, with an Exposition of
the Character of the Priestly Office.
I have been defeated, and own my de
1.
I subjected myself,-to the Lord, and
feat.

IN DEFENCE OF HIS

FLIGHT TO PONTUS.

Let

prayed unto Him."
the most blessed
David supply my exordium, or rather let
Him Who spoke in David, and even now yet
For indeed the very
speaks through him.
best order of beginning every speech and ac
tion, is to begin from God,P and to end in
God.
As to the cause, either of my original
revolt and cowardice, in which I got me
away far off, and remained * away from you
for a time, which perhaps seemed long to
those who missed me ; or of the present gen
tleness and change of mind, in which I have
given myself up again to you, men may think
and speak in different ways, according to the
hatred or love they bear me, on the one side
refusing to acquit me of the charges alleged,
on the other giving me a hearty welcome.
For nothing is so pleasant to men as talking
of other people's business, especially tinder the
influence of affection or hatred, which often
I will,
almost entirely blinds us to the truth.
however, myself, unabashed,
the
truth, and arbitrate with justice between the
two parties, which accuse or gallantly defend
11s, by, on the one side, accusing myself, on
the other, undertaking my own defence.

forth

set

2. Accordingly, that my speech may pro
ceed in due order, I apply myself to the ques
For
tion which arose first, that of cowardice.
I cannot endure that any of those who watch
with interest the success, or the contrary, of
my efforts, should be put to confusion on
my account, since it has pleased God that our
affairs should be of some consequence to
Christians, so I will by my defence relieve,
if there be any such, those who have already
suffered ; for it is well, as far as possible, and
as reason allows,
from causing,
through our sin or suspicion, any offence or
stumbling-block to the community : inasmuch
as we know how inevitably even those who
offend one of the little ones4 will incur the se
verest punishment at the hands of Him who
cannot lie.

to shrink

3. For my present position is due, my good
people, not to inexperience and ignorance,
nay indeed, that I may boast myself a little,*
it due to contempt for the divine
neither is
in the
laws and ordinances.
body there is i one member 1 which rules and,

Now, just as

a Ps. xxxvii. 7 (LXX).
fi Begin from God.

Possibly an adaptation of the exordium of
Theocr. Idyll, xvii. I. ix Atoc apvu/xeirda, mil etc Ata A^yere, poiffiu. "Let Zeus inspire our opening strain. And, Muses, end
your song in Zeus again."

y Ps. lv. 7.
$One member.

8 S. Matt, xviii. 6.
The Hen. editors object to this, translation
(which is that of Rtinnus. Bitlius and Gabriel) as inconsistent with
the following allusion to the relation of the soul to the body.
It
seems, however, more in harmony with the figure of S. Paul,
who compares the arrangement of the members of the body to
the hierarchy of the Church.

Cf. Remosth. Epist. I.

n Rom. xii. 4 ;

€2 Cor. xi. 16.

1 Cor. xii. 12.

so to say, presides, while another is ruled over
and subject ; so too in the churches, God has
ordained, according either to a law of equal
ity, which admits of an order of merit, or to
one of providence, by which He has knit all
together, that those for whom such treatment is
beneficial, should be subject to pastoral care
and rule, and be guided by word and deed in
the path of duty ; while others should be pastors
and teachers," for the perfecting of the church,
those, I mean, who surpass the majority in vir
tue and nearness to God, performing the func
tions of the soul in the body, and of the intel
lect in the soul ; in order that both may be so
united and compacted together, that, although
one is lacking and another is pre-eminent, they
may, like the members of our bodies, be so
combined and knit together by the harmony
of the Spirit, as to form one perfect body/
really worthy of Christ Himself, our Head.*

4.

I am aware then that anarchy 8 and disor
der cannot be more advantageous than order and
rule, either to other creatures or to men ; nay,
this is true of men in the highest possible degree,
because the interests at stake in their case are
greater ; since it is a great thing ' for them, even
if they fail of their highest purpose-to be free
from sin-to attain at least to that which is sec
ond best, restoration from sin. Since this seems
right and just, it
is, I take it, equally wrong
and disorderly that all should wish to rule,
and that no one should accept ( it.
For if all
men were to shirk this office, whether it must
be called a ministry or a leadership, the fair
fulness'' of the Church would be halting in the
highest degree, and in fact cease to be fair.
And further, where, and by whom would
God be worshipped among us in those mys
tic and elevating rites which are our great
est and most precious privilege, if there were
neither king, nor governor, nor priesthood,
nor sacrifice,9 nor all those highest offices to
the loss of which, for their great sins, men
were of old condemned in consequence of
their disobedience?

5. Nor indeed is it strange or inconsistent for
the majority of those who are devoted to the
study of divine things, to ascend to rule from
being ruled, nor does it overstep the limits
laid down by philosophy,' or involve disgrace ;

a Eph. iv. 11.
y Eph. iv. 15.
p t Cor. xii. 20 ; Eph. iv. 16.
3 Anarchy, <Vc. Comp. Plato I.egg. XII. 2.
e A great thing. The Ben. editors note the obscurity of the
original here.
Many MSS. have ap\eir9ai, preserving the
5 Accept, t^veirdcu.
play upon the word ap\tiv. The latter reading, the Hen. editors
suggest, may have an active sense, as Horn. II. II. 345.

0 Hos. iii. 4.
i) Kph. i. 23.
1 Philosophy. eViAoo-o^t'a is used by S. Greg, and other Fathers
in various senses, not always clearly distinguishable.
Sometimes
it refers to the ancient philosophical teachers and schools : some
times to the Christian philosophy, which inculcates Divine truth,

2o6

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

any more than for an excellent sailor to become
a lookout-man, and for a lookout-man, who
has successfully kept watch over the winds, to
be entrusted with the helm ; or, if you will,
for a brave soldier to be made a captain, and
a good captain to become a general, and have
committed to him the conduct of the whole
campaign.
Nor again, as perhaps some of
those absurd and tiresome people may suppose,
who judge of others' feelings by their own, was
I ashamed of the rank of this grade from my
desire for a higher.
I was not so ignorant
either of its divine greatness or human low
estate, as to think it no great thing for a created
nature, to approach in however slight degree to
God, Who alone is most glorious and illus
trious, and surpasses in purity every nature,
material and immaterial alike.

6. What then were my feelings, and what
was the reason of my disobedience?
For to
most men I did not at the time seem consistent
with myself, or to be such as they had known
me, but to have undergone some deterioration,
and to exhibit greater resistance and self-will
And the causes of this you
than was right.
have long been desirous to hear.
First, and
most important, I was astounded at the unex
pectedness of what had occurred, as people are
terrified by sudden noises ; and, losing the
control of my reasoning faculties, my selfrespect, which had hitherto controlled me,
gave way.
In the next place, there came over
me an eager longing" for the blessings of calm
and retirement, of which I had from the first
been enamoured to a higher degree, I imagine,
than any other student of letters, and which
amidst
the greatest and most threatening
dangers I had promised to God, and of which
I had also had so much experience, that I was
then upon its threshold, my longing having
in consequence been greatly kindled, so that I
could not submit to be thrust into the midst of
a life of turmoil by an arbitrary act of oppres
sion, and to be torn away by force from the
holy sanctuary of such a life as this.

7. For nothing seemed to me so desirable
as to close the doors of my senses, and, escap
ing from the flesh and the world, collected
within myself, having no further connection
than was absolutely necessary with human af
fairs, and speaking to myself and to God,1*
to live superior to visible things, ever preservand readies the principles of a good and holy life : sometimes to
the practice of these principles, either in regard to some special vir
tue, t.g. patience, or, in general, in the lives of individual Chris
tians, and further, as involving the most careful and extensive
reduction of these principles to practice-the discipline of the mo
nastic life.
Nearly all MSS. read *' pity "-which would
have to be understood in the sense of "regretful affection."

Cf. Suicer. in verb.

o linger longing.
0 I Cor. xiv. 28.

ing in myself the divine impressions pure and
unmixed with the erring tokens of this lower
world, and both being, and constantly growing
more and more to be, a real unspotted mirror of
God and divine things, as light is added to
light, and what was still dark grew clearer, en
joying already by hope the blessings of the
world to come, roaming about with the angels,
even now being above the earth by having for
saken it, and stationed on high by the Spirit.
If any of you has been possessed by this long
ing, he knows what I mean and will sym
pathise with my feelings at that time.
For,
perhaps, I ought not to expect to persuade
most people by what I say, since they are un
happily disposed to laugh at such things, either
from their own thoughtlessness, or from the in
fluence of men unworthy of the promise, who
have bestowed upon that which is good an evil
name, calling philosophy nonsense, aided by
envy and the evil tendencies of the mob, who
are ever inclined to grow worse : so that they
are constantly occupied with one of two sins,
either the commission of evil, or the discredit
ing of good.

8.

I was influenced besides by another feel
ing, whether base or noble I do not know,
but I will speak out to you all my secrets.
was ashamed of all those others, who, without
being better than ordinary people, nay, it is
a great thing if they be not worse, with unwashen hands," as the saying runs, and unini
tiated souls, intrude into the most sacred
offices; and, before becoming worthy to ap
proach the temples, they lay claim to the
sanctuary,^ and they push and thrust around
the holy table, as if they thought this order to
be a means of livelihood, instead of a pattern
of virtue, or an absolute authority, instead of
a ministry of which we must give account.
In
fact they are almost more in number than
those whom they govern ; pitiable as regards
piety, y and unfortunate in their dignity ; so
that, it seems to me, they will not, as time
and this evil alike progress, have any one left
to rule, when all are teachers, instead of. as
the promise says, taught of God,* and all
prophesy,' so that even "Saul is among the
prophets," f according to the ancient history
For at no time, either now or
and proverb.
in former days, amid the rise and fall of vari
ous developments, has there ever been such

a S. Mark vii. 5.
,d The sanctuary,

i.e. That which gave the right to a place in
Billius wrongly takes it of the
y Piety-for it is a mere external pretence, deceiving themselves
tiat&aia here has the double sense of pieiy and

the sanctuary,-the priesthood.
episcopate.
as well as others,
orthodoxy-the former being the more prominent.

6 Is. liv. 13 : S. John vi. 45.
< Numb. xi. 29 ; 1 Cor. xiv. 24.

{ 1 Sam. x. 11 ; xix. 24.

IN DEFENCE OF HIS FLIGHT TO PONTUS.

an abundance, as now exists among Christians,
of disgrace and abuses of this kind.
And, if
to stay this current is beyond our powers, at
any rate it is not the least important duty of
religion to testify the hatred and shame we
feel for it.

9. Lastly, there is a matter more serious
than any which I have mentioned, for I am
now coming to the finale a of the question :
and I will not deceive you ; for that would not
be lawful in regard to topics of such moment.
I did not, nor do I now, think myself qualified
to rule a flock or herd, or to have authority
For in their case it is
over the souls of men.
sufficient to render the herd or flock as stout
and fat as possible ; and with this object the
neatherd and shepherd will look for well wa
tered and rich pastures, and will drive his
charge from pasture to pasture, and allow them
to rest, or arouse, or recall them, sometimes
with his staff, most often with his pipe ; and
with the exception of occasional struggles with
wolves, or attention to the sickly, most of his
time will be devoted to the oak and the shade
and his pipes, while he reclines on the beauti
ful grass, and beside the cool water, and shakes
down his couch in a breezy spot, and ever and
anon sings a love ditty, with his cup by his
side, and talks to his bullocks or his flock, the
fattest of which supply his banquets or his pay.
But no one ever has thought of the virtue of
flocks or herds ; for indeed of what virtue are
they capable ? Or who has regarded their
advantage as more important than his own
pleasure ?

10. But in the case of man, hard as it is for
him to learn how to submit to rule, it seems
far harder to know how to rule over men, and
hardest of all, with this rule of ours, which
leads them by the divine law, and to God, for
its risk is, in the eyes of a thoughtful man,
proportionate to its height and dignity.
For,
first of all, he mast, like silver or gold, though
in general circulation in all kinds of seasons
and affairs, never ring false or alloyed, or give
token of any inferior matter, needing further
refinement in the fire ; 3 or else, the wider his
rule, the greater evil he will be.
Since the
injury which extends to many is greater than
that which is confined to a single individual.

11. For it is not so easy to dye deeply a
piece of cloth, or to impregnate with odours,
foul or the reverse, whatever comes near to
it so easy for the fatal vapour,
them ; nor is
which is rightly called a pestilence, to infect
n The Jinale of the questiati, or 11 the imin conclusion of my
Aoyos cannot here
subject." lit.
mcin " of my speech," for it has only just begun.

the colophon of my reason/'

3 Cf. i Cor. iii. 12.

For it

its opposite.

the air, and through the air to gain access to
living beings, as it
is for the vice of a supe
rior to take most speedy possession of his sub
jects, and that with far greater facility than
virtue
is in this that
wickedness especially has the advantage over
goodness, and most distressing it
is to me to
perceive it, that vice is something attractive
and ready at hand, and that nothing is so easy
as to become evil, even without any one to
lead us on to it ; while the attainment of virjue
is rare and difficult, even where there is much
to attract and encourage us.
And it is this,
I think, which the most blessed Haggai had
before his eyes, in his wonderful and most true
figure : a -" Ask the priests concerning the law,
saying : If holy flesh borne in a garment touch
meat or drink or vessel, will it sanctify what
is in contact with it? And when they said
No; ask again if any of these things touch
what is unclean, does it not at once partake of
the pollution ?
For they will surely tell you
that it does partake of it, and does not con
tinue clean in spite of the contact."
1 2 . What does he mean by this ?

As I take
it, that goodness can with difficulty gain a hold
upon human nature, like fire upon green wood ;
while most men are ready and disposed to join
in evil, like stubble,^ I mean, ready for a spark
and a wind, which is easily kindled and con
sumed from its dryness.
For more quickly
would any one take part in evil with slight in
ducement to its full extent, than in good which
For
is fully set before him to a slight degree.
| indeed a little wormwood most quickly im
parts its bitterness to honey ; while not even
double the quantity of honey can impart its
sweetness to wormwood : and the withdrawal
of a small pebble would draw headlong a whole
river, though it would be difficult
for the
strongest dam to restrain or stay its course.

13. This then is the first point in what we
have said, which it
is right for us to guard
against, viz. : being found to be bad painters *
of the charms of virtue, and still more, if not,
perhaps, models for poor painters, poor models
for the people, or barely escaping the proverb,
that we undertake to heal others* while our
selves are full of sores.

14. In the second place, although a man
has kept himself pure from sin, even in a very
high degree ; I do not know that even this is
sufficient for one who is to
instruct others in
For he who has received this charge,
virtue.
not only needs to be free from evil, for evil is,

a Hags;, ii. 12 et seq.
fi Job xxi. 18 ; Ps. Ixxxiii. 13 : Isat. v. 24 : Joel ii. 5.
y Painters, i.e. in our discourses ; models by our lives and ex

I S. Luke iv. 23.

amples.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

in the eyes of most of those under his care,
most disgraceful, but also to be eminent in
good, according to the command, " Depart
And he must not
from evil and do good. ' ' "
only wipe out the traces of vice from his soul,
but also inscribe better ones, so as to outstrip
men further in virtue than he is superior to
them in dignity.
He should know no limits
in goodness or spiritual progress, and should
dwell upon the loss of what is still beyond him,
rather than the gain of what he has attained,
and consider that which is beneath his feet a
step to that which comes next : and not think
it a great gain to excel ordinary people, but a
loss to fall short of what we ought to be : and
to measure his success by the commandment
and not by his neighbours, whether they be
evil, or to some extent proficient in virtue:
and to weigh virtue in no small scales, inas
much as it is due to the Most High, " from
Whom are all things, and to Whom are all
things." 3

15. Nor must he suppose that the same
things are suitable to all, just as all have not
the same stature, nor are the features of the face,
nor the nature of animals, nor the qualities of
soil, nor the beauty and size of the stars, in
all cases the same : but he must consider base
conduct a fault in a private individual, and
deserving of chastisement under the hard rule
of the law ; while in the case of a ruler or
leader it is a fault not to attain to the highest
possible excellence, and always make progress
in goodness, if indeed he is, by his high degree
of virtue, to draw his people to an ordinary
degree, not by the force of authority, but by
the influence of persuasion.
For what is invol
untary apart from its being the result of oppres
For
sion, is neither meritorious nor durable.
what is forced, like a plant » violently drawn
aside by our hands, when set free, returns to
what it was before, but that which is the result
of choice is both most legitimate and enduring,
for it is preserved by the bond of good will.
And so our law and our lawgiver enjoin upon
us most strictly that we should ' ' tend the
flock not by constraint but willingly." 8

1 6. But granted that a man is free from vice,
and has reached the greatest heights of virtue :
I do not see what knowledge or power would
justify him in venturing upon this office.
For
the guiding of man, the most variable and man
ifold of creatures, seems to me in very deed
to be the art of arts • and science of sciences.

Any one may recognize this, by comparing the
work of the physician of souls with the treat
ment of the body ; and noticing that, labori
ous' as the latter is, ours is more laborious, and
of more consequence, from the nature of its
subject matter, the power of its science, and
the object of its exercise.
The one labours
about bodies, and perishable failing matter,
which absolutely must be dissolved and under
go its fate," even if upon this occasion by the aid
of art it can surmount the disturbance within
itself, being dissolved by disease or time in
submission to the law of nature, since it can
not rise above its own limitations.

17. The other is concerned with the soul,
which comes from God and is divine, and par
takes of the heavenly nobility, and presses on
to it, even if it be bound to an inferior nature.
Perhaps indeed there are other reasons also
for this, which only God, Who bound them to
gether, and those who are instructed by God
in such mysteries, can know, but as far as I,
and men like myself can perceive, ' there are
two : one, that it may inherit the glory above
by means of a struggle and wrestling 0 with
things below, being tried as gold in the fire »
by things here, and gain the objects of our hope
as a prize of. virtue, and not merely as the gift
of God. This, indeed, was the will of Supreme
Goodness, to make the good even our own,
not only because sown in our nature, but be
cause cultivated by our own choice, and by the
motions of our will,8
free to act in either di
The second reason is, that it may
rection.
draw to itself and raise to heaven the lower nat
ure, by gradually freeing it from its grossness,
in order that the soul may be to the body what
God is to the soul, itself leading on the matter
which ministers to it, and uniting it, as its fel
low-servant, to God.

1 8. Place and time and age and season and
the like are the subjects of a physician's scru
tiny ; he will prescribe medicines and diet, and
guard against things injurious, that the desires
of the sick may not be a hindrance to his art.
Sometimes, and in certain cases, he will make
use of the cautery or the knife or the severer
remedies ; but none of these, laborious and
hard as they may seem, is so difficult as the dia
gnosis and cure of our habits, passions, lives,
wills, and whatever else is within us, by ban
ishing from our compound nature everything
brutal and fierce, and introducing and estab
lishing in their stead what is gentle and dear

a Ps. xxxvii. 27.
y A f>lant.
c The art 0/ arts.

Cf. Orat. vi. 8. xxiii. 1. A favourite figure of S.
Gregory.
This is the original of the frequently
quoted commonplace, which in S. Gregory the Great's Pastoral
Care, i.

1, takes the form " ars artium est regimen animarum."

6 1 Pet. v. 2.

Rom. xi. 35.

o Gen. iii. 19.
£ Our will.

$ Eph. vi. 12.
Cle'mencet compares S. Bernard, de Gratia ct J.ibero Arbitrio, xiv. 47 (torn. i. 1397, Gaume). Petavius, de Incam.,
torn, v., p. 416. lib. IX., tii., 11, comments on this passage in treating of free will.

y i PeL i. 7.

to God, and arbitrating fairly between soul and
body ; not allowing the superior to be over
powered by the inferior, which would be the
greatest injustice ; but subjecting to the ruling
and leading power that which naturally takes
the second place : as indeed the divine law
enjoins, which is most excellently imposed on
His whole creation, whether visible or beyond
our ken.

19. This further point does not escape me,
that the nature of all these objects of the watch
fulness of the physician remains the same, and
does not evolve out of itself any crafty opposi
tion, or contrivance hostile to the appliances of
his art, nay, it is rather the treatment which
modifies its subject matter," except where some
slight insubordination occurs on the part of the
patient, which it is not difficult to prevent or
restrain. But in our case, human prudence and
selfishness, and the want of training and incli
nation to yield ready submission are a very
great obstacle to advance in virtue, amounting
almost to an armed resistance to those who are
And the very eagerness
wishful to help us.
with which we should lay bare our sickness to
our spiritual physicians, we employ in avoiding
this treatment/ and shew our bravery by
struggling against what is for our own interest,
our skill in shunning what is for our health.

20. For we either hide away our sin, cloak
ing it over in the depth of our soul, like some
festering and malignant disease, as if by escap
ing the notice of men we could escape the
Or else we
mighty eye of God and justice.
allege excuses in our sins,v by devising pleas
in defence of our falls, or tightly closing our
ears, like the deaf adder that stoppeth her
ears, we are obstinate in refusing
to hear
the voice of the charmer, and be treated with
the medicines of wisdom,* by which spiritual
sickness is healed.
Or, lastly, those of us who
are most daring and self-willed shamelessly
brazen out our sin before those who would
heal it, marching with bared head, as the say
ing is, into all kinds of transgression. O what
madness, if there be no term more fitting for
this state of mind !
Those whom we ought to
love as our benefactors we keep off, as if they
were our enemies, hating those who reprove in
the gates, and abhorring the righteous word ; *
and we think that we shall succeed in the war
that we are waging against those who are
well disposed to us by doing ourselves all the
harm we can, like men who imagine they are

n.lts subject matter, i.e. the affection of the sick body, which
it is the object of medicine to change to its opposite. So Combefis.
(5 This treatwrnt : the treatment of the spiritual phvsician.
yPs. cxli. 4 (LXX.).
c Amos v. 10.

SPs. Iviii. s, 6 (LXX.).

2og

consuming the flesh of others when they are
really fastening upon their own.

ai. For these reasons I allege that our of
fice as physicians far exceeds in toilsomeness,
and consequently in worth, that which is con
fined to the body ; and further, because the lat
ter is mainly concerned with the surface, and
only in a slight degree investigates the causes
But the whole of
which are deeply hidden.
our treatment and exertion is concerned with
the hidden man of the heart,11 and our warfare
is directed against that adversary and foe with
in us, who uses ourselves as his weapons against
ourselves, and, most fearful of all, hands us
over to the death of sin.
In opposition then,
to these foes we are in need of great and per
fect faith, and of still greater co-operation on
the part of God, and, as I am persuaded, of no
slight countermanceuvring on our own part,
which must manifest itself both in word and
deed, if ourselves, the most precious possession
we have, are to be duly tended and cleansed
and made as deserving as possible.

22. To turn however to the ends in view in
each of these forms of healing, for this point is
still left to be considered, the one preserves, if
it already exists, the health and good habit of
the flesh, or if absent, recalls it ; though it is
not yet clear whether or not these will be for
the advantage of those who possess them, since
their
opposites very often confer a greater
benefit on those who have them, just as poverty
and wealth, renown or disgrace, a low or
brilliant position, and all other circumstances,
which are naturally indifferent, and do not in
cline in one direction more than in another,
produce a good or bad effect according to the
will of, and the manner in which they are used
But the
by the persons who experience them.
scope of our art is to provide the soul with
wings, to rescue it from the world and give it
to God, and to watch over that which is in
His image,13 if it abides, to take it by the hand,
if it is in danger, or restore it, if ruined, to
make Christ to dwell in the heart? by the Spirit :
and, in short, to deify, and bestow heavenly
bliss upon, one who belongs to the heavenly
host.

23. This is the wish of our schoolmaster*
the law, of the prophets who intervened be
tween Christ and the law, of Christ who is the
ful filler and end' of the spiritual law; of the
emptied Godhead,f of the assumed flesh,1' of
the novel union between God and man, one
This is
consisting9 of two, and both in one.

a 1 Pet.iii, 4.
f Phil. ii. 7.
ij Heb. ii. 14.
8 Gat. iii. 24.
9 One consisting, &c. "These words" says Gabriel, "are in
the heretics, for one clause

deed a two-edged sword against

y Kph. iii. 17.

• Hcb. xii. 2.

0 ('.en. i. a6.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

why God was united ■ to the flesh by means
of the soul, P and natures so separate were knit
together by the affinity to each of the element
which mediated between them : so all became
one for the sake of all, and for the sake of one,
our progenitor, the soul because of the soul
which was disobedient, the flesh because of the
flesh which co-operated with it and shared
in its condemnation, Christ, Who was superior
to, and beyond the reach of, sin, because of
Adam, who became subject to sin.

24. This is why the new was substituted for
the old,'' why He Who suffered was for suffering
recalled to life, why each property of His, Who
was above us, was interchanged with each of ours,
why the new mystery took place of the dispen
sation, due to loving kindness which deals with
him who fell through disobedience.
This is
the reason for the generation and the virgin,
for the manger and Bethlehem ; the generation
on behalf of the creation,8 the virgin on behalf
of the woman," Bethlehem »' because of Eden,
the manger because of the garden, small and vis
ible things on behalf of great and hidden things.
This is why the angels 1 glorified
heavenly, then the earthly,6 why the shepherds
saw the glory over the Lamb and the Shepherd,
why the star led the Magi to worship and offer
gifts,' in order that idolatry might be destroyed.
This is why Jesus was baptized," and received
testimony from above, and fasted, A and was
tempted, and overcame him who had overcome.
This is why devils were cast out,'1 and diseases
healed, and the mighty preaching was entrusted
to, and successfully proclaimed by men of low
estate.

first

the |

25. This is why the heathen rage and the
peoples imagine vain things ; " why tree* is set
over against tree,0 hands against hand, the one
stretched out in self indulgence," the others in
generosity ; the one unrestrained, the others
fixed by nails," the one expelling Adam, the oth
er reconciling the ends of the earth.
This is
the reason of the lifting up to atone for the fall,
and of the gall for the tasting, and of the thorny

mortally wounds Nestorius who separates the Divine from the
Human Nature-the other Kutyches, who empties the human into
the Divine. "
a Was united, avcxpatri), lit.. *' was blended"-cf. Oral, xxxviii.
13.
This and similar terms used by Gregory and his contempo
raries in an orthodox sense were laid aside by later Fathers, in
consequence of their ha\ing been perverted in favor of the feutychian heresy.
0 By means of the sou/, Cf. Orat. xxix. 19 : xxxviii. 13 ; Fpist.
101 (torn. 2. p. go A.) : Poem. Dogmat., x., 55-61 (torn. 2, p. 256) ;
Petavius <le [ncarn.. IV.. xiii.. a.
6 Lit. " of the formation "- the substantive here corresponds
to the verb in Gen. ii. 7 (I.XX.).
£ S. I.like ii. 7.
tj S. L11. ii- 14.
1 S. Matt. ii. 9, ir.
A S. Matt. iv. 2.
k S. Matt. lit. 13. 17.
u S. Matt. x. 7, 8.
( Gen. iii. 3. Why tree, &c. A striking contrast of the means of
Redemption hv the Cross of Christ with the circumstances of the
p S. Matt, xxvii. 35.
r Gen. iii. 6-23.
Fall.

y Heb. viii. 8-13.
e Oen. ij. 7.
0 1 Cor. xv.' 49.
r Ps. ii. I.

o S. John xix. 17.

crown for the dominion of evil, and of death
for death, and of darkness for the sake of light,
and of burial for the return to the ground, and
of resurrection for the sake of resurrection. a
All these are a training from God for us, and
a healing for our weakness, restoring the old
Adam to the place whence he fell, and con
ducting us to the tree of life,? from which the
tree of knowledge estranged us, when par
taken of unseasonably, and improperly.

26. Of this healing we, who are set over
others, are the ministers and fellow-labourers ; »
for whom it is a great thing to recognise and
or
their own passions and sicknesses :
heal
rather, not really a great thing, only the viciousness of most of those who belong to this
order has made me say so : but a much greater
thing is the power to heal and skilfully cleanse
those of others, to the advantage both of those
who are in want of healing and of those whose
charge it is to heal.

27. Again, the healers of our bodies will
have their labours and vigils and cares, of
which we are aware ; and will reap a harvest
of pain for themselves from the distresses of
others, as one of their wise men a said ; and
will provide for the use of those who need
them, both the results of their own labours and
investigations, and what they have been able
to borrow from others : and they consider
none, even of the minutest details, which they
discover, or which elude their search, as having
other than an important influence upon health
or danger. And what is the object ofall this?
That a man may live some days longer on the
earth, though he is possibly not a good man,
but one of the most depraved, for whom it had
perhaps been better, because of his badness, to
have died long ago, in order to be set free from
vice, the most serious of sicknesses.
But, sup
pose he is a good man, how long will he be
able to live? Forever? Or what will he gain
from life here, from which it
is the greatest
of blessings, if a man be sane and sensible, to
seek to be set free?

28. But we, tipon whose efforts is staked
the salvation of a soul, a being blessed and im
mortal, and destined for undying chastisement
or praise, for its vice or virtue,-what a strug
gle ought ours to be, and how great skill do we
require to treat, or get men treated properly,
and to change their life, and give up the clay
For men and women, young
to the spirit.

a. For the sake of resurrection. One translator carries on the
contrast, and renders " to atone for the insurrection," sc. of Adam.
The preposition tjircp seems decisive against this.
fl Rev. ii. 7 ; xxii. 14.
iv. 1
y 1 Cor. iii. 9 :
8 One oftheir wise men, the author of the treatise ffept CiotS*,
ascribed to Hippocrates.

: a Cor. vi. I.

IN DEFENCE OF HIS FLIGHT TO PONTUS.

'

and old, rich and poor, the sanguine and des
pondent, the sick and whole, rulers and ruled,
the wise and ignorant, the cowardly and cour
ageous, the wrathful and meek, the successful
and failing, do not require the same instruction
and encouragement.

29. And if you examine more closely, how
great is the distinction between the married
and the unmarried, and among the latter be
tween hermits and those who" live together in
community, between those who are proficient
and advanced in contemplation and those who
barely hold on the straight course, between
townsfolk again and rustics, between the sim
ple and the designing, between men of busi
ness and men of leisure, between those who
have met with reverses and those who are pros
perous and ignorant of misfortune.
For these
classes differ sometimes more widely from each
other in their desires and passions than in their
physical characteristics; or, if you will, in the
mixtures and blendings of the elements of
which we are composed, and, therefore, to reg
ulate them is no easy task.

30. As then the same medicine and the
same food are not in every case administered
to men's bodies, but a difference is made ac
cording to their degree of health or infirmity ;
so also are souls treated with varying instruc
tion and guidance.
To this treatment witness
is borne by those who have had experience of
it.
Some are led by doctrine, others trained
by example ; some need the spur, others the
curb ; some are sluggish and hard to rouse
to the good, and must be stirred up by being
smitten with the word ; others are immoder
ately fervent in spirit, with impulses difficult
to restrain, like thoroughbred colts, who run
wide of the •turning post, and to improve them
the word must have a restraining and checking
influence.

3 1 . Some are benefited by praise, others by
blame, both being applied in season ; while if
out of season, or unreasonable, they are inju
rious ; some are set right by encouragement,
others by rebuke ; some, when taken to task in
public, others, when privately corrected. For

10..

a Those mho, &c. fuyaSac, cf. xxi., to. where >iopa£iico! and oi
t». '\<t<
<i arc distinguished from |iiyao>« and oi tt}s imm£ias.
Clemencet here holds that oi ttjc r'pnui'ac arc hermits as distin
guished from coenobites, but does not hint at any further sub
division between the MOinmitot and the fityaocc.
Cf. also xliii.
6a: xxi.
Moutaut, "Revue Critique, &c." (pp. 48-^2) at
tempts to distinguish l>ctween the fiiyaoec and the koipwvikoi. Hut
although he confirms the overthrow by Clemencet of the views of
previous translators, he leaves Cli*mcncet's own position really unweakened.
S. Gregory uses the two terms as practically convert
ible.
In xxi., $ to, (which Montaut misinterprets) he explains
that the life of the coenobite is a hermit-life in its relation to the
world which he has forsaken, while it has opportunities in com
munity-life for the growth of those virtues which are required by the
relation of man to man. Cf. Bened. edition (Clemencet), rncf.
Gener., Pars. II., $ iii. sub finem.

some are wont to despise private admonitions,
but are recalled to their senses by the condem
nation of a number of people, while others,
who would grow reckless under reproof openly
given, accept rebuke because it
is in secret,
and yield obedience in return for sympathy.

32. Upon some it is needful to keep a close
watch, even in the minutest details, because
if they think they are unperceived (as they
be), they are puffed up
would contrive to
with the idea of their own wisdom.
Of others
it is better to take no notice, but seeing not to
see, and hearing not to hear them, according
to the proverb, that we may not drive them
to despair, under the depressing influence of
repeated reproofs, and at last to utter reckless
ness, when they have lost the sense of self-re
spect, the source of persuasiveness."
In some
cases we must even be angry, without feeling
angry, or treat them with a disdain we do not
feel, or manifest despair, though we do not really
despair of* them, according to the needs of
their nature.
Others again we must treat with
condescension p and lowliness, aiding them
readily to conceive a hope of better things.
Some it is often more advantageous to conquer
-by others to be overcome, and to praise or
deprecate, in one case wealth and power, in
another poverty and failure.

33. For our treatment does not correspond
with virtue and vice, one of which is most ex
cellent and beneficial at all times and in all
cases, and the other most evil and harmful ;
and, instead of one and the same of our medi
cines invariably proving either most wholesome
or most dangerous in the same cases-be it sever
ity or gentleness, or any of the others which we
have enumerated-in some cases it proves good
and useful, in others again it has the contrary
effect, according, I suppose, as time and cir
cumstance and the disposition of the patient,
admit. Now to set before you the distinction
between all these things, and give you a per
fectly exact view of them, so that you may in
brief comprehend the medical art, is quite im
possible, even for one in the highest degree
qualified by care and skill : but actual experi
ence and practice are requisite to form y
a
medical system and a medical man.

34. This, however, I take to be generally
admitted-that just as it
is not safe for those
who walk on a lofty tight rope to lean to
either side, for even though the inclination
seems slight, it has no slight consequences, but

a The source of persuasiveness, lit., "the medicine of per
suasion."
0 condescension, lit., 1 equity.' dealing qenlly with their weakness,
not exacting the literal fulfilment of ihe law.
. they become clear to.'
.
y Are requisite toform, lit., by ' actual .

*

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

their safety depends upon their perfect balance :
so in the case of one of us, if he leans to either
side, whether from vice or ignorance, no slight
danger of a fall into sin is incurred, both for
himself and those who are led by him.
But
we must really walk in the King's highway,"
and take care not to turn aside from it either
to the right hand or to the left,*3 as the Proverbs
For such is the case with our passions,
say.
and such in this matter is the task of the good
shepherd, if he is to know properly the souls
of his flock, and to guide them according to
the methods of a pastoral care which is right
and just, and worthy of our true Shepherd.

35. In regard to the distribution of the word,
to mention last the first of our duties, of that
divine and exalted word, which everyone now
is ready to discourse upon ; if anyone else
boldly undertakes it and supposes it within the
power of every man's intellect, 1 am amazed
at his intelligence, not to say his folly.
To
me indeed it seems no slight task, and one
requiring no little spiritual power, to give in
due season v to each his portion of the word, and
to regulate with judgment the truth of our
opinions, which are concerned with such sub
jects as the world or worlds,*
matter, soul,
mind, intelligent natures, better or worse, pro
vidence which holds together and guides the
universe, and seems in our experience of it to
be governed according to some principle, but
one which is at variance with those of earth and
of men.

36. Again, they are concerned with our ori
ginal constitution, and final restoration, the
types of the truth, the covenants, the first and
second coming of Christ, His incarnation,
sufferings and dissolution,* with the resurrec
tion, the last day, the judgment and recom
pense, whether sad or glorious ; I, to crown all,
with what we are to think of the original* and
blessed Trinity.
Now this involves a very
great risk to those who are charged with the
illumination'' of others, if they are to avoid
contracting'' their doctrine to a single Person,
from fear of polytheism, and so leave us empty
terms, if we suppose the Father and the Son and
the Holy Spirit to be one and the same Person
only: or, on the other hand, severing It into
three, either foreign and diverse, or disordered

v S. T.tike xii. 42.

a Numb. xx. 17.
8 Prov. iv. 27.
5 Worlds, i.e. the invisible and visible, of which S. Greg, held
that the former was created before the latter, cf. Orat. xviii. 3 ;
xxvii. 10: xxviii. 31 ; xxxviii. 10; xt. 45.
t Dissolution ; some translate 'return'-i.e. of the Ascension ;
referring the ' resurrection, jtc.' to mankind in general.
£ Original.
Perhaps better ' supreme.'
rj Illumination. Some apply this to Holy Baptism, with its
8 Cctttractitijr, i.e. by the Sabellinn heresy. A parallel pas

preliminary instniction.
sage in almost identical terms is Orat. xx. 6.

and unprincipled, and, so to say, opposed divin
ities, thus falling from the opposite side into
an equally dangerous error:- like some distorted
plant if bent far back in the opposite direction.
37. For, amid the three infinnities in regard
to theology, atheism, Judaism, and polytheism,
one of which is patronised by Sabellius the
Libyan, another by Arius of Alexandria, and
the third by some of the ultra-orthodox among
us, what is my position, can I avoid what
ever in
these three is noxious, and remain
within the limits of piety ; neither being led
astray by the new analysis and synthesis into
the atheism" of Sabellius, to assert not so much
that all arc one as that each is nothing, for
things which are transferred and pass into each
other cease to be that which each one of them
is, or that we have an unnaturally compound
deity, like those mythical creatures, the subject
of a picturesque imagination: nor again, by
alleging a plurality of severed natures, accord
ing to the well named madness^ of Arius, be
coming involved in a Jewish poverty, and in
troducing envy into the divine nature, by
limiting the Godhead to the Unbegotten One
alone, as if afraid that our God would perish,
if He were the Father of a real God of equal
nature : nor again, by arraying three principles
in opposition to, or in alliance with, each
other, introducing
the Gentile plurality of
principles from which we have escaped?

38. It is necessary neither to be so devoted
to the Father, as to' rob Him of His Father
hood, for whose Father would He be, if the
Son were separated and estranged from Him,
by being ranked with the creation, (for an
alien being, or one which is combined and
confounded with his father, and, for the sense
is the same, throws him into confusion, is not
a son) ; nor to be so devoted to Christ, as to
neglect to preserve both His Sonship, (for
whose son would He be, if His origin were not
referred to the Father ? ) and the rank of the
Father as origin, inasmuch as He is the Father
' and Generator ; for He would be the origin of
j petty and unworthy beings, or rather the term
I would be used in a petty and unworthy sense,
1 if He were not the origin of Godhead and
goodness, which are contemplated in the Son
i and the Spirit : the former being the Son and
i the Word, the latter the proceeding and inFor both the Unity of the
I dissoluble Spirit.
Godhead must be preserved, and the Trinity

xliii. 30. in the sense in which it is here explained.

a. Atheism. This term is used of Sabellianism xviii. t6.

xx. 6.
xxi. 13.
Cf.
Petav. deTrin. I
This term
is applied in a letter of Constantine after the Council of Nicaea.
It
is called Judaism also Orat. xx. 6 as frequently by S. Athanasius.

8 Madness of Ari.mism, xxi. 13. xxxiv. 8. xliii. 30.

vi. 3, sqq.

,
I Cf. Petav. dc I rin. 1. ix. 8.

IN DEFENCE OF HIS FLIGHT TO PONTUS.

of Persons confessed, each with His own prop
erty.

39. A suitable and worthy comprehension
and exposition of this subject demands a discus
sion of greater length than the present occasion,
or even our life, as I suppose, allows, and,
what is more, both now and at all times, the
aid of the Spirit, by Whom alone we are able
to perceive, to expound, or to embrace, the
truth in regard to God.
For the pure alone
can grasp Him Who is pure and of the same
disposition as himself ; and I have now briefly
dwelt upon the subject, to show how difficult it
is to discuss such important questions, especially
before a large audience, composed of every age
and condition, and needing like an instrument
of many strings, to be played upon in various
ways ; or to find any form of words able to
edify them all, and illuminate them with the
light of knowledge.
For it is not only that
there are three sources from which danger
springs, understanding, speech, and hearing,
so that failure in one, if not in all, is infallibly
certain ; for either the mind is not illuminated,
or the language is feeble, or the hearing, not
having been cleansed, fails to comprehend, and
accordingly, in one or all respects, the truth
must be maimed : but further, what makes the
instruction of those who profess to teach any
other subject so easy and acceptable-viz. the
piety" of the audience-on this subject involves
difficulty and danger.

40. For having undertaken to contend on
behalf of God, the Supreme Being, and of
salvation, and of the primary hopeP of us all,
the more fervent they are in the faith, the more
hostile are they to what is said, supposing that
a submissive spirit indicates, not piety, but
treason to the truth, and therefore they would
sacrifice anything rather than their private con
victions, and the accustomed doctrines in which
they have been educated.
I am now referring
to those who are moderate and not utterly de
praved in disposition, who, if they have erred
in regard to the truth, have erred from piety,
who have zeal, though not according to know
ledge,'' who will possibly be of the number of
not excessively condemned, and not
those

a Fifty, tvkafieta. L e. The pious readily and attentively receive
instruction in mor.iliiy or KencraUy received truth, but arc more
suspicious and intolerant than ordinary people, if. at a time when
any theological question is hotly debated, a preacher touches upon
any point connected with il, and so stirs party feeling or personal
prejudice.
{1 the primary hofit. This term is used of the full knowledge
and confession of the doctrine of the Holy Trinity. Orat. xxxii. 23 :
where its necessary connection with Christianity and the life of the
soul is insisted on. Kor its vital importance cf. Liddon, [lamp. Lcct.
pp. 41s, 6, and its bearing on the Mediatorial Work nf Christ, and so
on our s-ilvation. Ibid. Lect. VIII. esp. pp. 472-9(51x1 ed.). S. Cyr.
Hv-r. Calecli. r3- a.
S. Cyr. Alex, de S. Trin. dial. 4. torn v. pp.
Bright. Hist, of
5al. *og.
tl.e Church, p 149.

S, Proclus Horn, in Incarn. 5. 6. o.

y Rom. x. 2.

beaten with many stripes, a because it is not
through vice or depravity that they have failed
to do the will of their Lord ; and these per
chance would be persuaded and forsake the
pious opinion which is the cause of their hostil
ity, if some reason either from their own minds,
or from others, were to take hold of them, and
at a critical moment, like iron from flint, strike
fire from a mind which is pregnant and worthy
of the light, for thus a little spark would quickly
kindle the torch of truth within it.

41. But what is to be said of those who, from
vain glory or arrogance, speak unrighteousness
against the most High,*3 arming themselves
with the insolence of Jannes and Jambres,')' not
against Moses, but against the truth, and rising
in opposition to sound doctrine?
Or of the
third class, who through ignorance and, its
consequence, temerity, rush headlong against
every form of doctrine in swinish fashion, and
trample under foot the fair pearls4
of the
truth ?

42. What again of those who come with no
better or
private idea, or form of words,
worse, in regard to God, but listen to all kinds
of doctrines and teachers, with the intention of
selecting from all what is best and safest, in
reliance upon no better judges of the truth than
They are, inconsequence, borne
themselves?
and turned about hither and thither by one
plausible idea after another, and, after being
deluged and trodden down by all kinds of doc
trine, « and having rung the changes on a long
succession of teachers and formula?, w^hich they
throw to the winds as readily as dust, their ears
and minds at last are wearied out, and, O what
folly ! they become equally disgusted with all
forms of doctrine, and assume the wretched
character of deriding and despising our faith as
unstable and unsound ; passing in their igno
rance from the teachers to the doctrine : as if
anyone whose eyes were diseased, or whose
ears had been injured, were to complain of the
sun for being dim and*not shining, or of sounds
for being inharmonious and feeble.

43. Accordingly, to impress the truth upon
a soul when it is still fresh, like wax not yet
subjected to the seal, is an easier task than in
scribing pious doctrine on the top of inscrip
tions-I mean wrong doctrines and dogmas ( -
with the result that the former are confused and
thrown into disorder by the latter.
It is bet
ter indeed to tread a road which is smooth and
well trodden than one which is untrodden and
rough, or to plough land which has often been

o Luke xii. 47.
8 Ps. lxxiii. 8. (I .XX.).
viii. 32.
8 S. Matt. vii. 6 :
C Doctrines and dogmas.
rality and the latter to belief.

y 2 Tim. iii. 8.
e Kph. iv. 14.
Elias takes the former to refer to mo

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

cleft and broken up by the plough : but a soul
to be written upon should be free from the in
scription of harmful doctrines, or the deeply
cut marks of vice : otherwise the pious inscriber would have a twofold task, the erasure of
the former impressions and the substitution of
others which are more excellent, and more
worthy to abide.
So numerous are they whose
wickedness is shown, not only by yielding to
their passions, but even by their utterances,
and so numerous the forms and characters
of wickedness, and so considerable the task of
one who has been intrusted with this office of
educating and taking charge of souls.
Indeed
I have omitted the majority of the details, lest
my speech should be unnecessarily burden
some.

44. If anyone were to undertake to tame and
train an animal of many forms and shapes,
compounded of many animals of various sizes
and degrees of tameness and wildness,
his
principal task, involving a considerable strug
gle, would be the government of so extraor
dinary and heterogeneous a nature, since each
is compounded
of the animals of which it
would, according to its nature or habit, be
differently affected with joy, pleasure or dis
like, by the same words, or food, or stroking
with the hand, or whistling, or other modes of
And what must the master ofsuch
treatment.
an animal do, but show himself manifold and
various in his knowledge, and apply to each a
treatment suitable for it, so as successfully to
lead and preserve the beast ? And since the
common body of the church is composed of
many different characters and minds, like a
single animal compounded of discordant parts,
it is absolutely necessary that its ruler should
be at once simple in his uprightness in all re
spects, and as far as possible manifold and
varied in his treatment of individuals, and in
dealing with all in an appropriate and suitable
manner.

45. For some need to be fed with the milk a
of the most simple and elementary doctrines,
viz., those who are in habit babes and, so to
say, new-made, and unable to bear the manly
food of the word : nay, if it were presented to
them beyond their
they would
strength,
l>e overwhelmed and oppressed,
probably
owing to the
inability of their mind, as
is the case with our material bodies, p to di
gest and appropriate what is offered to it, and
so would lose even their original power.
Oth
ers require the wisdom which is spoken among

a 1. Cor. mii. t, a : Heb. v. 12-14.
0 Ow material bodies, lit.. " matter."
This, together with
"dust." " mire" or "clay " and other similar terms, is often used
by S. Gregory as a synonym of *' the body."

the perfect," and the higher and more solid
food, since their senses have been sufficiently
exercised to discern 0 truth and falsehood, and
if they were made to drink milk, and fed on
the vegetable diet of invalids,')' they would be
And with good reason, for they
annoyed.
would not
according to
Christ, nor make that laudable increase, which
the Word produces in one who is rightly fed,
by making him a perfect man, and bringing
him to the measure of spiritual stature. *

be strengthened 4

46. And who is sufficient for these things ?
For we are not as the many, able to corrupt f
the word of truth, and mix the wine,' which
maketh glad the heart of man,9 with water,
mix, that is, our doctrine with what is com
mon and cheap, and debased, and stale, and
tasteless, in order to turn the adulteration to
our profit, and accommodate ourselves to those
who meet us, and curry favor with everyone,
becoming ventriloquists' and chatterers, who
serve their own pleasures by words uttered
from the earth, and sinking into the earth, and,
to gain the special good will of the multitude,
injuring in the highest degree, nay, ruining our
selves, and shedding the innocent blood of sim
pler souls, which will be required at our hands. *
47. Besides, we are aware that it is better
to offer our own reins to others more skilful
than ourselves, than, while inexperienced, to
guide the course of others, and rather to give
a kindly hearing than stir an untrained tongue ;
and after a discussion of these points with ad
visers who are, I fancy, of no mean worth,
and, at any rate, wish us well, we preferred to
learn those canons of speech and action which
we did not know, rather than undertake to teach
them in our ignorance.
For it is delightful to
have the reasoning x of the aged come to one
even until the depth of old age, able, as it is,
to aid a soul new to piety.
Accordingly, to
undertake the training of others before being
sufficiently trained oneself, and to learn,
as
men say, the potter's art on a wine-jar, that is,
to practise ourselves in piety at the expense of
others' souls, seems to me to be excessive folly
or excessive rashness-folly, if we are not even
aware of our own ignorance ; rashness, if in
spite of this knowledge we venture on the task.
48. Nay, the wiser of the Hebrews tell us
that there w as of old amortg the Hebrews a most
excellent and praisew-orthy law,* that every

0 Hcb. v. 14.

a 1 Cor. ii. 6.
5 Col. i. 11. ii. 19.
(2 Cor. ii. 16, 17.
1 Ventrili-yuists.
x E?ek. iii. 10 : xxxiii. 8.
A I.e., venerable for wisdom due to experience.
u. Laiv.

1} Isai. i. 27.
Isai. viil. 19, " Wizards."

_ t rtph. iv. 13.

Not definitely enacted, but a custom conslant'y rbIt applied to the earlier and later chapters of Ezekiel l<nd

V Rom. xiv. a.
8 Ps. civ. 15.

served.
the Song of Solomon.

IN DEFENCE OF HIS FLIGHT TO PONTUS.

age was not entrusted with the whole of Scrip
ture, inasmuch as this would not be the more
profitable course, since the whole of it
is not
at once intelligible to everyone, and its more
recondite parts would, by their apparent mean
ing, do a very great injury to most people.
Some portions therefore, whose exterior" is
unexceptionable, are from the first permitted
and common to all ; while others are only en
trusted to those who have attained their twentyfifth year, viz., such as hide their mystical
beauty under a mean-looking cloak, to be the
reward of diligence and an illustrious life ; flash
ing forth and presenting itself only to those
whose mind has been purified, on the ground
that this age alone f can be superior to the
body, and properly rise from the letter to the
spirit.

49. Among us, however, there is no bound
ary line between giving and receiving instruc
tion, like the stones of old between the tribes
within and beyond the Jordan : nor is a cer
tain part entrusted to some, another to others;
nor any rule for degrees 1 of experience ; but
the matter has been so disturbed and thrown
into confusion, that most of us, not to say
all, almost before we have lost our childish
curls and lisp, before we have entered the
house of God, before we know even the
names of the Sacred Books, before we have
learnt the character and authors of the Old
and New Testaments :
(for my present point
is not our want of cleansing from the mire
and marks of spiritual shame which our
viciousness has contracted) if, I say, we have
furnished ourselves with two or three expres
sions of pious authors, and that by hearsay,
not by study ; if we have had a brief experience
of David, or clad ourselves properly in a cloaklet, or are wearing at least a philosopher's gir
dle, or have girt about us some form and ap
pearance of piety-phew ! how we take the
chair and show our spirit !
Samuel was holy
even in his swaddling-clothes : 4 we are at once
wise teachers, of high estimation in Divine
things, the first of scribes and lawyers ; we or
dain ourselves men of heaven and seek to be
called Rabbi by men ; ' the letter is nowhere,
everything is to be understood spiritually, and
our dreams are utter drivel, and we should be
annoyed if we were not lauded to
excess.
This is the case with the better and more sim-

« Exterior^ Origen, Horn. 5, in Levit., speaks of the ' body,
soul, and spirit of Scripture.'
If, as many MSS. we read Aio'Aif, 11 with difficulty."
0 Alette.
This is preferred by the Rencd. note.
Hcb. v. 14 V. "use" (in the singular), the
y Degrees, etc.
sense is " any rule for confining the use of difficult passages of
Holy Scripture to those whose experience is a guarantee against
their abuse."

c S. Matt, xxiii. 7.

o" x Sam. ii. 11.

' and noble ? a

pie of us: what of those who are more spiritual
After frequently condemning
us, as men of no account, they have forsaken
us, and abhor fellowship with impious people
such as we are.

This also they will admit.

50. Now, if we were to speak gently to one of
them, advancing, as follows, step by step in
argument:
"Tell me, my good sir, do you
call dancing anything, and flute-playing ? ' '
"Certainly," they would say.
"What then
of wisdom and being wise, which we venture
to define as a knowledge of things divine and
human ? ' '
' ' Are
then these accomplishments better than and su
perior to wisdom, or wisdom by far better than
these?"
"Better even than all things," I
know well that they will say. Up to this point
they are judicious.
" Well, dancing and fluteplaying require to be taught and learnt, a pro
cess which takes time, and much toil in the
sweat of the brow, and sometimes the payment
of fees, and entreaties for inititation, and long
absence from home, and all else which must be
done and borne for the acquisition of expe
rience :
but as for wisdom, which is chief of all
things, and holds in her embrace everything
which is good, so that even God himself prefers
this
title to all the names by which He is
called ; are we to suppose that it is a matter of
such slight consequence, and so accessible, that
we need but wish, and we would be wise?"
" It would be utter folly to do so."
If we, or
any learned and prudent man, were to say this
to them, and try by degrees to cleanse them
from their error, it would be sowing upon
rocks, P and speaking to ears of men who will
not hear : » so far are they from being even
wise enough to perceive their own ignorance.
And we may rightly, in my opinion, apply to
them the saying of Solomon :
There is an
evil which I have seen under the sun, s a man
wise in his own conceit ; « and a still greater
evil is to charge with the instruction of others
a man who is not even aware of his own ignor
ance.

51. This is a state of mind which demands,
in special degree, our tears and groans, and has
often stirred my pity, from the conviction that
imagination robs us in great measure of reality,
and that vain glory is a great hindrance to
men's attainment of virtue.
To heal and stay
this disease needs a Peter or Paul, those great
disciples of Christ, who in addition to guidance
in word and deed, received their grace, f and

a "More spiritual and noble." -This is ironical.
fi S. I.ukc viii. 6.
5 Kccles. x. 5.
SThrir grace, to xapio>«-_ Klia:; takes this of the power to
Perhaps better

Tillemont of miracles in general.

y Ecclus. xxv. o.
e Prov. xxvi. 12.

heal diseases.

2l6

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

or
leaders,
instance, Moses,

became all things to all men, that they might
gain all. a
But for other men like ourselves, it
is a great thing to be rightly guided and led
by those who have been charged with the cor
rection and setting right of things such as these.
52. Since, however, I have mentioned Paul,
and men like him, I will, with your permission,
pass by all others who have been foremost as
in any
lawgivers, prophets, or
similar office-for
Aaron,
Joshua, Elijah, Elisha,
the Judges, Samuel,
David, the company of Prophets, John, the
Twelve Apostles, and their successors, who with
many toils and labors exercised their authority,
each in his own time ; all these I pass by, to set
forth Paul as the witness to my assertions, and
for us to consider by his example how im
portant a matter is the care of souls, and whether
it requires slight attention and little judgment.
But that we may recognize and perceive this,
let us hear what Paul himself says of Paul.

53. I say nothing of his labours, his watchings, his sufferings in hunger and thirst, in cold
and nakedness, his assailants from without, his
adversaries within. 0
I pass over the persecu
tions, councils, prisons, bonds, accusers, tribu
nals, the daily and hourly deaths, the basket,
the stonings, beatings with rods, the travelling
about, the perils by land and sea, the deep, the
shipwrecks, the perils of rivers,
perils of rob
bers, ]>erils from his countrymen, perils among
false brethren, the living by his own hands, the
gospel without charge, » the being a spectacle to
both angels and men,4 set in the midst between
God and men to champion His cause,' and to
unite them to Him, and make them His own
peculiar people, f beside those things that are
without.'' For who could worthily detail these
matters, the daily pressure,9 the individual so
the
licitude, the care of all
the churches,
universal sympathy, and brotherly love ?
Did
anyone stumble, Paul also was weak ; did an
other suffer scandal, it was Paul who was on
fire.

54. What of the laboriousness of his teach
ing ? The manifold character of his ministry ?
His loving kindness? And on the other hand
his strictness ? And the combination and blend
ing of the two ; in such wise that his gentle
ness should not enervate, nor his severity ex
asperate? He gives laws for slaves and mas
ters,' rulers and ruled," husbands and wives/

of the special position as Apostles to the Jews and to the Gen
tiles (Gal. ii. 8. 9), where the term used is xapis.
y 1 Cor. iv. 12 :_ix. 18.

02 Cor. xi. 23 et seq.

f Hts cause reading Toy : v. L Toil'.
na Cor. xi. 28. aq.

9 Pressure iwnmaiw, 1 Cor. xi. 28, iiri<naxriv.
k Kom. xiii. 1-3.

A Eph. v. 25, aa.

a 1 Cor. ix. 22.
& lb. iv. 9.
£ Tit. ii. 14.
t Eph. vi. 5, 9.

parents and children," marriage and celibacy, 0
self-discipline and indulgence,')' wisdom and ig
norance,4 circumcision and uncircumcision, «
Christ and the world, the flesh and the spirit. S
On behalf of some he gives thanks, others he
upbraids. Some he names his joy and crown, *
others he charges with folly.9 Some who hold
a straight course he accompanies, sharing in
their zeal ; others he checks, who are going
wrong.
At one time he excommunicates,' at
another he confirms his love ; " at one time he
[ grieves, at another rejoices ; at one time he
feeds with milk, at another he handles mys
teries ; * at one time he condescends, at another
he raises to his own level ; at one time he
threatens a rod,*1 at another he offers the spirit
of meekness; at one time he is haughty to
ward the lofty, at another lowly toward the
lowly. Now he is least of the apostles, " now
he offers a proof of Christ speaking in him ; *
now he longs for departure and is being
poured forth as a libation,0 now he thinks it
more necessary for their sakes to abide in the
For he seeks not his own interests, but
flesh.
those of his children," whom he has begotten
in Christ by the gospel." This is the aim of
all his spiritual authority, in everything to
neglect his own in comparison with the ad
vantage of others.

55. He glories in his infirmities and dis
tresses. He takes pleasure in the dying of
Jesus," as if it were a kind of ornament. He
is lofty in carnal things/ he rejoices in things
I spiritual; he is not rude in knowledge, v and
claims to see in a mirror, darkly.* He is bold
in spirit, and buffets his body, x throwing it as
an antagonist.
What is the lesson and in
struction he would thus impress upon us ? Not
to be proud of earthly things, or puffed up by
knowledge, or excite the flesh against the
spirit.
He fights for all, prays for all, is jeal
ous for all, is kindled on behalf of all, whether
without law, or under the law ; a preacher of
He even
the Gentiles, # a patron of the Jews.
was exceedingly bold on behalf of his brethren
according to the flesh,TM if I may myself be bold
enough to say so,
in his loving prayer that
they might in his stead be brought to Christ.
What magnanimity ! what fervor of spirit ! He
imitates Christ, who became a curse for us, -
I who took our infirmities and bore our sick1 nesses ; W or, to use more measured terms, he is

aF.ph. vi. 1-4.
& 1 Cor. i. 27; iii. 18.
jj Phil. iv. 1.
0 Gal. iii 1.
iii. 2.
A 1 Cor. ii. 7 :
{ 2 Cor. xiii. 3.

yRom. xiv. 3,6.
£Cal. v. 16.
kjCot. ii. 8.
*lb. XV. 9.
ir 1 Cor. x. 33.
plb. iv. 15,
t Rom. v. 3; Phil. iii. 4.
X 'n- **• *7;
^ 2 Tim. i. 11. w Rom. ix. 3. oa Gal. iii. 13. £0 S, Matt. viii. 17.

t> 1 Cor. vii. 3, 8. 25. 31.
e Rom. ii. 25, 20.
|xlb. iv. 21.
o Phil. i. 23; ii. 17.
«t 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

<ra Cor. iv. 10: xii. 9, 10.

v 2 Cot. xi. 6

1 1 Cor. v. 5.

IN DEFENCE OF HIS FLIGHT TO PONTUS.

ready, next to Christ, to suffer anything, even
as one of the ungodly, for them, if only they
be saved.

56. Why should I enter into detail? He
lived not to himself, but to Christ and his
preaching. He crucified the world to himself,"
and being crucified
to the world and the
things which are seen, he thought all things
little,3 and too small to be desired ; even
though from Jerusalem and round about unto
Illyricum » he had fully preached the Gospel,
even though he had been prematurely caught
up to the third heaven, and had had a vision
of Paradise, and had heard unspeakable words.4
Such was Paul, and everyone of like spirit
with him.
But we fear that, in comparison
with them, we may be foolish princes of Zoan,«
or extortioners, who exact the fruits of the
ground, or falsely bless the people : f and fur
ther make themselves happy, and confuse the
way of your feet,'' or mockers ruling over you,
or children in authority,9 immature in mind,
not even having bread and clothing enough to
be rulers over any ; * or prophets teaching lies,"
or rebellious princes,* deserving to share the
reproach of their elders for the straitness of the
famine,*• or priests very far from speaking com
fortably * to Jerusalem, according to the re
proaches and protests urged by Isaiah, who
was purged by the Seraphim with a live coal.*
57. Is the undertaking then so serious and
laborious to a sensitive and sad heart-a very
rottenness to the bones 0 of a sensible man :
while the danger is slight, and a fall not worth
consideration ? Nay the blessed Hosea inspires
me with serious alarm, where he says that to
us priests and rulers pertaineth the judgment,"
because we have been a snare to the watchtower ; and as a net spread upon Tabor, which
has been firmly fixed by the hunters of men's
souls, and he threatens to cut off the wicked
prophets,!" and devour their judges with fire,
and to cease for a while from anointing a king
and princes," because they ruled for themselves,
and not by Him.T

58. Hence again the divine Micah, unable
to brook the building of Zion with blood,
however you interpret the phrase, and of Jeru
salem with iniquity, while the heads thereof
judge for reward, and the priests teach for hire,
and the prophets divine for money-what does
he say will be the result of this ?
Zion shall
be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem be as a

a Gal. vi. 14.
8 2 Cor. xii. 2, 4.
0 lb. iii. 4.
X lb. i. 23.
o Prov. xiv. 30.

cI9a.xix.11.

p Phil. iii. 8.
t lb. iii. 7.
ft Hos. v. 1, 2.

t
( lb. ix. 16.
v lb. xl. a.

y Rom. xv. 19.
x lb. ix. 15.
0 lb. vi. 5.

if lb. iii. 12.
f lb. vi. 6, 7.

/* lb. viii. 21.

a lb. vti 7.

T lb. viii. 4.

lodge in a garden, and the mountain of the
house be reckoned as a glade in a thicket." He
bewails also the scarcity of the upright, there
being scarcely a stalk or a gleaning grape left,
since both the prince asketh, and the judge
curries favour,3 so that his language is almost
I the same as the mighty David's: Save me, O
Lord, for the godly man ceaseth:'"' and says
that therefore their blessings shall fail them,
as if wasted by the moth.

59. Joel again summons us to wailing, and
will have the ministers of the altar lament
under the presence of famine :
so far is he
from allowing us to revel in the misfortunes
of others : and, after sanctifying a fast, calling
a solemn assembly, and gathering the old men,
the children, and those of tender age,s we our
selves must further haunt the temple in sack
cloth and ashes,* prostrated right humbly on
' the ground, because the field is wasted, and
the meat-offering and the drink-offering is cut
off from the house of the Lord, till we draw
down mercy by our humiliation.

60. What of Habakkuk ? He utters more
heated words, and is impatient with God
Himself, and cries down, as it were our good
Lord, because of the injustice of the judges.
O Lord, how long shall I cry and Thou wilt
1 not hear ? Shall I cry out unto Thee of vio
lence, and Thou wilt not save? Why dost
Thou show me toil and labour, causing me to
look upon perverseness and impiety? Judg
ment has been given against me, and the
judge is a spoiler. Therefore the law is slacked,
and judgment doth never go forth.
Then
comes the denunciation, and what follows
upon it.
Behold, ye despisers, and regard,
and wonder marvellously, and vanish away,
But why need I quote
for I work a work.f
the whole of the denunciation ? A little fur
ther on, however, for I think it best to add
this to what has been said, after upbraiding
and lamenting many of those who are in some
respect unjust or depraved, he upbraids the
leaders and teachers of wickedness, stigmatising
vice as a foul disorder, and an intoxication and
aberration of mind ; charging them with giv
ing their neighbours drink in order to look
upon the darkness of their soul,'' and the dens
the
of creeping things and wild beasts, viz.:
dwelling places of wicked thoughts.
Such
indeed they are, and such teachings do they
discuss writh us.

61. How can it be right to pass by Malachi,
who at one time brings bitter charges against
the priests, and reproaches them with despising

o Mic. iii. 10-12.

8 Joel L «3, scq.

0 lb. vii. 1-4.

y Ps. xii. 1.

c Isa. lviii. 5.

( Hab. i. 2 ct seq.

i| lb. ii. 15.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

Again he reminds them of

the name of the Lord," and explains wherein
they did this, by offering polluted bread upon
the altar, and meat which is not firstfruits,
which they would not have offered to one of
their governors, or,
if they had offered it,
they would have been dishonoured ; yet offer
ing these in fulfilment of a vow to the King I
of the universe, to wit, the lame and the sick,
and the deformed, which are utterly profane |
and loathsome. 0
the covenant of Clod, a covenant of life and j
peace, with, the sons of Levi, and that they
should serve Him in fear, and stand in awe of 1
The law of
the manifestation of His Name.
truth, he says, was in his mouth, and unright
eousness was not found in his lips ; he walked |
with me uprightly in peace, and turned away
many from iniquity : for the priest's lips shall
keep knowledge, and they shall seek the law
at his mouth.
And how honourable and at
the same time how fearful is the cause ! for he
is the messenger of the Lord Almighty. * Al
though I pass over the following imprecations,
as strongly worded,* yet I am afraid of their
This however may be cited without
truth.
offence, to our profit. .
Is it right, he says, to
regard your sacrifice, and receive it with good
will at your hands,' as if he were most highly
incensed, and rejecting their ministrations ow
ing to their wickedness.

62. Whenever I remember Zechariah, I
shudder at the reaping-hook, f and likewise
at his testimony against the priests, his hints
in reference to the celebrated Joshua, the high j
priest, whom he represents as stripped of filthy
and unbecoming garments and then clothed in
rich priestly apparel.'' As for the words and
charges to Joshua which he puts into the an
gel's mouth, let them be treated with silent
respect, as referring perhaps to a greater 6 and
higher object than those who are many priests : '
but even at his right hand stood the devil, to
resist him. A fact, in my eyes, of no slight
significance, and demanding no slight fear and
watchfulness.

63. Who is so bold and adamantine of soul
as not to tremble and be abashed at the charges
andreproachesdelibeYatelyurgedagainst the rest
of the shepherds. A voice, he says, of the howl
ing of the shepherds, for their glory is spoiled.
A voice of the roaring of lions,' for this hath
befallen them.
Does he not all but hear the j
wailing as if close at hand, and himself wail ,

0 lb. i. 13.

Y lb.
a Mai. i. 6.
5-7.
8 Strongly ivorded, 0\a(T<t>ijtiov, pcrh. " ill omened."
if lb. iii. 1 et seq.
f Zech. v. 1 (LXX. ).
f lb. ii. 13.
9 A greater, &c.. i.e. ihcy rcftr to the Person of Jesus Christ
1 Hcb. vii. 23.

a Zech. xi. 3.

Himself.

#

with the afflicted. A little further is a more
striking and impassioned strain.
Feed, he
says, the flock of slaughter, whose jjossessors
slay them without repentance, and they that
sell them say, " Blessed be the Lord, (or we
are rich : " and their own shepherds are with
out feeling for them.
Therefore, I will no
more pity the inhabitants of the land, saith
the Lord Almighty." And again : Awake, O
sword, against the shepherds, and smite the
shepherds, and scatter the sheep, and I will
turn My Hand upon the shepherds ; * and, Mine
anger is kindled against the shepherds, and I
will visit the lambs : * adding to the threat those
who rule over the people.
So industriously
does he apply himself to his task that he can
not easily free himself from denunciations, and
refer to the whole
I am alraid that, did I
This
series, I should exhaust your patience.
must then suffice for Zechariah.

64. Passing by the elders in the book of
Daniel ; 4 for it
is better to pass them by, to
gether with the Lord's righteous sentence and
declaration concerning them, that wickedness
came from Babylon from ancient judges, who
seemed to govern the people ; how are we
affected by Ezekiel, the beholder and expositor
of the mighty mysteries and visions ?
By his
injunction to the watchmen • not to keep silence
concerning vice and the sword impending over
it, a course which would profit neither them
selves nor the sinners ; but rather to keep
watch and forewarn, and thus benefit, at any
rate those who gave warning, if not both those
who spoke and those who heard ?

65. What of his further invective against
the shepherds, Woe shall come upon woe,
and rumour upon rumour, then shall they
seek a vision of the prophet, but the law shall
perish from the priest, and counsel from the
ancients, ( and again, in these terms, Son of
man, say unto her, thou art a land that is not
watered, nor hath rain come upon thee in the
day of indignation: whose princes in the midst
of her are like roaring lions, ravening the prey,
devouring souls in their might. 1
And a little
further on: Her priests have violated My laws
and profaned My holy things, they have put no
difference between the holy and profane, but
all things were alike to them, and they hid
their eyes from My Sabbaths, and I was pro
faned among them.9
He threatens that He
will consume both the wall and them that
daubed it,' that is, those who sin and those
who throw a cloak over them ; as the evil

a Zech. xi. 5, 6.
6 Hist. Susann., 5.
i) lb. xxii. 24 seq.

P lb. xiii. 7.
c Ezck. xxxiii. 2.
0 lb. xxii. a6.

y Tb. jr. 3.
£ lb. vii. 26.
1 lb. xiii. 14.

-

IN DEFENCE OF HIS FLIGHT TO PONTUS.

rulers and priests have done, who caused the
house of Israel to err according to their own
hearts which are estranged in their lusts."

What is the consequence?

66. I also refrain from entering into his dis
cussion of those who feed themselves, devour
the milk, clothe themselves with the wool, kill
them that are fat, but feed not the flock,
strengthen not the diseased, nor bind up that
which is broken, nor bring again that which is
driven away, nor seek that which is lost, nor
keep watch over that which is strong, but
oppress them with rigour, and destroy them
with their pressure ; P so that, because there
was no shepherd, the sheep were scattered
over every plain and mountain, and became
meat for all the fowls and beasts,t because there
was no one to seek for them and bring them
back.
As I live,
saith the Lord, because these things are so, and
My flock became a prey,{ behold I am against
the shepherds, and I will require My flock at
their hands, and will gather them and make
them My own : but the shepherds shall suffer
such and such things, as bad shepherds ought.
67. However, to avoid unreasonably pro
longing my discourse, by an enumeration of
all the prophets, and of the words of them all,
I will mention but one more, who was known
before he was formed, and sanctified from the
womb,' Jeremiah : and will pass over the rest.
He longs for water over his head, and a foun
tain of tears for his eyes, that he may ade
quately weep for Israel ; f and no less does he
bewail the depravity of its rulers.

68. God speaks to him in reproof of the
priests: The priests said not, Where -is the
Lord, and they that handled the law knew
Me not ; the pastors also transgressed against
Again He says to him : The pastors are
Me.'
become brutish, and have not sought the Lord,
and therefore alltheir flock did not understand,
and was scattered.* Again, Many pastors have
destroyed My vineyard, and have polluted My
pleasant portion, till it was reduced to a track
less wilderness.'
He further inveighs against
the pastors again : Woe be to the pastors
that destroy and .scatter the sheep of My pas
ture !
Therefore thus saith the Lord against
them that feed Miy people : Ye have scattered
My flock, and driven them away, and have
not visited them/: behold I will visit upon you
the evil of yoiur doings."
Moreover he bids
the shepherds tip howl, and the rams of the
flock to lament, because the days of their
slaughter are accomplished.*

69. Why need I speak of the things of an
cient days? Who can test himself by the rules
and standards which Paul laid down for bishops
and presbyters, that they are to be temperate,
soberminded, not given to wine, no strikers,
apt to teach, blameless in all things, and be
yond the reach of the wicked," without finding
considerable deflection from the straight line
of the rules? What of the regulations of Jesus
for his disciples, when He sends them to
preach ? P The main object of these is-not to
enter into particulars--that they should be of
such virtue, so simple and modest, and in a
word, so heavenly, that the gospel should make
its way, no less by their character than by
their preaching.

70. I am alarmed by the reproaches of the
Pharisees, the conviction of the Scribes.
For
it is disgraceful for us, who ought greatly sur
pass them, as we are bidden, if we desire the
kingdom of heaven, to be found more deeply
sunk in vice : so that we deserve to be called
serpents, a generation of vipers, and blind
guides, who strain out a gnat and swallow a
camel, or sepulchres foul within, in spite of
our external comeliness, or platters outwardly
clean, and everything else, which they are, or
which is laid to their charge. »

I be confident or to look up.

71. With these thoughts I am occupied
, night and day : they waste my marrow, and
feed upon my flesh, and will not allow me to
They depress my
soul, and abase my mind, and fetter my tongue,
and make me consider, not the*position of a
prelate, or the guidance and direction of others,
which is far beyond my powers ; but how I
myself am to escape the wrath to come, and to
scrape off from myself somewhat of the rust of
vice. A man must himself be cleansed, before
cleansing others: himself become wise, that
he may make others wise ; become light, and
then give light : draw near to God, and so
bring others near ; be hallowed, then hallow
them ; be possessed of hands to lead others
by the hand, of wisdom to give advice.

72. When will this be, say they who are
swift but not sure in every thing, readily build
ing up, readily throwing down. When will the
lamp be upon its stand,* and where is the
Those
talent?' For so they call the grace. f
j who speak thus are more fervent in friendship
than in reverence. You ask me, you men of ex
ceeding courage, when these things shall be,
Not even
and what account I give of them ?
extreme old age would be too long a limit to

* Kzek. xiv. 5.
8 !b. xxxiv. 8.
»( lb. ii. 8.

H lb. xxxiv. 2 et scq.
A Jcr. i. 5.
fj lb. x. 21.

y lb. xxxix. 17.
£ lb. ix. 1.
t lb. xii. 10.
A lb. xxv. 34.

k lb. xxiii. lA 2.

a 1 Tim. iii. 2. 3 ; Tit. L 7.
y S. Matt, xxiii. 13 et scq.

13 S. Matt. x. 9 ; S. Luke ix. 3.
6 lb. v. 15.

« lb. xxv. 15.

£ " The grace " i.e. the grace of the priesthood.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

assign.
For hoary hairs combined with pruence are better than inexperienced youth, wellreasoned hesitation than inconsiderate haste,
and a brief reign than a long tyranny : just
as a small portion honourably won is better
than considerable possessions which are dis
honourable and uncertain, a little gold than a
great weight of lead, a little light than much
darkness.

73. But this speed, in its untrustworthiness
and excessive haste, is in danger of being like
the seeds which fell upon the rock,a and, be
cause they had no depth of earth/ sprang up at
once, but could not bear even the first heat of
the sun ; or like the foundation laid upon the
sand,> which could not even make a slight re
sistance to the rain and the winds. Woe to
thee, O city, whose king is a child,4 says Solo
Be not hasty of speech,' says Solomon
mon.
again, asserting that hastiness of speech is less
serious than heated action.
And who, in spite
of all this, demands haste rather than security
and utility? Who can mould, as clay-figures
are modelled in a single day, the defender of
the truth, who is to take his stand with Angels,
and give glory with Archangels, and cause the
sacrifice to ascend to the altar on high, and
share the priesthood of Christ, and renew the
creature, and set forth the image, and create
inhabitants for the world above, aye and, great
est of all, be God, and make others to be God ?
74. I know Whose ministers we are, and
where we are placed, and whither we are
guides. I know the height of God, and the
weakness of man, and, on the contrary, his
power.
Heaven is high, and the earth deep ; f
and who of those who have been cast down by
sin shall ascend ? » Who that is as yet surrounded
by the gloom here below, and by the grossness
of the flesh can purely gaze with his whole
mind upon that whole mind, and amid unstable
and visible things hold intercourse with the
stable and invisible ?
For hardly may one of
those who have been most specially purged, be
hold here even an image of the Good, as men
see the sun in the water. Who hath measured
the water with his hand, and the heaven with
a span, and the whole earth in a measure?
Who hath weighed the mountains in scales, and
the hills in a balance? •
What is the place of
his rest?' and to whom shall he be likened?"
75. Who is it, Who made all things by His
Word/ and formed man by His Wisdom, and
gathered into one things scattered abroad, and
mingled dust with spirit, and compounded an
0 S. Matt. xiii. 5.
« Prov. xxix. 20.
0 Isai. xl. 12,
k lb. xl. 18, 25.

a S Luke viii. 6.
6 Kcclcs. x. 16.
i) Ps. xxiv. 3.

y lb. vii. 26.
£ lb. xxv 3.
t lb. Ixvi. x.

A Ps. xxxiii. 6.

animal visible and invisible, temporal and im
mortal, earthly and heavenly, able to attain to
God but not to comprehend Him, drawing
I said, I will be wise,
near and yet afar off.
says Solomon, but she (i.e. Wisdom) was far
from me beyond what is : * and, Verily, he that
increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow.'* For
the joy of what we have discovered is no
greater than the pain of what escapes us ; a
pain, I imagine, like that felt by those who are
dragged, while yet thirsty, from the water, or
are unable to retain what they think they hold,
or are suddenly left in the dark by a flash of
lightning.

able to contain

76. This depressed and kept me humble,
and persuaded me that it was better to hear
the voice of praise v than to be an expounder
of truths beyond my power ; the majesty, and
the height, and the dignity, and the pure
natures scarce
the bright
ness of God, Whom the deep covers, Whose
secret place is darkness,* since He is the purest
light,* which most men cannot approach unto ;
this universe, and again is
Who is in all
beyond the universe ; Who is all goodness,( and
beyond all goodness ; Who enlightens the mind,
and escapes the quickness and height of the
mind, ever retiring as much as He is appre
hended, and by His flight and stealing away
when grasped, withdrawing to the things above
one who is enamoured of Him.

For myself,

7 7 . Such and so great is the object of our
longing zeal, and such a man should he be,
who prepares and conducts souls to their es
pousals.
I feared to be cast,
bound hand and foot,' from the bride-chamber,
for not having on a weddipg-garment, and for
having rashly intruded among those who there
And yet I had been invited from
sit at meat.
my youth, if I may speak of what most men
know not, and had been cast upon Him from
the womb,9 and presented by the promise of my
mother, afterwards confirmed in the hour of
danger : and my longing grW up with it, and
my reason agreed to it, and) I gave as an offer
ing my all to Him Who \had won me and
saved me, my property, my
name, my health,
my very words, from which
only gained the
advantage of being able to
iespise them, and
of having something in comr
Dn of which I
preferred Christ.
ards of God were
made sweet as honeycombs ' tcS me, and I cried
after knowledge and lifted nip my voice for
wisdom." There was moreovejr the moderation
of anger, the curbing of th<p tongue, the re
) y Ps. xxvi. 7 (LXX.).
(3 lb. i. 18.
s Kxod. xxxiii. 19.
ci Tim. vi. 16. f
9 Ps. xxii. 11.
\
* Prov. ii, 3.
J

a Ecdes. vii. 24.
8 lb. xviii. 12 : civ 6.
7) S. Matt. xxii. 13.
1 lb. xix. 10 ; cxix. 103.

And the v _

IN DEFENCE OF HIS FLIGHT TO PONTUS.

straint of the eyes, the discipline of the belly,
and the trampling under loot of the glory
which clings to the earth.
I speak foolishly,"
but it shall be said, in these pursuits I was
perhaps not inferior to many.

78. One branch of philosophy is, however,
too high for me, the commission to guide and
govern souls-and before I have rightly learned
to submit to a shepherd, or have had my soul
duly cleansed, the charge of caring for a flock :
especially in times like these, when a man,
seeing everyone else rushing hither and thither
in confusion, is content to flee from the melee
and escape, in sheltered retirement, from the
storm and gloom of the wicked one : when
the members are at war with one another, and
the slight remains of love, which once ex
isted, have departed, and priest is a mere empty
name, since, as it is said, contempt 0 has been
poured upon princes.''

79. Would that it were merely empty ! And
now may their blasphemy fall upon the head of
All fear has been banished from
the ungodly !
shamelessness has taken its place, and
souls,
knowledge5 and the deep things of the Spirit*
are at the disposal of anyone who will ; and we
all become pious by simply condemning the
impiety of others ; and we claim the services of
ungodly judges/ and fling that which is holy to
the dogs, and cast pearls Ijefore swine,1 by pub
lishing divine things in the hearing of profane
souls, and, wretches that we are, carefully ful
fil the prayers of our enemies, and are not
ashamed to go a whoring with our own inven
tions.*
Moabites and Ammonites, who were
not permitted even to enter the Church of the
Lord,1 frequent our most holy rites. We have
opened to all not the gates of righteousness,"
but, doors of railing and partizan arrogance ;
and the first place among us is given, not to
one who in the fear of God refrains from even
an idle word, but to him who can revile his
neighbour most fluently, whether explicitly, or
• who rolls beneath his
by covert allusion ;
tongue mischief and iniquity, or to speak more
accurately, the poison of asps. A

80. We observe each other's sins, not to
bewail them, but to make them subjects of
reproach, not to heal them, but to aggravate
them, and excuse our own evil deeds by the
wounds of our neighbours. Bad and good men
are distinguished not according to personal

0 Ps. cvii. 40.

a 2 Cor. xi. 33.
y Princes, apvofrac.

i.e. The office of the priesthood, which is
one of dignity, has been brought into contempt by the unworthiness
of those ordained to it, who have, by their want of the virtues re
quisite for their office, made it an empty name-and, not only so,
but have been actively vicious.

8 Knowledge, &c.
« 1 Cor. ii. 10.
1 Dent xxui. 3.

fib. vi. 1. 7.

cf. the ironical passage, %% 49, so.
k Ps. cxviii. 19.

rj S. Matt. vu. 6.

A lb. x. 7. cxl. 3.

9 Ps. cvi. 39.

character, but by their disagreement or friend
ship with ourselves. We praise one day what
we revile the next, denunciation at the hands
of others is a passport to our admiration ; so
magnanimous are we in our viciousness, that
everything is frankly forgiven to impiety.

81. Everything has reverted to the origi
nal state of things'1 before the world, with its
present fair order and form, came into being.
The general confusion and irregularity cry for
some organising hand and power.
Or, if you
will, it is like a battle at night by the faint
light of the moon, when none can discern the
faces of friends or foes ; or like a sea fight on
the surge, with the driving winds, and boiling
foam, and dashing waves, and crashing vessels,
with the thrusts of poles, the pipes of boat
swains, the groans of the fallen, while we make
our voices heard above the din, and not know
ing what to do, and having, alas ! no oppor
tunity for showing our valour, assail one an
other, and fall by one another's hands.

82. Nor indeed is there any distinction be
tween the state of the people and that of the
priesthood : but it seems to me to be a simple
fulfilment of the ancient curse, "As with the
people so with the priest." ? Nor again are the
great and eminent men affected otherwise than
the majority ; nay, they are openly at war with
the priests, and their piety is an aid to their
powers of persuasion.
And indeed, provided
that it be on behalf of the faith, and of the
highest and most important questions, let them
be thus disposed, and I blame them not ; nay,
to say the truth, I go so far as to praise and
congratulate them.
Yea ! would that I were
one of those who contend and incur hatred for
the truth's sake : or rather, I can boast of being
For better is a laudable war
one of them.
than a peace which severs a man from God :
and therefore it
is that the Spirit arms the
gentle warrior, as one who is able to wage war
in a good cause.

83. But at the present time there are some
who go to war even about small matters and to
no purpose, and, with great ignorance and auda
city, accept, as an associate in their ill-doing,
anyone whoever he may be.
Then every
one makes the faith his pretext, and this ven
erable name is dragged into their private quar
rels.
Consequently, as was probable, we are
hated, even among the Gentiles, and, what is
harder still, we cannot say that this is .with
Nay, even the best of our
out just cause.
own people are scandalized, while this result
is not surprising in the case of the multitude,

a Gen. i. a.

|3 Isai. xxiv. 2 ; Hos. iv. g.

who are ill-disposed to accept anything that
is good.

84. Sinners are planning upon our backs ; "
and what we devise against each other, they
turn against us all : and we have become a new
spectacle, not to angels and men,P as says Paul,
that bravest of athletes, in his contest with prin
cipalities and powers,> but to almost all wicked
men, and at every time and place, in the pub
lic squares, at carousals, at festivities, and times
of sorrow.
Nay, we have already-I can
scarcely speak of it without tears-been repre
sented on the stage, amid the laughter of the
most licentious, and the most popular of all
dialogues and scenes is the caricature of a Chris
tian.

85. These are the results of our intestine
warfare, and our extreme readiness to strive
about goodness and gentleness, and our inex
pedient excess of love for God.
Wrestling,
or any other athletic contest, is only permitted
according to fixed laws, and the man will be
shouted down and disgraced, and lose the vic
tory, who breaks the laws of wrestling, or acts
unfairly in any other contest, contrary to the
rules laid down for the contest, however able
and skilful he may be ; and shall anyone con
tend for Christ in an unchristlike manner, and
yet be pleasing to peace for having fought un
lawfully in her name.

86. Yea, even now, when Christ is invoked,
the devils tremble,* and not even by our illdoing has the pow'er of this Name been ex
tinguished, while we are not ashamed to insult
a cause and name so venerable ; shouting it,
and having it shouted in return, almost in
public, and every day ; for My Name is blas
phemed among the Gentiles because of you.*

87. Of external warfare I am not afraid,
nor of that wild beast, and fulness of evil,
who has now arisen against the churches,
though he may threaten fire, sword, wild
beasts, precipices, chasms ; though he may
show himself more inhuman than all previous
madmen, and discover fresh tortures of greater
I have one remedy for them all,
severity.
one road to victory ;
I will glory in Christ fnamely, death for Christ's sake.

88. For my own warfare, however, I am at
a loss what course to pursue, what alliance,
what word of wisdom, what grace to devise,
with what panoply to arm myself, against the
wiles-of the wicked one.'' What Moses is to
conquer him by stretching out his hands upon
the mount,8 in order that the cross, thus typi-

aP%. exxix. 3 (I.XX.).
5 S. James ii. 19.
£ Phil. iii. 3.

B i Cor. iv. 9.

c Isai. lii. 5 ; Rom. ii. 34.

y F.ph. vi. 12.
0 Exod. xvii. 11.

i) Eph. vi. ii.

fied and prefigured, may prevail ?
What
Joshua, as his successor, arrayed alongside the
Captain of the Lord's hosts?0 What David,
either by harping, or fighting with his sling,*
and girded by God with strength unto the
battle,'!' and. with his fingers trained to war?4
What Samuel, praying* and sacrificing for the
people, and anointing as king one who can
gain the victory ? What Jeremiah, by writ
ing lamentations for Israel, is fitly to lament
these things?

89. Who will cry aloud, Spare Thy People,
0 Lord, and give not Thine heritage to re
the nations should rule over
proach, that
them?f
What Noah, and Job,i and Daniel,
who are reckoned together as men of prayer,
will pray for us, that we may have a slight res
pite from warfare, and recover ourselves, and
recognize one another for a while, and no
longer, instead of united Israel, be Judah ' and
Israel, Rehoboam and Jeroboam, Jerusalem
and Samaria, in turn delivered up because of
our sins, and in turn lamented.

90. For I own that I am too weak for this
warfare, and therefore turned my back, hiding
my face in the rout, and sat solitary,' because
1 was filled with bitterness" and sought to be
silent, understanding that it
is an evil time,*
that the beloved had kicked," that we were
become backsliding children," who are the
luxuriant vine,* the true vine, all fruitful, all
beautiful," springing up splendidly with show
ers from on high."' For the diadem of beauty."
the signet of glory," the crown of magnifi
cence T has been changed for me into shame ;
and if anyone, in face of these things, is daring
and courageous, he has my blessing on his dar
ing and courage.

91. I have said nothing yet of the internal
warfare within ourselves, and in our pasfions,
in which we are engaged night and day against
the body of our humiliation," either secretly
or openly, and against the tide which tosses and
whirls us hither and thither, by the aid of our
senses and other sources of the pleasures of this
life; and against the miry clay* in which we
have been fixed ; and against the law of sin,*
which wars against the law of the spirit, and
strives to destroy the royal image in us, and
all the divine emanation which has been be
stowed upon us ; so that it is difficult for any
one, either by a long course of philosophic

a Josh. v. 14.
6 lb. cxliv. 1.
71 Ezek. xiv. 14, 20.
1 l.am. iii. 28.
M Deut. xxxii. 15.
ojer. ii. 21 ; x. 16.
9 K.zek. xxviii. 12.

01 Sam. xvi. 16: xvii. 49.
* 1 Sam. vii. 5.

y Ps. xviii. 39.
£ Joel ii. 17. _
9 Jutiah, etc., cf Oral. vi. 7 ; xxxii. 4.
A Mic. ii. 3.
£ Hos. X. 1.
p l*ai. Uii. 3.
u Phil. iii. 21.

k lb. iii. 19.
v Jcr. iii. 14.
wPs. Ixv. 10.
r lb. xxiii. 42.

^ Ps. xl. 2 ; Ixix. 2.

X Rom. vii. 23.

IN DEFENCE OF HIS FLIGHT TO PONTUS.

training, and gradual separation of the noble
and enlightened part of the soul from that
which is debased and yoked with darkness, or
by the mercy of God, or by both together, and
by a constant practice of looking upward, to
overcome the depressing power of matter.
And before a man has,
as far as possible,
gained this superiority, and sufficiently puri
fied his mind, and far surpassed his fellows in
nearness to God, I do not think it safe for
him to be entrusted with the rule over souls,
or the office of mediator (for such, I take it, a
priest is) between God and man.

92. What is

it that has induced this fear
in me, that, instead of supposing me to be
needlessly afraid, you may highly commend
my foresight?
I hear from Moses himself,
when God spake to him, that, although many
were bidden to come to the mount, one of
whom was even Aaron, with his two sons who
were priests, and seventy elders of the senate,
the rest were ordered to worship afar otT, and
Moses alone to draw near, and the people
For it is not
were not to go up with him."
everyone who may draw near to God, but
only one who, like Moses, can bear the glory
of God.
Moreover, before this, when the law
was first given, the trumpet-blasts, and light
nings, and thunders, and darkness, and the
smoke of the whole mountain,'3 and the terrible
threats that if even a beast touched the moun
tain it should be stoned,* and other like alarms,
kept back the rest of the people, for whom it
was a great privilege, after careful purification,
merely to hear the voice of God.
But Moses
actually went up and entered into the cloud,5
and was charged with the law, and received
the tables, which belong, for the multitude, to
the letter, but, for those who are above the
multitude, to the spirit.'

93. I hear again that Nadab and Abihu,
for having merely offered incense with strange
fire, were with strange fire destroyed. £ the in
strument of their impiety being used for their
punishment, and their destruction following
at the very time and place of their sacrilege;
and not even their father Aaron, who was
next to Moses in the favor of God, could save
I know also of Eli the priest, and a
them.
little later of Uzzah, the former made to pay
the penalty for his sons' transgression, in dar
ing to violate the sacrifices by an untimely
exaction of the first fruits of the cauldrons, al
though he did not condone their impiety, but
frequently rebuked them ; 1 the other, because

a Exod. xxiv. i, 2.

4 Exod.

y Heb. xii. 18.
£ Lev. x. z.

. 15. 18.

0 lb. xix. 16.

€ 2 Cor. iii. 6, 7.

ij 1 Sam. ii. 12, 15, 23.

he only touched the ark, which was being
thrown off the cart by the ox," and though he
saved it, was himself destroyed,
in God's
jealousy for the reverence due to the ark.

94. I know also that not even bodily blem
ishes in either priests'1 or victims »
passed
without notice, but that it was required by the
law that perfect sacrifices must be offered by
perfect men-a symbol, I take it, of integrity
of soul.
It was not lawful for everyone to
touch the priestly vesture, or any of the holy
vessels ; nor might the sacrifices themselves be
consumed except by the proper persons, and
at the proper time and place ; { nor might the
anointing oil nor the compounded incense" be
imitated ; nor might anyone enter the temple
who was not in the most minute particular
pure in both soul and body ; so far was the
Holy of holies removed from presumptuous
access, that it might be entered by one man
only once a year ; f so far were the veil, and
the mercy-seat, and the ark, and the Cheru
bim, from the general gaze and touch.

95. Since then I knew these things, and that
no one is worthy of the mightiness of God,
and the sacrifice, and priesthood, who has
not first presented himself to God, a living,
holy sacrifice, and set forth the reasonable,
well-pleasing service,'' and sacrificed to God
the sacrifice of praise and the contrite spirit,8
which is the only sacrifice required of us by
the Giver of all ; how could I dare to offer to
Him the external sacrifice, the antitype of the
great mysteries,1 or clothe myself with the
garb and name of priest,
before my hands
had been consecrated by holy works ; before
my eyes had been accustomed to gaze safely
upon created things, with wonder only for the
Creator, and without injury to the creature ;
before my ear had been sufficiently opened to
the instruction of the Lord, and He had opened
mine ear to hear* without heaviness, and had
set a golden earring with precious sardius, that
is, a wise man's word in an obedient ear ; x be
fore my mouth had been opened to draw in
the Spirit,'' and opened wide to be filled " with
the spirit of speaking mysteries and doctrines ; *
and my lips bound,0 to use the words of wis
dom, by divine knowledge, and, as I would
add, loosed in due season : before my tongue
had been filled with exultation, and become
an instrument of Divine melody, awaking

f& Lev. xxi. 17.

a 2 Sam. vi. 6.
5 lb. viii. 31.
f I,cv. xvi. 34 ; Heb. ix. 7.
1 Tke great mysteries, i e., the Sacrificial Death of Christ upon
x Isai. 1. 4 : vi. 10.
X Prov. xxv. 12.
v lb. lxxxt. 10.

y lb. xxii. 19.
9 Ps. 1. 14.

0 Prov. xv. 7 (LXX?).

« Exod. xxx. 33, 28.

p Ps. cxix. 131.

£ 1 Cor. xiv. a.

^ Rom. xii. 1.

the Cross.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

with glory, awaking right early,0 and labor
ing till it cleave to my jaws : 3 before my feet
had been set upon the rock,? made like hart's
feet, and my footsteps directed in a godly
fashion so that they should not well-nigh slip,8
nor slip at all ; before all my members had
become instruments of righteousness, ■ and all
mortality had been put off, and swallowed up
of life,i and had yielded to the Spirit?

96. Who is the man, whose heart has never
been made to burn,'' as the Scriptures have
been opened to him, with the pure words of
God which have been tried in a furnace ; 9 who
has not, by a triple ' inscription " of them upon
the breadth of his heart, attained the mind of
Christ ; A nor been admitted to the treasures
which to most men remain hidden, secret, and
dark, to gaze upon the riches therein," and
become able to enrich others, comparing spir
itual things with spiritual.''

97. Who is the man who has never beheld, as
our duty is to behold it, the fair beauty of the
Lord, nor has visited His temple,f or rather,
become the temple of God,° and the habitation
of Christ in the Spirit ? 9 Who is the man who
has never recognized the correlation and dis
tinction between figures and the truth, so that
by withdrawing from the former and cleaving
to the latter, and by thus escaping from the
oldness of the letter and serving the newness
of the spirit, " he may clean pass over to grace
from the law, which finds its spiritual fulfil
ment in the dissolution of the body.0,

98. Who is the man who has never, by ex
perience and contemplation, traversed the en
tire series of the titles T and powers of Christ,
both those more lofty ones which originally
were His, and those more lowly ones which
He later assumed for our sake-viz.: God, the
Son, the Image, the Word, the Wisdom, the
Truth, the Light, the Life, the Power, the Va
pour, the Emanation, the Effulgence, the Mak
er, the King, the Head, the Law, the Way,
the Door, the Foundation, the Rock, the
Pearl, the Peace, the Righteousness, theSanctification, the Redemption, the Man, the Ser
vant, the Shepherd, the Lamb, the High Priest,
the Victim, the Firstborn before creation, the
Firstborn from the dead, the Resurrection :
who is the man who hearkens, but pays no

c Rom. vi. 13.

^ lb. cxxxvii. 6.

y lb. xviii. 33 : xl. 3.
£ 2 Cor. v. 4.

a Ps. Ivii. 9.
6 lb. Ixxiii. a.
7} S. I.uttc xxiv. 3a.
$ Ps. xii. 7.
1 Trifilr, a quotation from Prov. xxii. 20. The meaning of the
Hebrew is doubtful.
Cl^mencet, not noticing this, suggests that
the allusion is to the law being twice inscribed on tables of stone,
once on the heart by the Spirit.
p Isai. xlv. 3.
k Prov. xxii. 20 (LXX.).
v 1 Cor. ii. 13.
02 Cor. vi. 16.
ff Rom. vi. 6.
irK.ph. ii. 32.
rmfttUs. These are more fully dealt with Orat. xxx. t7-ai.

K t Cor. ii. 16.
( Ps. xxvii. 4.
p lb. vii. 6.

heed, to these names so pregnant with reality,
and has never yet held communion with, nor
been made partaker of, the Word, in any of
relations signified by each of these
the real
names which He bears ?

99. Who, in fine, is the man who, although
he has never applied himself to, nor learnt to
speak, the hidden wisdom of God in a mys
tery," although he is still a babe, still fed with
milk,0 still of those who are not numbered in
Israel,t nor enrolled in the army of God, al
though he is not yet able to take up the Cross
of Christ like a man, although he is possibly
not yet one of the more honorable members,
yet will joyfully and eagerly accept his appoint
ment as head of the fulness of Christ ? * No one,
if he will listen to my judgmertt and accept
my advice !
This is of all things most to be
feared, this is the extremest of dangers in the
eyes of everyone who understands the magni
tude of success, the utter ruin of failure.

100. Let others sail for merchandise, I used
to say, and cross the wide oceans, and constantly
contend with winds and waves, to gain great
wealth, if so it should chance, and run great
risks in their eagerness for sailing and mer
chandise; but, for my part, I greatly prefer
to stay ashore and plough a short but pleasant
furrow, saluting at a respectful distance the sea
and its gains, to live as best I can upon a poor
and scanty store of barley-bread, and drag my
life along in safety and calm, rather than ex
pose myself to so long and great a risk for the
sake of great gains.

101. For one in high estate, if he fail to
make further progress and to disseminate virtue
still more widely, and contents himself with
slight results, incurs punishment, as having
spent a great light upon the illumination of a
little house, or girt round the limbs of a boy
the full armor of a man. On the contrary, a
man of low estate may with safety assume a
light burden, and escape the risk of the ridi
cule and increased danger which would attend
him if he attempted a task beyond his powers.
For, as we have hearS, it
is not seemly for a
man to build a tower, unless he has sufficient
to finish it.*

102. Such is the defence which I have been
able to make, perhaps at immoderate length,
Such are the reasons which, to
for my flight.
my pain and possibly to yours,
carried me
away from you, my friends and brothers ; yet,
as it seemed to me at the time, with irresistible
force. My longing after you, and the sense
of your longing for me, have, more than any-

a 1 Cor. ii. 17.

6 Eph. i. 33

0 lb. iii. 2.

y Numb. i. 3.

• S. Luke xtv. 28.

IN DEFENCE OF HIS FLIGHT TO PONTUS.

• 225

thing else, led to my return, for nothing in
clines us so strongly to love as mutual affec
tion.

103. In the next place there was my care, my
duty, the hoar hairs and weakness of my holy
parents, who were more greatly distressed on
my account than by their advanced age-of
this Patriarch Abraham whose person is hon
ored by me, and numbered among the angels,
and of Sarah, who travailed in my spiritual
birth by instructing me in the truth.
Now, I
had specially pledged myself to become the
stay of their old age and the support of their
weakness, a pledge which, to the best of my
power, I have fulfilled, even at the expense of
philosophy itself, the most precious of posses
sions and titles to me ; or, to speak more truly,
although I made it the first object of my phil
osophy to appear to be no philosopher, I could
not bear that my labor in consequence of a
single purpose should be wasted, nor yet that
that blessing should be lost, which one of the
saints of old is said to have stolen from his
father, whom he deceived by the food which
he offered to him, and the hairy appearance
he assumed, thus attaining a good object by
disgraceful trickery." These are the two causes
of my submission and tractability.
it,
perchance, unreasonable that my arguments
should yield and submit to them both, for
there is a time to be conquered, as I also think
there is for every purpose, 3 and it is better to
be honorably overcome than to win a danger
ous and lawless victory.

Nor is

104. There is a third reason of the highest
importance which I will further mention, and
then dismiss the rest.
I remembered the days
of old,v and, recurring to one of the ancient
histories, drew counsel for myself therefrom as
to my present conduct; for let us not suppose
these events to have been recorded without a
purpose, nor that they are a mere assemblage
of words and deeds gathered together for the
pastime of those who listen to them, as a kind
of bait for the ears, for the sole purpose of
giving pleasure.
Let us leave such jesting to
the legends and the Greeks, who think but
little of the truth, and enchant ear and mind
by the charm of their fictions and the dainti
ness of their style.

105. We however, who extend the accuracy
of the Spirit to the merest stroke and tittle,8 will
never admit the impious assertion that even
the smallest matters were dealt with haphazard
by those who ha'e recorded them, and have
thus been borne in mind down to the present

a Gen. xxvit. 91, sq
y Ps. cxliiu s.
»5

/> Ecclcs. iii. I.
{ S. Matt. v. 18.

day : on the contrary, their purpose has been
to supply memorials and instructions for our
consideration
under similar circumstances,
should such befall us, and that the examples
of the past might serve as rules and models,
for our warning and imitation.

106. What then is the story, and wherein lies
its application?
For, perhaps, it would not
be amiss to relate it, for the general security.
Jonah also was fleeing from the face of God,"
or rather, thought that he was fleeing : but he
was overtaken by tne sea, and the storm, and
the lot, and the whale's belly, and the three
days' entombment, the type of a greater mys
tery.
He fled from having to announce the
dread and awful message to the Ninevites,
and from being subsequently, if the city was
saved by repentance, convicted of falsehood :
not that he was displeased at the salvation of
the wicked, but he was ashamed of being
made an instrument of falsehood, and exceed
ingly zealous for the credit of prophecy, which
was in danger of being destroyed in his per
son, since most men are unable to penetrate
the depth of the Divine dispensation in such
cases.

107. But, as I have learned from a man^
skilled in these subjects, and able to grasp the
depth of the prophet, by means o£a reasonable
explanation of what seems unreasonable in the
history, it was not this which caused Jonah
to flee, and carried him to Joppa and again
from Joppa to Tarshish, when he entrusted his
stolen self to the sea: » for it was not likely
that such a prophet should be ignorant of the
design of God, viz., to bring about, by means
of the threat, the escape of the Ninevites from
the threatened doom, according to His great
wisdom, and unsearchable judgments, and ac
cording to His ways which are beyond our
tracing and finding out ; 4 nor that, if he knew
this he would refuse to co-operate with God
in the use of the means which He designed
Besides, to imagine that
for their salvation.
Jonah hoped to hide himself at sea, and escape
by his flight the great eye of God, is surely
utterly absurd and stupid, and unworthy of
credit, not only in the case of a prophet, but

a Jonah i. 3.

A man. A Greek scholiast says that this was Origen (ob.
a. n. 235), who gives this interpretation in his commentary on the
prophecy of Jonah.
Elias says that he had read it in the commen
tary of Methodius (fl. A.n. 300), who usually combats Origen's in
terpretations. We know that Origen did comment on the book of
Job. and that Methodius wrote on one at least of the Minor Proph
ets : but both these works have been lost, so that we cannot
absolutely decide the question, though the assurance with which
both the notes are written makes us hesitate to consider either of
them merely a happy guess.
Combefis thinks that^S. Greg,
alludes to one of his own instructors : the gen. with axovw (cf.
Plato, Gorg., 503. c.) favours this view, but the interpretation may
well have been derived from one of the earlier writers.

6 Rom. xi. 33,

y Jonah i. 3.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

even in the case of any sensible man, who has
only a slight perception of God, Whose power
is over all.

108. On the contrary, as my instructor said,
and as I am myself convinced, Jonah knew
better than any one the purpose of his message
to the Ninevites, and that, in planning his
flight, although he changed his place, he did
not escape from God.
Nor is this possible
for any one else, either by concealing himself
in the bosom of the earth, qr in the depths of
the sea, or by soaring on wings, if there be
any means of doing so, and rising into the
air, or by abiding in the lowest depths of hell, a
or by enveloping himself in a thick cloud,
or by any other of the many devices for en
suring escape.
For God alone of all things
cannot be escaped from or contended with ;
if He wills to seize and bring them under His
hand, He outstrips the swift, He outwits the
wise, He overthrows the strong, He abases
the lofty, He subdues rashness, He represses
power.

109. Jonah then was not ignorant of the
mighty hand of God, with which he threatened
other men, nor did he imagine that he could
utterly escape the Divine power ; this we arcnot to believe : but when he saw the falling
away of Israel-, and perceived the passing over of
the grace of prophecy to the Gentiles-this was
the cause of his retirement from preaching and
of his delay in fulfilling the command ; accord
ingly he left the watchtower of joy,(for this is
the meaning of Joppa in Hebrew, I mean his
former dignity and reputation, and flung him
self into the deep of sorrow : and hence he is
tempest-tossed, and falls asleep, and is wrecked,
and aroused from sleep, and taken by lot, and
confesses his flight, and is cast into sea, and
swallowed, but not destroyed, by the whale ;
but there he calls upon God, and, marvellous
as it is, on the third day he, like Christ, is
delivered : but my treatment of this topic must
stand over, and shall shortly, if God permit,
be more deliberately worked out.0

1 10. Now however, to return to my original
point, the thought and question occurred to
me, that although he might possibly meet with
some indulgence, if reluctant to prophesy, for
the cause which I mentioned-yet, in my own
case, what could be said, what defence could
be made, if I longer remained restive, and re
jected the yoke of ministry, which, though I
know not whether to call it light or heavy,
had at any rate been laid upon me.

a Ps. exxxix. 8 ct scq.
0 Shalt be -forked out.

lis, was
fulfilled by S. Gregory in his History of Kzekicl the Prophet, a
work no longer extant

This promise, as Eltas tells

in. For if it be granted, and this alone can
be strongly asserted in such matters, that we
are far too low to perform the priest's office
before God, and that we can only be worthy
of the sanctuary after we have become worthy
of the Church, ■ and worthy of the post of pre
sident, after being worthy of the sanctuary, yet
some one else may perhaps refuse to acquit us
on the charge of disobedience. Now terrible
are the threatenings against disobedience, and
terrible are the penalties which ensue upon
it ; as indeed are those on the other side, if,
instead of being reluctant, and shrinking back,
and concealing ourselves as Saul did among
his father's stuffP -although called to rule but
for a short time-if, I say, we come forward
readily, as though to a slight and most easy
is not safe even to resign it,

nor to amend by second thoughts our first.

I task, whereas it

112. On this account I had much toilsome
consideration to discover my duty, being set
in the midst betwixt two fears, of which the
one held me back, the other urged me on.
For a long while I was at a loss between them,
and after wavering from side to side, and, like a
current driven by inconstant winds, inclining
first in this direction, then in that, I at last
yielded to the stronger, and the fear of diso
bedience overcame me, and has carried me off.
Pray, mark how accurately and justly I hold
the balance between the fears, neither desiring
an office not given tome, nor rejecting it when
given.
The one course marks the rash, the
other the disobedient, both the undisciplined.
My position lies between those who are too
bold, or too timid ; more timid than those who
rush at every position, more bold than those
who avoid them all.
This is my judgment on
the matter.

113. Moreover, to distinguish still more
clearly between them, we have, against the fear
of office, a possible help in the law of obedience,
inasmuch as God in His goodness rewards our
faith, and makes a perfect ruler of the man
who has confidence in 'Him, and places all
his hopes in Him ; but against the danger
J of disobedience I know of nothing which
en
' can help
us,
courage our confidence.
For it is to be feared
that we shall have to hear these words con
cerning those who have been entrusted to us :
their souls at your hands ; *
S. Gregory seems o describe a series of
three steps, (t) the Church, nt which all should l>e worthy mem
bers. (2) the Sanctuary, reserved for the Priests, (3) the Throne
of the liishop.
Clemencet refers both - and 2 to the ministry.
If we suppose S. Gregory's own posit on to be referred to, the
third would be applicable to his offioj under his father, which
{Disc.
is held by Thomassin to have been that of Vicar-General
2, 3). A similar po-.t was offered to him by S.
Kccles.. 1.. ii., 7

will require
aO/the Church.

and of no ground to

1 Basil (Orat., xliii., 39).

j3 1 Sam. x. 22.

y Ezek. iii. 16.

TO THOSE WHO HAD INVITED HIM.

and, Because ye have rejected me, and not
been leaders and rulers of ray people, I also
will reject you, that I should not be king over
you ; 0 and, As ye refused to hearken to My
voice, and turned a stubborn back, and were
disobedient, so shall it be when ye call upon
Me, and I will not regard nor give ear to your
prayer.^ God forbid that these words should
come to us from the just Judge, for when we
sing of His mercy we must also by all means
sing of His judgment.*

114. I resort once again to history, and on
considering the men of best repute in ancient
days, who were ever preferred by grace to the
office of ruler or prophet, I discover that some
readily complied with the call, others depre
cated the gift, and that neither those who drew
back were blamed for timidity, nor those who
came forward for eagerness.
The former stood
in awe of the greatness of the ministry, the
latter trustfully obeyed Him Who called them.
Aaron was eager, but Moses resisted,4 Isaiah
readily submitted, but Jeremiah was afraid of
his youth,* and did not venture to prophesy
until he had received from God a promise and
power beyond his years, f

115. By these arguments I charmed myself,
and by degrees my soul relaxed and became
ductile, like iron, and time came to the aid of
my arguments, and the testimonies of God, to
which I had entrusted my whole life, were my
counsellors.'
Therefore I was not rebellious,
neither turned away back,* saith my Lord,
when, instead of being called to rule, He was
led, as a sheep to the slaughter ; ' but I fell down
and humbled myself under the mighty hand of
God," and asked pardon for ray former idle
ness and disobedience, if this is at all laid to
my charge.
I held my peace,* but I will not
I withdrew for a
hold my peace for ever :
little while," till I had considered myself and
consoled my grief: but now I am commis
sioned to exalt Him in the congregation of
the people, and praise Him in the seat of
If my former conduct deserved
the elders.1'
blame, my present action merits pardon.

116. What further need is there of words.
Here am I, my pastors and fellow-pastors, here
am I, thou holy flock, worthy of Christ, the
Chief Shepherd,i here am I, my father, ut
terly vanquished, and your subject accord
ing to the laws of Christ rather than accord
ing to those of the land :° here is my obedi-

« 1 Sam. xv. 26 ; cf. Hos. iv. 6.
6 Exod. iv. io, 13, 27.
y Ps. ci. 1.
1) Pa. cxix. 24.
i Jer. i. 6.
» lb. liii. 7.
k 1 Pet. v. 6.
v Ps. cvii. 32.
I» lb. xxvi. 20.
o Ofthe land, lit.. " external," i.e.. the Roman laws, which gave

0 Zcch. vii. 11, 13.
e Isai. VI. 8.
$ Isai. 1. 6.
A Isai. xlii. 14.
f I Pet. v. 4.

absolute power to a father over his children.

ence, reward it with your blessing.
Lead me
with your prayers, guide me with. your words,
establish me with your spirit.
The blessing
of the father establisheth the houses of chil
dren," and would that both I and this spiritual
house may be established, the house which I
have longed for, which I pray may be my rest
for ever,3 when I have been passed on from
the church here to the church yonder, the
general assembly of the firstborn, who are
written in heaven.*

117. Such is my defence :

its reasonableness
I have set forth : and may the God of peace,4
Who made both one,* and has restored us to
each other, Who setteth kings upon thrones,
and raiseth up the poor out of the dust and
lifteth up the beggar from the dunghill,£ Who
chose David His servant and took him away
from the sheepfolds,i though he was the least
and youngest of the sons of Jesse,9 Who gave
the word ' to those who preach the gospel with
great power for the perfection of the gospel,
-may He Himself hold me by my right
hand, and guide me with His counsel, and
receive me with glory," Who is a Shepherd *
to shepherds and a Guide to guides : that we
may feed His flock with knowledge," not with
the instruments of a foolish shepherd," accord
ing to the blessing, and not according to the
curse pronounced against the men of former
days : may He give strength and power unto
his people,* and Himself present to Himself0
His flock resplendent and spotless and worthy
of the fold on high, in the habitation of them
that rejoice," in the splendour of the saints,0 so
that in His temple everyone, both flock and
shepherds together may say, Glory ,» in Christ
Jesus our Lord, to Whom be all glory for ever
and ever.

Amen.

ORATION III.

To Those Who Had Invited Him, and
Not Come to Receive Him.

(About Easter a. d. 362.)

I. How slow you are, my friends and breth
ren, to come to listen to my words, though
you were so swift in tyrannizing over me, and
tearing me from my Citadel Solitude, which
I had embraced in preference to everything

0 Ps. exxxii. 13. 14.

7 Heb. xii. 23.
o Kcclus. iii. 9.
f r Sam. ii. 8 ; Ps. cxiii. 7.
fi Heb. xiii. 20.
t Ps. Ixviii. 11.
J) Ps. Ixxviii. 70.
x Ps. Ixxiii. 23, 24.
ft Ter. iii. 15.
o Kph. v. 27.
v Zcch. xi. 15.
rt Ps. ixxxvii. 7 (LXX.J. p Pi. ex. 3 (LXX.). v Ps. xxix. 9.

9 1 Sam. xvii. 14.
A Kzek. xxxtv. 12.
f Ps. Ixviii, 35.

« Eph. ii. 14.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

else, and as coadjutress and mother of the di
vine ascent, and as deifying man," I had es
pecially admired, and had set before me as
the guide of my whole life.0 How is it that,
now you have got it, you thus despise what
you so greatly desired to obtain, and seem
to be better able to desire the absent than to
enjoy the present ;
as though you preferred
to possess my teaching rather than to profit
by it?
Yes, I may even say this to you : "I
became a surfeit unto you before you tasted
of me, or gave me a trial " v -which is most
strange.

II. And neither did you entertain me as a
guest, nor, if I may make a remark of a more
compassionate kind, did you allow yourselves
to be entertained by me, reverencing this com
mand if nothing else ; nor did you take me
by the hand, as beginning a new task ; nor
encourage me in my timidity, nor console me
for the violence I had suffered ; but-I shrink
from saying it, though say it I must-you
made my festival no festival, and received
me with no happy introduction ; and you
mingled the solemn festival with sorrow, be
cause it lacked that which most of all would
have contributed to its happiness, the presence
of you my conquerors, for it would not be true
So easily is
to call you people who love me.
anything despised which is easily conquered,
and the proud receives attention, while he
who is humble before God is slighted.

III. What will ye?

Shall I be judged by
Shall I pass a
you, or shall I be your judge ?
verdict, or receive one, for I hope to be ac
quitted if I be judged, and if I give sentence,
to give it against you justly?
The charge
against you is that you do not answer my
love with equal measure, nor do you repay
iny obedience with honour, nor do you pledge
the future to me by your present alacritythough even if you had, I could hardly have
believed it.
But each of you has something
which he prefers to both the old and the new
Pastor, neither reverencing the grey hairs of
the one, nor calling out the youthful spirit of
the other.

IV. There is a Banquet in the Gospels,4 and
a hospitable Host and' friends ; and the Ban
quet is most pleasant, for it is the marriage of
His Son.
He calleth them, but they come
not : He is angry, and-I pass over the inter-

o S. Gregory very frequently

uses this very strong expres
sion to bring out the rciliiy and intimacy of the Christian's Union
wiih Christ as the result of the sanctifying grace by which all the
llaplized are node "partakers of the Divine Nature" (2 Pet.
i. 410 The passage might also be rendered " had preferred to
every oihcr kind of life,
y Isa. i. 14.

& S. I.uke xiv. 16.

val for
to speak
fear of bad omen-but,
gently, He filleth the Banquet with others.
God forbid that this should be your case ;
but yet you have treated me (how shall I put
it gently?) with as much haughtiness or bold
ness as they who after being called to a feast
rise up against it, and insult their host ; for
you, though you are not of the number of
those who are without, or are invited to the
I marriage, but are yourselves those who invited
me, and bound me to the Holy Table, and
1 shewed me the glory of the Bridal Chamber,
i then deserted me (this is the most splendid
j thing about you)-one to his field, another to
his newly bought yoke of oxen, another to
his just-married wife, another to some other
trifling matter ; you were all scattered and dis
persed, caring little for the Bridechamber and
the Bridegroom.*

:

V. On this account I was filled with des
pondency and perplexity-for I will not keep
silence about what I have suffered-and I was
very near withholding the discourse which I
was minded to bestow as a Marriage-gift, the
most beautiful and precious of all 1 had ; and
I very nearly let
it loose upon you, whom,
now that the violence had once been done to
me, I greatly longed for :
for I thought I
could get from this a splendid theme, and be
cause my love sharpened my tongue-love
which is very hot and ready for accusation
when it Ls stirred to jealousy by grief which it
conceives from some unexpected neglect.
If
any of you has been pierced with love's sting,
I and has felt himself neglected, he knows the
| feeling, and will pardon one who so suffers,
because he himself has been near the same
frenzy.

VI. But it

is not permitted to me at the
present time to say to you anything upbraid
ing ; and God forbid I ever should. And
even now perhaps I have reproached
you
more than in due measure, the Sacred Flock,
the praise-worthy nurselings of Christ, the
Divine inheritance ; by which, O God, Thou
art rich, even wert Thou poor in all other
respects.
To Thee, I think, are fitting those
words, " The lot is fallen unto Thee in a fair
ground : yea Thou hast the goodliest heri
tage." "
Nor will I allow that the most popu
lous cities or the broadest flocks have any ad
vantage over us, the little ones of the smallest
of all the tribes of Israel, of the least of the
thousands of Judah,* of the little Bethlehem
among cities,8 where Christ was born and
is from the beginning well-known and wor-

a S. Matt, xxii. to.
y 1 Sam. xxiii. 23.

0 Ps. xvi. 6.
6 Mic. v. a.

PANEGYRIC ON HIS BROTHER S. CESARIUS.

shipped ; amongst those whom the Father is
exalted, and the Son is held to be equal to
Him, and the Holy Ghost is glorified with
Them : we who are of one soul, who mind
the same thing, who in nothing injure the
Trinity, neither by preferring One Person
above another, nor by cutting off any :
as
those bad umpires and measurers of the God
head do, who by magnifying One Person more
than is fit, diminish and insult the whole.

VII. But do ye also, if you bear me any good
will-ye who are my husbandry, my vine
yard, my own bowels, or rather His Who is
our common Father, for in Christ he hath
begotten you through the Gospels" -shew to us
also some respect.
It is only fair, since we
have honoured you above all else : ye are my
witnesses, ye, and they who have placed in
our hands this-shall I say Authority, or Ser
vice ? And if to him that loveth most most is
clue, how shall I measure the love, for which I
have made you my debtors by my own love?
Rather, shew respect for yourselves, and the
Image committed to your care,3 and Him Who
committed it, and the Sufferings of Christ,
and your hopss therefrom, holding fast the
faith which ye have received, and in which
ye were brought up, by which also ye are be
ing saved, and trust to save others (for not
many, be well assured, can boast of what you
can), and reckoning piety to consist, not in
often speaking about God, but in silence for
the most part, for the tongue is a dangerous
thing to men, if it be not governed by reason.
Believe that listening is always less dangerous
than talking, just as learning about God is
more pleasant
Leave the
more accurate search into these questions to
those who are the Stewards of the Word ;
and for yourselves, worship a little in words,
but more by your actions, and rather by keep
ing the Law than by admiring the Lawgiver ;
shew your love for Him by fleeing from
living in
wickedness, pursuing after virtue,
the Spirit, walking in the Spirit, drawing
your knowledge from Him, building upon the
foundation of the faith, not wood or hay or
stubble,'' weak materials and easily spent when
the fire shall try our works or destroy them ;
but gold, silver, precious stones, which re
main and stand.

than teaching.

VIII. So may ye act, and so may ye honour
us, whether present or absent, whether taking
your part in our sermons, or preferring to do
something else : and may ye be the children of

God, pure and unblamable, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse generation : a and may
ye never be entangled in the snares of the
wicked that go round about, or bound with
the chain of your sins.
May the Word in
you never be smothered with cares of this
life and so ye become unfruitful :
but may
ye walk in the King's Highway, turning aside
neither to the right hand nor to the left,3 but
led by the Spirit through the strait
gate.
Then all our affairs shall prosper, both now
and at the inquest There, in Christ Jesus our
Lord, to Whom be the glory for ever. Amen.

ORATION VII.

Panegyric on his Brother S. Cjesarius.

On his

in medicine.

The date of this Oration is probably the
It is placed by S. Jerome
spring of a. d. 369.
first among S. Gregory's Orations.
Caesarius,
the Saint's younger brother, was born probably
Educated in his early years
about a.d. 330.
at home, he studied later in the schools of
Alexandria, where he attained great profi
ciency in mathematics, astronomy, and, espe
cially,
return from
Alexandria, he was offered by the Emperor
Constantius, in response to a public petition, an
honourable and lucrative post at Byzantium,
but was prevailed upon by Gregory to return
with him to Nazianzus.
After a while he
went back to Byzantium, and, on the accession
of Julian, was pressed to retain his appointment
at court, and did so, in spite of Gregory's 1
reproaches, until Julian, whd had long been
trying to win him from Christianity, at last
Caesarius,
invited him to a public discussion.
in spite of the specious arguments of the Em
peror, gained the day, but, having now dis
tinctly declared himself a Christian, could no
longer remain at eourt.
On the death of
Julian, he was esteemed and promoted by suc
cessive Emperors, until he received from Valens
the office of treasurer of Bithynia.
The exact
character of this office and its rank are still
undecided by historical writers, some of whom
attribute to him other offices not mentioned
by S. Gregory, which most probably were
filled by a namesake.
On the nth of October
a.d. 368 the city of Nicaea was almost entire
ly destroyed by an earthquake and Caesarius
Impressed
miraculously escaped with his life.
by his escape, he received Holy Baptism, and
formed plans for retiring from office and (as

a 1 Cor. iv. 15.

P Gen. i. 27.

I.e., the Elder Gregory.

y 1 Cor. iii. 12.

a Phil. ii. 15.

0Num. xxi. 22 ; Isa. xl. 3.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

it seems) devoting himself to a life of ascetic
discipline, which, were dissipated by his early
and sudden death.

1. It may be, my friends, my brethren, my
fathers (ye who are dear to me in reality as
well as in name) that you think that I, who
am about to pay the sad tribute of lamenta
tion to him who has departed, am eager to
undertake the task, and shall, as most men
delight to do, speak at great length and in
eloquent style.
And so some of you, who
have had like sorrows to bear, are prepared to
join in my mourning and lamentation, in
order to bewail your own griefs in mine, and
learn to feel pain at the afflictions of a friend,
while others are looking to feast their ears in
For they sup
the enjoyment of my words.
pose that I must needs make my misfortune
an occasion for display-as was once my wont,
when possessed of a superabundance of earthly
things, and ambitious, above all, of oratorical
renown- before I looked up to Him Who is
the true and highest Word, and gave all up to
God, from Whom all things come, and took
Clod for all in all. Now pray do not think
this of me, if you wish to think of me aright.
For I am neither going to lament for him who
is gone more than is good-as I should not
approve of such conduct even in others-nor
am I going to praise him beyond due measure.
Allieit that language is a dear and especially
proper tribute to one gifted with it, and eulo
gy to one who was exceedingly fond of my
words-aye, not only a tribute, but a debt, the
But even in my tears
most just of all debts.
and admiration i must respect the law which
regards such matters : nor is this alien to our
philosophy ; for he says The memory of the
just is accompanied with eulogies, a and also,
Let tears fall down over the dead, and begin
to lament, as if thou hadst suffered great harm
thyself:3 removing us equally from insensi
I shall proceed
bility and immoderation.
then, not only to exhibit the weakness of
human nature, but also to put you in mind
of the dignity of the soul, and, giving such
consolation as is due to those who are in sorsow, transfer our grief, from that which con
cerns the flesh and temporal things, to those
things which are spiritual and eternal.

2. The parents of Caisarius, to take first the
point which best becomes me, are known to
Their excellence you are eager to
you all.
notice, and hear of with admiration, and share
in the task of setting it forth to any, if Xhere

a Prov. x. 7 (LXX.).

0 E:clus. xxxviii. 16.

! be such, who know it not : for no single man
is able to do so entirely, and the task is one
beyond the powers of a single tongue, however
laborious, however zealous. Among the many
and great points for which they are to be cele
brated (I trust I may not seem extravagant in
praising my own family) the greatest of all,
which more than any other stamps their char
acter, is piety. By their hoar hairs they lay
claim to reverence, but they are no less vener
able for their virtue than for their age ; for
while their bodies are bent beneath the bur
den of their years, their souls renew their
youth in God.

3. His father" was well grafted out of the
wild olive tree into the good one, and so
far partook of its fatness as to be entrusted
with the engrafting of others, and charged with
the culture of souls, presiding in a manner be
coming his high office over this people, like a
second Aaron or Moses, bidden himself to draw
near to God,fl and to convey the Divine Voice
to the others who stand afar off; » gentle, meek,
calm in mien,4 fervent in spirit, a fine man in
external appearance, but richer still in that
But why should I de
which is out of sight.
scribe him whom you know ?
P'or I could not
I even by speaking at great length say as much
1 as he deserves, or as much as each of you knows
It is then bet-
| ter to leave your own fancy to picture him,
■ than mutilate by my words the object of your
I admiration.

and expects to be said of him.

And this she so far

4. His mother' was consecrated to God by
virtue of her descent from a saintly family,
and was possessed of piety as a necessary inl heritance, not only for herself, but also for her
children-being indeed a holy lump from a
in
holy firstfruits. f
creased and amplified that some, (bold though
the statement be, I will utter it,) have both
believed and said that even her husband's per
fection has been the work of none other than
i herself ; and, oh how wonderful ! she herself,
as the reward of her piety, has received a
greater and more perfect piety.
Lovers of
their children and of Christ as they both were,
I what is most extraordinary, they were far
I greater lovers of Christ than of their children :
yea, even their one enjoyment of their children
was that they should be acknowledged and
named by Christ, and their one measure of
their blessedness in their children was their

S. Gregory the elder.

12-20, 32-39.

a Hitfather.
0 Kxod. xxiv. 1, 2.
£ hi mien. v. 1. "in disposition."
e His mother.

Also viii., 4, 5 ; xii., 2, 3 ; xvi., 1-4, 20.

S. Nonna. Cf. Oral, xviii., 7-12, 30. 31. 42, 43.

y Kxod. xx. 19 : Deut. v. 27.

Cf. Orat. xviii., 5, 6,

i Rom. xi. 16.

Also viii. 4, 5.

PANEGYRIC ON HIS BROTHER S. C/ESARIUS.

virtue and close association with the Chief
Good." Compassionate, sympathetic, snatch
ing many a treasure from moths and robbers,0
and from the prince of this world,v to transfer
it from their sojourn here to the [true] hab
itation, laying up in store5 for their children
the heavenly splendour as their greatest inher
itance.
Thus have they reached a fair old age,
equally reverend both for virtue and for years,
and full of days, alike of those which abide
and those which pass away ; each one failing
to secure the first prize here below only so far
as equalled by the other ; yea, they have ful
filled the measure of every happiness with the
exception of this last trial, or discipline, which
ever anyone may think we ought to call it ;
mean their having to send before them the
child who was, owing to his age, in greater
danger of falling, and so to close their life in
safety, and be translated with all their family
to the realms above.

5.

I have entered into these details, not
from a desire to eulogize them, for this, I know
well, it would be difficult worthily to do, if I
made their praise the subject of my whole ora
tion, but to set forth the excellence inherited
from his parents by Csesarius, and so prevent
you from being surprised or incredulous, that
one sprung from such progenitors, should have
deserved such praises himself ; nay, strange
indeed would it have been, had he looked to
others and disregarded the examples of his kins
folk at home. His early life was such as becomes
those really well born and destined for a good
life.
I say little of his qualities evident to all,
his beauty, his stature, his manifold graceful
ness, and harmonious disposition, as shown in
the tones of his voice-for it
is not my office
to laud qualities of this kind, however impor
tant they may seem to others-and proceed
with what I have to say of the points which,
even if I wished, I could with difficulty pass by.
6. Bred and reared under such influences,
we were fully trained in the education afforded
here,* in which none could say how far he ex
celled most of us from the quickness and extent
of his abilities-and how can I recall those days
without my tears showing that, contrary to my
promises, my feelings have overcome my philo
sophic restraint? The time came when it was
decided that we should leave home, and then
for the first time we were separated, for I
studied rhetoric in the then flourishing schools
of Palestine ; he went to Alexandria, esteemed
both then and now the home of every branch of

a The Chief Good,
0 S. Matt. vi. 19; S. John x. i.
* i Tim. vi. 19.

to jcpciTTOP, Lit.

' that which is better."
Y S. John xiv. 30.
e Here, at Nazianzus.

learning.
Which of his qualities shall I place
first and foremost, or which can I omit with
I least injury to my description ? Who was more
faithful to his teacher than he? Who more
kindly to his classmates ? Who more carefully
avoided the society and companionship of the
depraved? Who attached himself more closely
to that of the most excellent, and among
others, of the most esteemed and illustrious of
his countrymen ? For he knew that we are
strongly influenced to virtue or vice by our
companions.
And in consequence of all this,
who was more honoured by the authorities than
he, and whom did the whole city (though a all
individuals are concealed in it, because of its
size), esteem more highly for his discretion, or
deem more illustrious for his intelligence?

7. What branch of learning did he not
master, or rather, in what branch of study did
he not surpass those who had made it their
sole study ? Whom did he allow even to ap
proach him. not only of his own time and age,
but even of his elders, who had devoted many
All subjects he studied
more years to study ?
as one, and each as thoroughly as If he knew
no other.
The brilliant in intellect, he sur
passed in industry, the devoted students in
quickness of perception ; riay, rather he out
stripped in rapidity those who were rapid, in
application those who were laborious, and in
both respects those who were distinguished in
both.
From geometry and astronomy, that
science so dangerous^ to anyone else, he gath
ered all that was helpful (I mean that he was
led by the harmony and order of the heavenly
bodies to reverence their Maker), and avoided
what is injurious; not attributing all things
that are or happen to the influence of the stars,
like those who raise their own fellow-servant,
the creation, in rebellion against the Creator,
but referring, as is reasonable, the motion of
these bodies, and all other things besides, to
God.
In arithmetic and mathematics, and in
the wonderful art of medicine, in so far as it
treats of physiology and temperament, and the
causes of disease, in order to remove the roots
and so destroy their offspring with them, who
is there so ignorant or contentious as to think
him inferior to himself, and not to be glad
to be reckoned next to him, and carry off the
second prize?
This indeed is no unsupport
ed assertion, but East and West* alike, and
every place which he afterward visited, are as

ing was exceedingly sublime and abstruse."

a Though, etc. The Hen. ed. translates "Although his teach
P Dangerous, as being so closclv connected with astroloey.
y East and West, iwd T« omoO Aijfis kcu fffire'oioc ;-A tj f t s signincat regionem, locum: culmen item, scu fasttgium. Cf. S. Greg.
S. Chrys. Horn. LVI. in loan. p. 786.
Naz. Orat. xxv. 13. p. 464.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

pillars inscribed with the record of his learn- j
!
ir»g8. But when, after gathering into his single ,
soul every kind of excellence and knowledge, |
as a mighty merchantman gathers every sort of
ware, he was voyaging to his own city, in order
to communicate to others the fair cargo of his
culture, there befell a wondrous thing, which
I must, as its mention is most cheering to me
Our
and may delight you, briefly set forth.
mother, a in her motherly love for her children,
had offered up a prayer that, as she had sent us
forth together, she might see us together return
home.
For we seemed, to our mother at least,
if not to others, to form a pair worthy of her
prayers and glances, if seen together, though
now, alas, our connection has been severed.
And God, Who hears a righteous prayer, and
honours the love of parents for well-disposed
children, so ordered that, without any design
or agreement on our part, the one from Alex
andria, the other from Greece, the one by sea,
the other by land, we arrived at the same city
at the same time.
This city was Byzantium,
which now' presides over Europe, in which
Caesarius, after the lapse of a short time, gained
such a repute, that public honours, an alliance
with an illustrious family, and a seat in the
council of state were offered him ; and a mission
was despatched to the Emperor by public de
cision, to beg that the first of cities be adorned
and honoured by the first of scholars (if he
cared at all for its being indeed the first, and
worthy of its name) ; and that to all its other
titles to distinction this further one be added,
that it was embellished by having Caesarius as its
physician and its inhabitant, although its bril
liancy was already assured by its throngs of
great men both
philosophy and other
in
But enough of this.
branches of learning.
At this time there happened what seemed to
others a chance without reason or cause, such
as frequently occurs of its own accord in our
day, but was more than sufficiently manifest to
devout minds as the result of the prayers to
god-fearing parents, which were answered by
the united arrival of their sons by land and sea.
9. Well, among the noble traits of Caesarius'
character, we must not fail to note one, which
perhaps is in others' eyes slight and unworthy
of mention, but seemed to me, both at the time
and since, of the highest import, if indeed
brotherly love be a praiseworthy quality ; nor
shall I ever cease to place it in the first rank,
Although
in relating the story of his life.
the metropolis strove to retain him by the

a Our mother.

For ft rlhcr detail cf. Orat. xviii. 31.

honours I have mentioned, and declared that it
would under no circumstances let him go, my
influence, which he valued most highly on all
occasions, prevailed upon him to listen to the
prayer of his parents, to supply his country's
need, and to grant me my own desire. And
when he thus returned home in my company,
he preferred me not only to cities and peoples,
not only to honours and revenues, which had
in part already flowed to him in abundance
from many sources and in part were within his
reach, but even to the Emperor himself and his
imperial commands.
From this time, then,
having shaken off all ambition, as a hard mas
ter and a painful disorder, I resolved to prac
tise philosophy and adapt myself to the higher
life : or rather the desire was earlier born, the
life came later.
But my brother, who had
dedicated to his country the firstfruits of his
learning, and gained an admiration worthy of
his efforts, was afterwards led by the desire of
fame, and, as he persuaded me, of being the
guardian of the city, to betake himself to court,
not indeed according to my own wishes or
judgment ; for I will confess to you that I
think it a better and grander thing to be in
the lowest rank with God than to win the first
place with an earthly king.
Nevertheless I
cannot blame him, for inasmuch as philoso
phy is the greatest, so is it the most difficult,
of professions, which can be taken in hand by
but few, and only by those who have been
called forth by the Divine magnanimity, which
gives its hand to those who are honoured by its
is no small thing if one,
preference.
who has chosen the lower form of life, follows
after goodness, and sets greater store on God
and his own salvation than on earthly lustre ;
using it as a stage, or a manifold ephemeral
mask while playing in the drama of this world,
but himself living unto God with that image
which he knows that he has received from
Him, and must render to Him Who gave it.
That this was certainly the purpose of Caesarius,
we know full well.

Yet it

10. Among physicians he gained the fore
most place with no great trouble, by merely
exhibiting his capacity, or rather some slight
specimen of his capacity, and was forthwith
numbered among the friends of the Emperor,
and enjoyed the highest honours.
But he
placed the humane functions of his art at the
disposal of the authorities free of cost, knowing
that nothing leads to further advancement than
virtue and renown for honourable deeds ; so
that he far surpassed in fame those to whom
he was inferior in rank.
By his modesty he
so won the love of all that they entrusted their

PANEGYRIC ON HIS BROTHER S. OESARIUS.

precious charges to his care, without requiring
him to be sworn by Hippocrates, since the sim
plicity of Crates was nothing to his owp : win
ning in general a respect beyond his rank ; for
besides the present repute he was ever thought
to have justly won, a still greater one was antici
pated for him, both by the Emperors" them
selves and by all who occupied the nearest po
But, most important, neither
sitions to them.
by his fame, nor by the luxury which sur
rounded him, was his nobility ofsoul corrupt
ed ; for amidst his many claims to honour, he
himself cared most for being, and being known
to be, a Christian, and, compared with this,
all other things were to him but trifling toys.
For they belong to the part we play before
others on a stage which is very quickly set
up and taken down again -perhaps indeed
more quickly destroyed than put together, as
we may see from the manifold changes of life,
and fluctuations of prosperity ; while the only
real and securely abiding good thing is godli
ness.

11. Such was the philosophy of Cassarius,
even at court :
these were the ideas amidst
which he lived and died, discovering and pre
senting to God, in the hidden man, a still
deeper godliness than was publicly visible.
And if I must pass by all else, his protection
of his kinsmen in distress, his contempt for ar
rogance, his freedom from assumption towards
friends, his boldness towards men in power,
the numerous contests and arguments in which
he engaged with many on behalf of the truth,
not merely for the sake of argument, but with
deep piety and fervour, I must speak of one
point at least as especially worthy of note.
The Emperor^ of unhappy memory was raging
against us, whose madness in rejecting Christ,
after making himself its first victim, had now
rendered him intolerable to others ; though he
did not, like other fighters against Christ,
grandly enlist himself on the side of impiety,
but veiled his persecution under the form of
equity; and, ruled by the crooked serpent
which possessed his soul, dragged down into
his own pit his wretched victims by manifold
devices.
artifice and contrivance
was, to deprive us of the honour of our conflicts
(for, noble man as he was, he grudged this to
Christians), by causing us, who suffered for
being Christians, to be punished as evil doers :
the second was, to call this process persuasion,
and not tyranny, so that the disgrace of those
impiety might be
who chose to side with
Julian, a.d.

*Tki Emperors. <
0 The Emperor, £.t.t Julian the Apostate.

( Constantius II., a.d. 337-361.
i Jovian. A.n. 363-4.

Valens, a.d. 364-378.

His first

361-363.

greater than their danger.
Some he won over
by money, some by dignities, some by
promises, some by various honours, which he
bestowed, not royally but in right servile style,
in the sight of all, while everyone was influ
enced by the witchery of his words, and his
own example.
At last he assailed Caesarius.
How utter was the derangement and folly
which could hope to take for his prey a man
like Caesarius, my brother, the son of parents
like ours !

12. However, that I may dwell awhile up
on this point, and luxuriate in my story as
men do who are eyewitnesses in some marvel
lous event, " that noble man, fortified with the
sign of Christ, and defending himself with His
Mighty Word, entered the lists against an ad
versary experienced in arms and strong in his
In no wise abashed at the
skill in argument.
sight, nor shrinking at all from his high pur
pose through flattery, he was an athlete ready,
lx>th in word and deed, to meet a rival of
Such then was the arena, and
equal power.
The
so equipped the champion of godliness.
judge on one side was Christ, arming the
athlete with His own sufferings : and on the
other a dreadful tyrant, 0 persuasive by his skill
in argument, and overawing him by the weight
of his authority ; and as spectators, on either
hand, both those who were still left on the
side of godliness and those who had been
snatched away by him, watching whether vic
tory inclined to their own side or to the other,
and more anxious as to which would gain the
day than the combatants themselves.

13. Didst thou not fear for Caesarius, lest
aught unworthy of his zeal should befall him ?
Nay, be ye of good courage. For the victory is
with Christ, Who overcame the world. » Now for
my part, be well assured, I should be highly in
terested in setting forth the details of the argu
ments and allegations used on that occasion,
for indeed the discussion contains certain feats
and elegances, which I dwell on with no slight
pleasure ; but this would be quite foreign to
an occasion and discourse like the present.
And when, after having torn to shreds all his
opponent's sophistries, and thrust aside as mere
child's play every assault, veiled or open,
Caesarius in a loud clear voice declared that
he was and remained a Christian-not even
thus was he finally dismissed.
For indeed, the
Emperor was possessed by an eager desire to
enjoy and be distinguished by his culture,

o Some edd. read " in the spectacle," which would make better
0 A dreadful tyrant. The Evil One : with Rillius and ClemenJulian was antagonist, not Judge-unless we consider that

sense, but has not MS. authority.
cet.
he combined unfairly the two offices.

y S. John xvi. 33.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

and then uttered in
the hearing of all his
famous saying-O happy father. O unhappy
sons ! thus deigning to honour me, whose cul
ture and godliness" he had known at Athens,
with a share in the dishonour of Caesarius, who
was remanded for a further trial^ (since Justice
the
was fitly arming the Emperor against
his
Persians),'' and welcomed by us after
happy escape and bloodless victory, as more
illustrious for his dishonour than for his ce
lebrity.

the

than

14. This victory I esteem far more sub
lime and honourable
Emperor's
mighty power and splendid purple and costly
diadem.
I am more elated in describing it
than if he had won from him the half of his
Empire.
During the evil days he lived in
retirement, obedient herein to our Christian
law,4 which bids us, when occasion offers, to
make ventures on behalf of the truth, and
not be traitors to our religion from coward
ice ; yet refrain, as long as may be, from rush
ing into danger, either in fear for our own
souls, or to spare those who bring the danger
upon us.
But when the gloom had been dis
persed, and the righteous sentence had been
pronounced in a foreign land, and the glitter
ing sword had struck down the ungodly, and
power had returned to the hands of Christians,
what boots it to say with what glory and
honour, with how many and great
testi
monies, as if bestowing rather than receiv
ing a favour, he was welcomed again at the
Court ; his new honour succeeding to that of
former days; while time changed its Emper
ors, the repute and commanding influence of
Caesarius with them was undisturbed, nay,
they vied with each other in striving to attach
him most closely to themselves, and be known
as his special friends and acquaintances.
Such
was the godliness of Coesarius, such its results.
Let ail men, young and old, give ear, and
press on through the same virtue to the same
distinction, for glorious is the fruit of good
labours,' if they suppose this to be worth striv
ing after, and a part of true happiness.

15. Again another wonder concerning him
is a strong argument for his parents' piety
He was living in Bithynia,
and his own.
holding an office of no small importance from
the stewardship of his
the Emperor, viz.,
revenue, and care of the exchequer :
for
this had been assigned to him by the Emperor

'■ orthodoxy."
S. dreg, may allude to Oesarius' later return to Court.
mian. Marccllin. xxv. 3, 7.

a Godlinei*, tvaifleiav : here, as often, used in the sense of
0 A further trial. Which Julian did not survive to carry out.
y Pertianit. The expedition in which he met his death. Am*
Sot. vi. a.
6 Matt x. 23.

c Wisd. iii. 15.

Socr. iii. ai.

as a prelude to the highest offices.
And
when, a short time ago, the earthquake" in
Nicaea .occurred, which is said to have been
the most serious within the memory of man,
overwhelming in a common destruction almost
all the inhabitants and the beauty of the city,
he alone, or with very few of the men of rank,
survived the danger, being shielded by the very
incredible escape, and
falling ruins in his
bearing slight traces of the peril ;
yet he
allowed fear to lead him to a more important
salvation, for he dedicated himself entirely to
the Supreme Providence ; he renounced the
things, and attached
service of transitory
himself to another court.
This he both
purposed himself, and made the object of
the united earnest prayers to which he invited
me by letter, when I seized this opportunity
to give him warning^ as I never ceased to
do when pained that his great nature should
be occupied in affairs beneath it, and that a
soul so fitted for philosophy should, like the
sun behind a cloud, be obscured amid the
Unscathed though he
whirl of public life.
had been by the earthquake, he was not proof
against disease, since he was but human.
His escape was peculiar to himself ; his death
common to all mankind ; the one the token
of his
of his
the other the result
piety,
nature.
The former, for our consolation, pre
ceded his fate, so that, though shaken by his
death, we might exult in the extraordinary
character of his preservation.
And now our
illustrious Caesarius has been restored to us,
when his honoured dust and celebrated corse,
after being escorted home amidst a succession
of hymns and
been
honoured by the holy hands of his parents ;
while his mother, substituting the festal gar
ments of religion for the trappings of woe,
has overcome her tears by her philosophy,
and lulled to sleep lamentations by psalmody,
as her son enjoys honours worthy of his newly
soul, which has been, through
regenerate
water, transformed by the Spirit.

orations, has

public

16.

This, Caesarius, is my funeral offer
ing to thee, this the firstfruits of my words,
which thou hast often blamed me for with
holding, yet wouldst have stripped off, had
they been bestowed on thee ; with this orna
ment I adorn thee, an ornament, I know well,
far dearer to thee than all others, though it be
not of the soft flowing tissues of silk, in
which while living, with virtue for thy sole
adorning, thou didst
like the many,
rejoice ; nor texture of transparent linen, nor

not,

a The earthquake, described by Theodore!, H. E. ii. a6.
J3 S. Greg. Epist. xx.

PANEGYRIC ON HIS BROTHER S. (LESARIUS.

their sweet

savours lasting

nor any other small

17. Such is my offering;

outpouring of costly unguents, which thou
hadst long resigned to the boudoirs of the
but
fair, with
thing
a single day ;
valued by small minds, which would have all
been hidden to-day with thy fair form by
this bitter stone.
Far hence be games and
stories of the Greeks, the honours of ill-fated
youths, with their petty prizes for petty con
tests ; and all the libations and firstfruits or
garlands and newly plucked flowers, where
with men honour the departed, in obedience
to
ancient custom and unreasoning grief,
rather than reason. My gift is an oration,
which perhaps succeeding time will receive
at my hand and ever keep in motion, that
it may not suffer him who has left us to be
utterly lost to earth, but may ever keep him
whom we honour in men's ears and minds, as
it sets before them, more clearly than a por
trait, the image of him for whom we mourn.
it be slight
if
his merit, God loveth that
and inferior to
Part of
which is according to our power."
our gift is now complete, the remainder we
will now pay by offering (those of us who
still survive) every year our honours and me
morials.
And now for thee, sacred and holy
soul, we pray for an entrance into heaven ;
mayest thou enjoy such repose as the bosom
of Abraham affords, mayest thou behold the
choir of Angels, and the glories and splen
dours of sainted men ; aye, mayest thou be
united to that choir and share in their joy,
looking down from on high on all things here,
on what men call wealth, and despicable dig
nities, and deceitful honours, and the errors
of our senses, and the tangle of this life, and
its confusion and ignorance, as if we were
fighting in the dark ; whilst thou art in attend
ance upon the Great King and filled with
the light which streams forth from Him : and
may it be ours hereafter, receiving therefrom
no such slender rivulet, as is the object of our
fancy in this day of mirrors and enigmas, to
attain to the fount of good itself, gazing with
pure mind upon the truth in its purity,- and
finding a reward for our eager toil here below
on behalf of the good, in our more perfect
possession and vision of the good on high :
the end to which our sacred books and teach
ers foretell that our course of divine mysteries
shall lead us.

18. What now remains? To bring the
healing of the Word to those in sorrow.
And
a powerful remedy for mourners is sympathy,

suffering.

for sufferers are best consoled by those who
have to bear a like
To such,
then, I specially address myself, of whom I
should be ashamed, if, with all other virtues,
they do not show the elements of patience.
For even if they surpass all others in love of
their children, let them equally surpass them
in love of wisdom and love of Christ, and in
the special practice of meditation on our de
parture hence, impressing it likewise on their
children, making even their whole life a prep
aration for death.
But if your misfortune
still clouds your reason and, like the moisture
which dims our eyes, hides from you the clear
view of your duty, come, ye elders, receive the
consolation of a young man, ye fathers, that
of a child, who ought to be admonished by
men as old as you, who have admonished
many and gathered experience from your
many years.
Yet wonder not, if in my youth
I admonish the aged ; and if in aught I can
see better than the hoary, I offer it to you.
How much longer have we to live, ye men of
honoured eld, so near to God? How long
are we to suffer here?
Not even man's whole
life
is long, compared with the Eternity of
the Divine Nature, still less the remains of
life, and what I may call the parting of our
human breath, the close of our frail existence.
How much has Caesarius outstripped us ? How
long shall we be left to mourn his departure ?
Are we not hastening to the same abode ?
Shall we not soon be covered by the same
Shall we not shortly be reduced to
stone ?
the same dust ? And what in these short
days will be our gain, save that after it has
been ours to see, or suffer, or perchance even
to do, more ill, we must discharge the com
mon and inexorable tribute to the law of na
ture, by following some, preceding others, to
the tomb, mourning these, being lamented by
those, and receiving from some that meed of
tears which we ourselves had paid to others ?

19. Such, my brethren, is our existence,
who live this transient life, such our pastime
upon earth : we come into existence out of
non-existence, and after existing are dissolved.
We are unsubstantial dreams, impalpable vis
ions," like the flight of a passing bird, like a
ship leaving no track upon the sea,p a speck
of dust, a vapour, an early dew, a flower
that quickly blooms, and quickly fades.
As
for man his days are as grass, as a flower of
Well hath in
the field, so he flourisheth.T
spired David discoursed of our frailty, and
again in these words, " Let me know the short-

a Cor. viii. 3 ; ix. 7.

a Job xx. 8.

0 Wisd. v. 10 et scq.

y Ps. ciii. 15.

ness of my days ; " and he defines the days of
man as " of a span long." a And what wouldst
thou say to Jeremiah, who complains of his
mother in sorrow for his birth,8 and that on
account of others' faults ?
I have seen all
things, v says the preacher, I have reviewed in
thought all human things, wealth, pleasure,
power, unstable glory, wisdom which evades
us rather than is won ; then pleasure again,
wisdom again, often revolving the same ob
jects, the pleasures of appetite, orchards, num
bers of slaves, store of wealth, serving men
and serving maids, singing men and singing
women, arms, spearmen, subject nations, col
lected
all the
tributes, the pride of kings,
necessaries and superfluities of life, in which I
surpassed all the kings that w-ere before me.
And what does he say after all these things?
Vanity of vanities,8 all is vanity and vexation
of spirit, possibly meaning some unreasoning
longing of the soul, and distraction of man
condemned to this from the original fall : but
hear, he says, the conclusion of the whole
This is his stay in his
matter, Fear God.*
perplexity, and this is thy only gain from life
here below, to be guided through the disorder
of the things which are seen i and shaken, to
the things which stand firm and are not
moved. i

Painful

is to the

20. Let us not then mourn Ciesarius but
ourselves, knowing what evils he has escaped
to which we are left behind, and what treasure
we shall lay up, unless, earnestly cleaving unto
God and outstripping transitory things, we
press towards the life above, deserting the
earth while we are still upon the earth, and
earnestly following the spirit which bears us
upward.
faint
as this
hearted, it is as nothing to men of brave mind.
And let us consider it thus.
*Ca?sarius will
not reign, but rather will he be reigned over
by others.
He will strike terror into no one,
but he will be free from fear of any harsh
master, often himself unworthy even of a sub
ject's position. He will not amass wealth,
but neither will he be liable to envy, or be
pained at lack of success, or be ever seeking
to add to his gains as much again.
For such
is the disease of wealth, which knows no limit
to its desire of more, and continues to make
drinking the medicine for
He will
make no display of his power of speaking, yet
for his speaking will he be admired.
He will
not discourse upon the dicta of Hippocrates
and Galen, and their adversaries, but neither

thirst.

• Pi. xxxix. 4, 5*

o lb. xii. 8.
£2 Cor. iv. 18.

8 Jer. xv. ro.

y Ecclcs. i. 14.

c lb. xii. 13.
if Heb. xii. 27.

will he be troubled by diseases, and suffer
pain at the misfortunes of others.
He will
not set forth the principles
of Eucleides,
Ptolemaeus, and Heron, but neither will he
be pained by the tumid vaunts of uncultured
men. He will make no display of the doc
trines of Plato, and Aristotle, and Pyrrho, and
the names of any Uemocritus, and Heracleitus,
Anaxagoras, Cleanthes and Epicurus, and all
the members of the
venerable Porch and
Academy : but neither will he trouble himself
with the solution of their cunning syllogisms.
Yet here are
What need of further details ?
Nor
some which all men honour or desire.
wife nor child will he have beside him, but he
will escape mourning for, or being mourned
by them, or leaving them to others, or being
left behind himself as a memorial of misfor
tune. He will inherit no property: but he
will have such heirs" as are of the greatest ser
vice, such as he himself wished, so that he
departed hence a rich man, bearing with him
all that was his. What an ambition ! What a
What magnanimity in his
new consolation !
executors ! A proclamation has been heard,
worthy of the ears of all, and a mother's grief
has been made void by a fair and holy pro
mise, to give entirely to her son his wealth as a
funeral offering on his behalf, leaving nothing
to those who expected it.

21. Is this inadequate for our consolation ?
I will add a more potent remedy.
I believe the
words of the wise, that every fair and God-be
loved soul, when, set free from the bonds of the
body, it departs hence, at once enjoys a sense
and perception of the blessings which await it,
inasmuch as that which darkened it has been
purged away, or laid aside-I know not how
else to term it-and feels a wondrous pleasure
and exultation, and goes rejoicing to meet its
Lord, having escaped as it were from the
grievous poison of life here, and shaken off the
fetters which bound it and held down the
wings of the mind, and so enters on the en
joyment of the bliss laid up for it, of which it
has even now some conception.
Then, a
little later, it receives its kindred flesh, which
once shared in its pursuits of things above,
from the earth which both gave and had been
entrusted with it, and in some way known to
God, who knit them together and dissolved
them, enters with it upon the inheritance of
the glory there.
And, as it shared, through
their close union, in its hardships, so also it

a Heirs, Cf. S. Hasil Kp. 26 (32). Cxsarius left all his property
to the poor. This passage shows that his own family welcomed
and approved the bequest, which S. Gregory was at much pains
to carry out, but was greatly embarrassed by the rapacity of his
brother's servants.

bestows upon it a portion of its joys, gathering
it up entirely into itself, and becoming with
it one in spirit and in mind and in God, the
mortal and mutable being swallowed up of
life.
Hear at least how the inspired Ezekiel
discourses of the knitting t.ogether of bones
and sinews," how after him Saint Paul speaks
of the earthly tabernacle, and the house not
made with hands, the one to be dissolved, the
other laid up in
heaven, alleging absence
from the body to be presence with the Lord,^
and bewailing his life in it as an exile, and
therefore longing for and hastening to his re
lease. Why am I faint-hearted in my hopes?
Why behave-ltkea There creature of a day-?-1^
:»wart' the voice of the Archangel,')' the last
^mnjjpet^the -transformation of the heavens,
the transfiguration of the earth, the liberation
of the elements, the renovation of the universe.'
Then shall I see Csesarius himself, no longer
in exile, no longer laid upon a bier, no longer
the object of mourning and pity, but brilliant,
glorious, heavenly, such as in my dreams I
have often beheld thee, dearest and most lov
ing of brothers, pictured thus by my desire, if
not by the very truth.

this

22. But now, laying aside lamentation, I
will look at myself, and examine my feelings,
that I may not unconsciously have in myself
anything to be lamented.
O ye sons of
men, for the words apply to you, how long
will ye be hard-hearted and gross in mind?
Why do ye love vanity and seek after leas
ing,^ supposing life here to be a great thing j
and these few days many, and shrinking
from
separation, welcome and pleas
ant as it is, as if it were really grievous and
Are
awful ? Are we not to know ourselves ?
Are we
we not to cast away visible things?
not to look to the things unseen ?
Are we
not, even if we are somewhat grieved, to be
on the contrary distressed at our lengthened
sojourn,i
like holy David, who calLs things
here the tents of darkness, and the place of
affliction, and the deep mire,9 and the shadow
of death ; ' because we linger in the tombs we
bear about with us, because, though we are
gods, we die like men ■ the death of sin ? This
is my fear, this day and night accompanies
me, and will not let me breathe, on one side
the glory, on the other the place of correction :
the former I long for till I can say, " My soul
fainteth for Thy salvation ; " A from the latter I
shrink back shuddering ; yet I am not afraid

that this body of mine should utterly perish in
dissolution and corruption ; but that the glori
ous creature of God (for glorious it is if up
right, just as it is dishonourable if sinful) in
which i£ reason, morality, and hope, should be
condemned to the same dishonour as
the
brutes, and be no better after death ; a fate to
be desired for the wicked, who are worthy of
the fire yonder.

23. Would that I might mortify my mem
bers that are upon the earth," would that I
might spend my all upon the spirit, walking
in the way that is narrow and trodden by few,
For glori
not that which is broad and easy.0
ous and great are its consequences, and our
hope is greater than our desert.
What is
man, that Thou art mindful of him ? v What
is this new mystery which concerns me? I
am small and great, lowly and exalted, mortal
and immortal, earthly and heavenly.
I share
one condition with the lower world, the other
with God ; one with the flesh, the other with
the spirit.
I must be buried with Christ, arise
with Christ, be joint heir with Christ, become
the son of God, yea, God Himself. See whither
our argument has carried us in its progress.
I almost own myself indebted to the disaster
which has inspired me with such thoughts,
and made me more enamoured of my depart
This is the purpose of the great
ure hence.
mystery for us.
This is the purpose for us
of God, Who for us was made man and be
came poor,* to raise our flesh,' and recover His
image, S and remodel man,'' that we might all
be made one in Christ,9 who was perfectly
made in all of us all that He Himself is,' that
we might no longer be male and female, bar
barian, Scythian, bond or free" (which are
badges of the flesh), but might bear in our
selves only the stamp of God, by Whom and
for Whom we were made,x and have so far re
ceived our form and model from Him, that
we are recognized by it alone.

24. Yea, would that what we hope for
might be, according to the great kindness of
our bountiful God, Who asks for little and be
stows great things, both in the present and in
the future, upon those who truly love Him ; <*
bearing all things, enduring all things * for their
love and hope of Him, giving thanks for all
things f favourable and unfavourable alike: I
mean pleasant and painful, for reason knows
that even these are often instruments of salva
tion ; commending to Him our own souls 0 and

a Ezek. xxrvii. 3 et seq.
vi Thess. iv. 16.
i Ps. iv. 3.
4 lb. xliv. 20.

r, lb. cxx. 4.

i 1 Cor. xv. 52.

ft 2 Cor. v. 1, 6 ; Phil. i. 23.
» lb. xliv. 19 (LXX.) ; Uix. 2.

o Pet. iii. 10.

k lb. lxxii. 6, 7.

K lb. cxix. 81.

6 2 Cor. viii. 9.

aCol. iii. 5.
ifO>l. iii. 10.
* Col. iii. it.
v lb. xiii. 7.

e Rom. viii. 11.

f S. Luke xv. o ;

1 Cor. xv. 49.

0 S. Matt, vii, 13.
0 Gal. iii. 28.
A Rom. xi. 36.
ft Thess. v. 18.

y Ps. viii. 5.
t 1 Cor. xv. a8.
fct 1 Cor. ii. 9.
o 1 Pet. iv. 19.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

the souls of those fellow wayfarers who, be
ing more ready, have gained their rest before
us.
And, now that we have done this, let us
cease from our discourse, and you too from your
tears, hastening, as you now are, to your, tomb,
which as a sad abiding gift you have given to
Cassarius, seasonably prepared as it was for his
parents in their old age, and now unexpect
edly bestowed on their son in his youth,
though not without reason in His eyes Who
disposes our affairs. 0 Lord and Maker of all
things, and specially of this our frame ! O God
and Father and Pilot of men who are Thine !
() Lord of life and death ! O Judge and Bene
factor of our souls ! () Maker and Transfor
mer in due time of all things c by Thy design
ing Word,s according to the knowledge of the
depth of Thy wisdom and providence ! do
Thou now receive Cresarius, the firstfruits of
our pilgrimage ; and if he who was last
is
first, we bow before Thy Word, by which the
universe is ruled ; yet do Thou receive us
also afterwards, in a time when Thou mayest
be found,t having ordered us in the flesh as long
as is for our profit ; yea, receive us, prepared
and not troubled* by Thy fear, not departing
from Thee in our last day, nor violently borne
away from things here, like souls fond of the
world and the flesh, but filled with eagerness
for that blessed and enduring life which is in
Christ Jesus, our Lord, to whom be glory,
world without end. Amen.

ORATION VIII.

On his Sister Gorgonia.

their

father, a.d. 374.

The exact date of this Oration is uncertain.
It is certainly (4$ 23) later than the death of
Caesarius, a.d. 369, and previous to the death
of
So much we
gather from the Oration itself, and the referen
ces made by some authors to a poem of S.
Gregory do not add anything certain to our
knowledge (Poem. Hist. I.
1. v. v. 108, 227).
The place in which it was delivered is, almost
without doubt, the city in which her married
The public details of
life had been spent.
that life are familiar to the audience.
Gorgonia's
speaker himself,
parents, and the
although known to them, are not spoken of
in terms implying intimacy such as we find
in Orations known to have been delivered at
Nazianzus.
The spiritual father and confi
dant of Gorgonia is present, certainly in a

a Amos v. 8 ([.XX. ).
y lb. xxxii. 6.

$ Ps. xxxiti. 6.
8 lb. cxi*. <x> (LXX).

position of authority, probably seated in the
The husband of Gorgonia
Episcopal throne.
(Epitaph. 24) was named Alypius.
His home,
as Clemencet and Benoit agree, on the authori
ty of Elias, was at Iconium, of which city, at
The names
the time, Faustinus was bishop.
Elias
of Gorgonia's two sons are unknown.
states
S.
that they both became bishops.
Gregory mentions her three daughters, Alypiana, Eugenia, and Nonna, in his will.
The
oration is marked by an eloquence, piety, and
tender feeling which make it a worthy com
panion of that on Caesarius.

Funeral Oration on his Sister Gor
gonia.

1. In praising my sister, T shall pay honour
to one of my own family ; yet my praise will
not be false, because it is given to a relation,
but, because it is true, will be worthy of com
mendation, and its truth is based not only
upon its justice, but upon well-known facts.
For, even if I wished, I should not be per
mitted to be partial; since everyone who
hears me stands, like a skilful critic, between
my oration and the truth, to discountenance
exaggeration, yet, if he be a man of justice,
demanding what is really due.
So that my
fear is not of outrunning the truth, but, on
the contrary, of falling short of it, and lessen
ing her just repute by the extreme inadequacy
is a hard task to
of my panegyric ; for it
match her excellences with suitable action and
words.
Let us not then lie so unjust as to
praise every characteristic of other folk, and
disparage really
localise
valuable
they are our own, so as to make some men
gain by their alisence of kindred with its,
while others suffer for their relationship.
For
justice would l>e violated alike by the praise of
the one and the neglect of the other, whereas
if we make the truth our standard and rule,
and look to her alone, disregarding all the ob
jects of the vulgar and the mean, we shall
praise or pass over everything according to its
merits.

qualities

2. Yet it would be most unreasonable of all,
if, while we refuse to regard it as a righteous
thing to defraud, insult, accuse, or treat un
justly in any way, great or small, those who
are our kindred, and consider wrong done to
those nearest to us the worst of all ; we were
yet to imagine that it would be an act of jus
tice to deprive them of such an oration as is
due most of all to the good, and spend more
words upon those who are evil, and beg for

indulgent treatment, than on those who are
excellent and merely claim their'due.
For if
we are not prevented, as would be far more
just, from praising men who have lived out
side our own circle, because we do not know
and cannot personally testify to their merits,
shall we be prevented from praising those
whom we do know, because of our friendship,
or the envy of the multitude, and especially
those who have departed hence, whom it
is
too late to ingratiate ourselves with, since they
have escaped, amongst all other things, from
the reach of praise or blame.

3. Having now made a sufficient defence
on these points, and shown how necessary it
is for me to be the speaker, come, let me pro
ceed with my eulogy, rejecting all daintiness
and elegance of style (for she whom we are
praising was unadorned and the absence of
ornament was to her, beauty), and yet ^form
ing, as a most indispensable debt, all those
funeral rites which are her due, and further
instructing everyone in a zealous imitation of
the same virtue, since it is my object in every
word and action to promote the perfection of
those committed to my charge.
The task of
praising thtrcountry and family ofour departed
one I leave to another, more scrupulous in ad
hering to the rules of eulogy ; nor will he
lack many fair topics, if he wish to deck her
with external ornaments, as men deck a splen
did and beautiful form with gold and precious
stones, and the artistic devices of the crafts
man; which, while they accentuate ugliness
by their contrast, can add no attractiveness to
the beauty which surpasses them.
For my
part, I will only conform to such rules so far
as to allude to our common parents, for it
would not be reverent to pass unnoticed the
great blessing of having such parents and
teachers, and then speedily direct my attention
to herself, without further taxing the patience
of those who are eager to learn what manner
of woman she was.

4. Who is there who knows not the Abra
ham and Sarah of these our latter days, Greg
ory and Nonna his wife?
For it is not well
to omit the incitement to virtue of mention
ing their names. He has been justified by
faith, she has dwelt with him who is faithful ;
he beyond all hope has been the father of many
nations," she has spiritually travailed in their
birth; he escaped from the bondage of his
father's gods/ she is the daughter as well as

« Rom. iv. 18.
0 H'tfnt/irr's godt. These words, together with the reference
to idols and idolaters in § 5 and the lines (Poem. Hist. I. i. 123-4,
have led some writers
tome 2. p. 636.) mr eiSuAot? iraoos ?jep
lesp. Ullmaun and Clericus) to attribute the worship of idols to the

the mother of the free ; he went out from kin
dred and home for the sake of the land of
promise,a she was the occasion of his exile ;
for on this head alone I venture to claim for
her an honour higher than that of Sarah ; he
set forth on so noble a pilgrimage, she readily
shared with him in its toils ; he gave himself
to the Lord, she both called her husband lord
and regarded him as such, and in part was
thereby justified ; whose was the promise, from
whom, as far as in them lay, was born Isaac,
and whose was the gift.

5. This good shepherd was the result of his
wife's prayers and guidance, and it was from
her that he learned his ideal of a good shep
herd's life. He generously fled from his idols,
and afterwards even put demons to flight ; he
never consented to eat salt with idolators :
united together with a bond of one honour, of
one mind, of one soul, concerned as much
with virtue and fellowship with God as with
the flesh ; equal in length of life and hoary
hairs, equal in prudence and brilliancy, rivals
of each other, soaring beyond all the rest, pos
sessed in few respects by the flesh, and trans
lated in spirit, even before dissolution: pos
sessing not the world, and yet possessing it,
by at once despising and rightly valuing it :
forsaking riches and yet being rich through
their noble pursuits ; rejecting things here, and
purchasing instead the things yonder : pos
sessed of a scanty remnant of this life, left over
from their piety, but of an abundant and long
I will say
life for which they have laboured.
but one word more about them : they have
been rightly and fairly assigned, each to either
sex ;
is the ornament of men, she of
women, and not only the ornament but the
pattern- of virtue.

he

6. From them Gorgonia derived both her
existence and her reputation ; they sowed in
her the seeds of piety, they were the source of
her fair life, and of her happy departure with
better hopes. Fair privileges these, and such as
are not easily attained by many of those who
plume themselves highly upon their noble
birth, and are proud of their ancestry.
But,
if I must treat of her case in a more philo
sophic and lofty strain, Gorgonia's native land
was Jerusnlem above/ the object, not of sight
but of contemplation, wherein is our common
wealth, and whereto we are pressing on : whose
Hypsistarii, and Clemcncct points out that jiiw is only the Ep.
ana Ion. panic of £aw, and docs not mean " of animals." The
weakness of a reliance on a poetical expression is shown in Tlicl.
Christ. Uiog. Here the words are the myslical application of the
actual experience of Abraham, and elkaXov docs not necessarily
connote material idols.
Oral,
funcbr. de Placilla. p. 965. B (ed. 1615) to the worship of Jesus
Christ by the Arians. Cf. Introd. to Oral, xviii.

It is applied by S. Greg. Nyssen.

a Gen. xii. 1 ; Heb. xi. 8.

0 Heb. xii. 32, 23.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

citizen Christ is, and whose fellow-citizens are
the assembly and church of the first born who
are written in heaven, and feast around its
great Founder in contemplation of His glory,
and take part in the endless festival ; her nobil
ity consisted in the preservation of the Image,
and the perfect likeness to the Archetype,
which is produced by reason and virtue and
pure desire, ever more and more conform
ing, in things pertaining to God, to those truly
initiated into the heavenly mysteries ; and in
knowing whence, and of what character, and
for what end we came into being.

is

7. This is what I know upon these points:
that I both am aware
and therefore it
and assert that her soul was more noble than
those of the East," according to a better
than the ordinary rule of noble or ignoble
birth, whose distinctions depend not on
blood but on character ; nor does it classify
those whom it praises or blames according to
their families, but as individuals.
But speak
ing as I do of her excellences among those
who know her, let each one join in contribu
ting some particular and aid me in my speech :
for it is impossible for one man to take in
every point, however gifted with observation
and intelligence.

8. In modesty she so greatly excelled,
and so far surpassed, those of her own day, to
say nothing of those of old time who have
been illustrious for modesty, that, in regard
to the two divisions of the life of all, that is,
the married and the unmarried state, the lat
ter being higher and more divine, though
more difficult and dangerous, while the former
is more humble and more safe, she was able
to avoid the disadvantages of each, and to
select and combine all that is best in both,
namely, the elevation of the one and the
security of the other, thus becoming modest
without pride, blending the excellence of the
married with that of the unmarried state, and
proving that neither of them absolutely binds
us to, or separates us from, God or the world
(so that the one from its own nature must be
uttely
altogether
praised) : but that it is mind which nobly pre
sides over wedlock and maidenhood, and
arranges and works upon them as the raw
material of virtue under the master-hand of
reason.
For though she had entered upon a
carnal union, she was not therefore separated
from the spirit, nor, because her husband was
her head, did she ignore her first Head : but,
performing those few ministrations due to the

avoided, and the

other

world and nature, according to the will of
the law of the flesh, or rather of Him who
gave to the flesh these laws, she consecrated
herself entirely to God.
But what is most ex
cellent and honourable, she also won over her
husband to her side, and made of him a good
fellow-servant, instead of an unreasonable mas
ter.
And not only so, but she further made
the fruit of her body, her children and her
children's children, to be the fruit of her spirit,
dedicating to God not her single soul, but
the whole family and household, and making
wedlock illustrious through her own accepta
bility in wedlock, and the fair harvest she
presenting herself, as
had reaped thereby ;
long as she lived, as an example to her off
spring of all that was good, and when sum
moned hence, leaving her will behind her, as
a silent exhortation to her house.

9. The divine Solomon, in his instructive
wisdom, I mean his
Proverbs, praises the
woman11 who looks to her household and loves
; her husband, contrasting her with one who
roams abroad, and is uncontrolled and dis
honourable, and hunts for precious souls with
wanton words and ways, while she manages
well
at home and bravely sets- about her
woman's duties, as her hands hold the dis
taff, and she prepares two coats for her hus
band, buying a field in due season, and makes
good provision for the food of her servants,
and welcomes her friends at a liberal table ;
with all the other details in which he sings
the
praises of the modest and industrious
Now, to praise my sister in these
woman.
points would be to praise a statue for its
claws, without
shadow, or a lion
for
allusion
Who
was more deserving
of renown, and yet
who avoided it so much and made herself
inaccessible to the eyes of man ? Who knew
better the due proportions of sobriety and
cheerfulness, so that her sobriety should not
seem inhuman, nor her tenderness immodest,
but prudent in one, gentle in the other, her
discretion was marked by a combination of
sympathy and dignity ?
Listen, ye women
addicted to ease and display, who despise the
veil of shamefastness. Who ever so kept her
eyes under control? Who so derided laughter,
that the ripple of a smile seemed a great thing
to her ? Who more steadfastly closed her
ears ? And who opened them more to the Di -
vine words, or rather, who installed the mind
as ruler of the tongue in uttering the judgments
of God? Who, as she, regulated her lips?

its
greatest perfections.

to its

a Job L 3.

a Prov. xxxi. xo.

*

ON HIS SISTER GORGONIA.

10. Here, if you will, is another point of
her excellence : one of which neither she nor
any truly modest and decorous woman thinks
anything: but which we have been made to
think much of, by those who are too fond of
ornament and display, and refuse to listen to
instruction on such matters.
She was never
adorned with gold wrought into artistic forms
of surpassing beauty, nor' flaxen tresses, fully
or partially displayed, nor spiral curls, nor dis
honouring designs of men who construct erec
tions on the honourable head, nor costly folds
of flowing and transparent robes, nor graces of
brilliant stones, which color the neighbouring
air, and cast a glow upon the form ; nor the
arts and witcheries of the painter, nor that
cheap beauty of the infernal creator who works
against the Divine, hiding with his treacherous
pigments the creation of God, and putting it
to shame with his honour, and setting before
eager eyes the imitation of an harlot instead
of the form of God, so that this bastard beauty
may steal away that image which should be
But
kept for God and for the world to come.
though she was aware of the many and various
external ornaments of women, yet none of them
was more precious to her than her own char
acter, and the brilliancy stored up within.
One red tint was dear to her, the blush of
modesty ; one white one, the sign of temper
ance : but pigments and pencillings, and living
pictures, and flowing lines of beauty, she left
to women of the stage and of the streets, and
to all who think it a shame and a reproach to
be ashamed.

11. Enough of such topics.

Of her prud
ence and piety no adequate account can be
given, nor many examples found besides those
of her natural and spiritual parents, who were
her only models, and of whose virtue she in
no wise fell short, with this single exception
most readily admitted, that they, as she both
knew and acknowledged, were the source of
her goodness, and the root of her own illum
ination.
What could be keener than the in
tellect of her who was recognized as a common
adviser not only by those of her family, those
of the same people and of the one fold, but
even by all men round about, who treated her
counsels and advice as a law not to be broken ?
What more sagacious than her words? What
more prudent than her silence?
Having men
tioned silence, I will proceed to that which
was most characteristic of her, most becoming
to women, and most serviceable to these times.
Who had a fuller knowledge of the things of
God, both from the Divine oracles, and from
But who was less
her own understanding?

ready to speak, confining herself within the due
limits of women ?
Moreover, as was the bounden duty of a woman who has learned true
piety, and that which is the only honourable
object of insatiate desire, who, as she, adorned
temples with offerings, both others and this
one, which will hardly, now she is gone, be
so adorned again?
Or rather, who so pre
sented herself to God as a living temple?
Who again paid such honor to Priests, espe
cially to him who was her fellow soldier and
teacher of piety, whose are the good seeds,
and the pair of children consecrated to God.

12. Who opened her house to those who
live according to God with a more graceful
and bountiful welcome? And, which is greater
than this, who bade them welcome with such
modesty and godly greetings?
Further, who
showed a mind more unmoved in sufferings?
Whose soul was more sympathetic to those in
trouble? Whose hand more liberal to those in
want ?
I should not hesitate to honour her with
the words of Job : Her door was opened to
all comers ; the stranger did not lodge in the
street.
She was eyes to the blind, feet to the
lame, a mother to the orphan." Why should
I say more of her compassion to widows, than
that its fruit which she obtained was, never to
Her house was a
be called a widow herself?
common abode to all the needy of her family ;
and her goods no less common to all in need
than their own belonged to each.
She hath
dispersed abroad and given to the poor,3 and
according to the infallible truth of the Gospel,
she laid up much store in the wine-presses
above, and oftentimes entertained Ghrist in
the person of those whose benefactress she was.
And, best of all, there was in her no unreal
profession, but in secret she cultivated piety
before Him who seeth secret things.
Every
thing she rescued from the ruler of this world,
everything she transferred to the safe garners.
Nothing did she leave liehind to earth, save
She bartered everything for the
her body.
hopes above : the sole wealth she left to her
children was the imitation of her example, and
emulation of her merits.

13. But amid these tokens of incredible
magnanimity, she did not surrender her body
to luxury, and unrestrained pleasures of the
appetite,
dog, as
that raging and tearing
though presuming upon her acts of benevo
lence, as most men do, who redeem their lux
ury by compassion to the poor,- and instead of
healing evil with good, receive evil as a recom
Nor did she, while
pense for their good deeds.

a Job xxix. 15 ; xxxi. 32.

0 Ps. cxii. 9.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

subduing her dust a by fasting, leave to another
the medicine of hard lying ; nor, while she
found this of spiritual service, was she less re
strained in sleep than anyone else ; nor, while
regulating her life on this point as if freed from
the body, did she lie upon the ground, when
others were passing the night erect, as the most
mortified men struggle to do.
Nay in this
respect she was seen to surpass not only women,
but the most devoted of men, by her intelli
gent chanting of the psalter, her converse with,
and unfolding and apposite recollection of,
the Divine oracles, her bending of her knees
which had grown hard and almost taken root
in the ground, her tears to cleanse her stains
with contrite heart and spirit of lowliness, her
prayer rising heavenward, her mind freed from
wandering in rapture ; in all these, or in any
one of them, is there man or woman who can
boast of having surpassed her ?
is
a great thing to say, but it is true, that while
she was zealous in her endeavour after some
points of excellence, of others she was the par
agon : of some she was the discoverer, in others
she excelled.
And if in some single particular
she was rivalled, her superiority consists in her
complete grasp of all.
Such was her success
in all points, as none else attained even in a
moderate degree in one : to such perfection did
she attain in each particular, that any one might
of itself have supplied the place of all.

Besides, it

14. O untended body, and squalid garments,
whose only flower is virtue ! O soul, clinging
to the body, when reduced almost to an im
material state through lack of food ; or rather,
when the body had been mortified by force,
even before dissolution, that the soul might at
tain to freedom, and escape the entanglements
of the senses ! O nights of vigil, and psal
mody, and standing which lasts from one day
to another ! O David, whose strains never
seem tedious to faithful souls !
O tender
limbs, flung upon the earth and, contrary to
nature, growing hard ! O fountains of tears,
sowing in affliction that they might reap in
joy. ^ O cry in the night, piercing the clouds
and reaching unto Him that dwelleth in the
heavens ! O fervour of spirit, waxing bold in
prayerful longings against the dogs of night,
and frosts and rain, and thunders, and hail,
and darkness ! O nature of woman overcom
ing that of man in the common struggle for
salvation, and demonstrating that the distinc
tion between male and female is one of body
not of soul! O Baptismal purity, O soul, in
the pure chamber of thy body, the bride of

Christ ! O bitter eating ! O Eve mother of
our race and of our sin! O subtle serpent,
and death, overcome by her self-discipline !
O self-emptying of Christ, and form of a ser
vant, and sufferings, honoured by her morti
fication !

15. Oh! how am I to count up all her
traits, or- pass over most of them without in
Here
jury to those who know them not ?
however it is right to subjoin the rewards of her
piety, for indeed I take it that you, who knew
her life well, have long been eager and desir
ous to find in my speech not only things
present, or her joys yonder, beyond the con
ception and hearing and sight of man, but also
those which the righteous Rewarder bestowed
upon her here : a matter which often tends
to the edification of unbelievers, who from small
things attain to faith in those which are great,
and from things which are seen to those which
are not seen.
I will mention then some facts
which are generally notorious, others which
have been from most men kept secret ; and
that because her Christian principle made a
point of not making a display of her [Divine]
favours.
You know how her maddened mules
ran away with her carriage, and unfortunately
overturned it, how horribly she was dragged
along, and seriously injured, to the scandal of
unbelievers at the permission of such accidents
to the righteous, and how quickly their un
belief was corrected :
crushed and
bruised as she was, in bones and limbs, alike
in those exposed and in those out of sight, she
would have none of any physician, except
Him Who had permitted it ; both because she
shrunk from the inspection and the hands of
men, preserving, even in suffering, her mod
esty, and also awaiting her justification from
Him Who allowed this to happen, so that she
owed her preservation to none other than to
Him : with the result that men were no less
struck by her unhoped-for recovery than by
her misfortune, and concluded that the tragedy
had happened for her glorification through
sufferings, the suffering being human, the re
covery superhuman, and giving a lesson to
those who come after, exhibiting in a high
degree faith in the midst of suffering, and
patience under calamity, but in a still higher
degree the kindness of God to them that are
such as she.
For to the beautiful promise to
the righteous " though he fall, he shall not be
utterly broken,"" has been added one more
recent, " though he be utterly broken, he shall
For if
speedily be raised up and glorified." P

for,

all

a Her dust, i.e. her body.

a Ps. xxxvii. 24.

(J lb. cxlvi. 8 (LXX.)-

her misfortune was unreasonable, her recov
ery was extraordinary, so that health soon
stole away the injury, and the cure became
more celebrated than the blow.

16. O remarkable and wonderful disaster !
O injury more noble than
security ! O
prophecy, "He hath smitten, and He will
bind us up, and revive us, and after three
days He will raise us up," a portending indeed,
as it did, a greater and more sublime event,
yet no less applicable to Gorgonia's sufferings !
This then, notorious to all, even to those afar
off, for the wonder spread to all, and the les
son was stored up in the tongues and ears
of all, with the other wonderful works and
powers of God.
But the following incident,
hitherto unknown and concealed from most
men by the Christian principle 1 spoke of, and
her pious shrinking from vanity and display,
dost thou bid me tell, O best*3 and most per
fect of shepherds, pastor of this holy sheep,
and dost thou further give thy assent to it,
since to us alone has this secret been entrusted,
and we were mutual witnesses of the marvel,
or are we still to keep our faith to her who is
gone ?
Yet I do think, that as that was the
time to be silent, this is the time to manifest
it, not only for the glory of God, but also
for the consolation of those in affliction.

17. She was sick in body, and dangerously
ill of an extraordinary and malignant disease,
her whole frame was incessantly fevered, her
blood at one time agitated and boiling, then
curdling with coma, incredible pallor, and
paralysis of mind and limbs: and this not at
long intervals, but sometimes very frequently.
Its virulence seemed beyond human aid ; the
skill of physicians, who carefully examined
the case, both singly and in consultation, was
of no avail ; nor the tears of her parents,
which often have great power, nor public sup
plications and intercessions, in which all the
people joined as earnestly as if for their own
preservation : for her safety was the safety of
all, as, on the contrary, her suffering and sick
ness was a common misfortune.

18. What then did this great soul, worthy
offspring of the greatest, and w^hat was the med
icine for her disorder, for we have now come
to the great secret?
Despairing of all other
aid, she betook herself to the Physician of all,
and awaiting the silent hours of night, during
a slight intermission of the disease, she ap
proached the altar with faith, and, calling

a Hos. vi. 1, a.
0 O best, &*c% Fauslinus, bishop of Iconium. must have been
present and S. Gregory, having asked his permission to relate
the incident, looks towards him awaiting some sign of his assent.

upon Him Who is honoured thereon, with a
mighty cry, and every kind of invocation,
calling to mind all His former works of power,
and well she knew those both of ancient and
of later days, at
last she ventured on an act
of pious and splendid effrontery : she imitated
the woman whose fountain of blood was dried
up by the hem of Christ's garment.* What
did she do? Resting her head with another
cry upon the altar, and with a wealth of tears,
as she who once bedewed the feet of Christ, fl
and declaring that she would not loose her
hold until she was made whole, she then ap
plied her medicine to her whole body, viz.,
such a portion of the an tity pes > of the Precious
Body and Blood as she treasured in her hand,
mingling therewith her tears, and, O the won
der, she went away feeling at once that she
was saved, and with the lightness of health in
body, soul, and mind, having received, as the
reward of her hope, that which she hoped for,
and having gained bodily by means of spirit
Great though these things be,
ual strength.
Believe them all of you,
they are not untrue.
whether sick or sound, that ye may either
keep or regain your health.
And that my
story is no mere boastfulness is plain from the
silence in which she kept, while alive, what I
Nor should I now have pub
have revealed.
lished it, be Well assured, had I not feared
that so great a marvel would have been utter
ly hidden from the faithful and unbelieving
of these and later days.

19. Such was her life.

Most of its details
I have left untold, lest my speech should grow
to undue proportions, and lest I should seem
to be too greedy for her fair fame : but ]>erhaps
we should be wronging her holy and illus
trious death, did we not mention some of its
excellences ; especially as she so longed for
I will do so therefore, as con
and desired it.
cisely as I can.
She longed for her dissolu
tion, for indeed she had great boldness to
wards Him who called her, and preferred to be
with Christ, beyond all things on earth.4 And
there is none of the most amorous and unre
strained, who has such love for his body, as
she had to fling away these fetters, and escape
from the mire in which we spend our lives,
and to associate in purity with Him Who is
Fair, and entirely to hold her Beloved, Who is
I will even say it, her Lover, by Whose rays,
feeble though they now are, we arc enlight
from
ened, and Whom, though separated
Him, we are able to know.
Nor did she
fail even of this desire, divine and sublime

a S. Matt. ix. 20.

y Antitypes, i.e. the reserved Sacrament.

8 S. Luke vii. 78.

6 PhiL i. 33.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

watching.

though it was, and, what is
still greater,
she had a foretaste of His Beauty through
her forecast and constant
Her
only sleep transferred her to exceeding joys,
and her one vision embraced her departure at
the foreappointed
time, having been made
aware of this day, so that according to the de
cision of God she might be prepared and yet
not disturbed.

20. She had recently obtained the blessing
of cleansing and perfection, which we have all
received from God as a common gift and
foundation of our new 0 life.
Or rather all her
life was a cleansing and perfecting: and while
the Holy
she received regeneration from
Spirit, its security was hers by virtue of her for
mer life. And in her case almost alone, I will
venture to say, the mystery was a seal rather
than a gift of grace. And when her husband's
perfection was her one remaining desire (and
if you wish me briefly to describe the man,
I do not know what more to say of him than
that he was her husband) in order that she
might be consecrated to God in her whole
body, and not depart half-perfected, or leave
behind her imperfect anything that was hers ;
she did not even fail of this petition, from
Him Who fulfils the desire of them that fear
Him,"9 and accomplishes their requests.

21. And now when she had all things to
her mind, and nothing was lacking of her de
sires, and the appointed time drew nigh, be
ing thus prepared for death and departure,
she fulfilled the law which prevails in such
After many
matters, and took to her bed.
injunctions to her husband, her children, and
her friends, as was to be expected from one
who was full of conjugal, maternal, and broth
erly love, and after making her last day a day
discourse
of solemn festival with brilliant
upon the things above, she fell asleep,
full
not of the days of man, for'which she had no
desire, knowing them to be evil for her, and
mainly occupied with our dust and wander
ings, but more exceedingly full of the days of
God, than I imagine any one even of those
who have departed in a wealth of hoary hairs,
and have numbered many terms of years.
Thus she was set free, or, it is better to say,
taken to God, or flew away, or changed her
abode, or anticipated by a little the departure
of her body.

22. Yet what was I on the point of omit
ting?
But perhaps thou, who art her spirit
ual father, wouldst not have allowed me, and
the wonder, and
hast carefully concealed

made it known to me.
It is a great point for
her distinction, and in our memory gf her
virtue, and regret for her departure.
But
trembling and tears have seized upon me, at
She was just
the recollection of the wonder.
passing away, and at her last breath,
sur
rounded by a group of relatives and friends
performing the last offices of kindness, while
her aged mother bent over her, with her soul
convulsed with envy of her departure, anguish
and affection being blended in the minds of
Some longed to hear some burning word
all.
to be branded in their recollection ;
others
were eager to speak, yet no one dared ; for
tears were mute and the pangs of grief unconsoled, since it seemed sacrilegious, to think
that mourning could be an honour to one who
was thus passing away.
So there was solemn
silence, as if her death had been a religious
There she lay, to all appearance,
ceremony.
breathless, motionless, speechless ; the stillness
of her body seemed paralysis, as though the
organs of speech were dead, after that which
could move them was gone.
But as her pas
tor, who in this wonderful scene, was carefully
watching her, perceived that her lips were
gently moving, and placed his ear to them,
which his disposition and sympathy embold
ened him to do,-but do you expound the
meaning of this mysterious calm, for no one
can disbelieve it on your word !
Under her
breath she was repeating a psalm-the last
words of a psalm-to say the truth, a testi
mony to the boldness with which she was de
parting, and blessed is he who can fall asleep
with these words, "I will lay me down in
peace, and take my rest.""
Thus wert thou
singing, fairest of women, and thus it fell out
unto thee ; and the song became a reality,
and attended on thy departure as a memorial
of thee, who hast entered upon sweet peace
after suffering, and received (over and above
the rest which comes to all), that sleep which
is due to the beloved,3 as befitted one who
lived and died amid the words of piety.

23. Better, I know well, and far more
precious than eye can see, is thy present lot,
the song of them that keep holy-day,T the
throng of angels, the heavenly host, the vision
of glory, and that splendour, pure and perfect
beyond all other, of the Trinity Most High,
no longer beyond the ken of the captive mind,
dissipated by the senses, but entirely contem
plated and possessed by the undivided mind,
and flashing upon our souls with the whole
light of Godhead : Mayest thou enjoy to the

a htvripQVy lit- " second.*1

0 Ps. cxlv. 19.

a Ps. iv. 8.

0 lb. exxvii. s.

y lb. xlii. 4.

TO HIS FATHER.

full all those things whose crumbs thou didst,
while still upon earth, possess through the
reality of, thine
inclination towards them.
And if thou takest any account of our affairs,
and holy souls receive from God this privi
lege, do thou accept these words of mine, in
place of, and in preference to many panegy
rics, which I have bestowed upon Casarius be
fore thee, and upon thee after him-since I
have been preserved to pronounce panegyrics
If any one will, after you,
upon my brethren.
pay me the like honour, I cannot say.
Yet
may my only honour be that which is in God,
and may my pilgrimage and my home be in
Christ Jesus our Lord, to Whom, with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory for ever.
Amen.

ORATION XII.

To his Father, when He had Entrusted
to Him the Care of the Church of
Nazianzus.

that

This Oration

was delivered

a.d. 372.
Two years earlier Valens had divided CappadoAnthimus, Bishop
cia into two provinces.
of Tyana, asserting
the ecclesiastical
provinces were regulated by those of the em
pire, claimed metropolitical rights over the
churches of Cappadocia Secunda, in opposi
tion to S. Basil, who had hitherto been met
ropolitan of the undivided province.
S. Basil,
with the intention of vindicating the perma
nence of his former rights, created a new see at
Sasima, on the borders of the two provinces,
and with great difficulty prevailed upon S.
Gregory to receive consecration as its first
S. Gregory, who had " bent his
Bishop.
neck, but not his will," a was for a long time
reluctant to enter upon his Episcopal duties,
and at last was prevailed upon by S. Gregory
of Nyssa, S. Basil's brother, to make an at
When, however, he found
tempt to do so.
that Anthimus wis prepared to bar his en
trance by force of arms, he returned home,
definitely resigned his see, and once more
l>etook himself to the life of solitude which he
Recalled hence, he con
so dearly loved.
sented,0 at his father's earnest entreaty, to un
dertake provisionally the duties of Bishopcoadjutor of Nazianzus : and pronounced this
short discourse on the occasion of his installa
tion.
1.

I opened my mouth, and drew in the
Spirit,y and I give myself and my all to the

0 lb., 492-525.

y Ps. cxix. 131.

aCarmina Hist., xi.t 487.

Spirit, my action and speech, my inaction and
silence, only let Him hold me and guide me,
and move both hand and mind and tongue
whither it is right, and He wills: and restrain
them as it is right and expedient.
I am an
instrument of God, a rational instrument, an
instrument tuned and struck by that skilful
Yesterday His work in me
artist, the Spirit.
I mused on abstinence from
was silence.
speech.
Does He strike upon my mind to
day ? My speech shall be heard, and I will
muse on utterance.
I am neither so talkative,
as to desire to speak, when He is bent on si
lence ; nor so reserved and ignorant as to
set a watch before my lips" when it is the time
to speak : but I open and close my door at
the will of that Mind and Word and Spirit,
Who is One kindred Deity.

2.

I will speak then, since lam so bidden.
And I will speak both to the good shepherd
here, and to you, his holy flock, as I think is
best both for me to speak, and for you to hear
to-day. Why is it that you have begged for
For my
one to share your shepherd's toil ?
speech shall begin with you, O dear and hon
oured head, worthy of that of Aaron, down
which runs that spiritual and priestly oint
ment upon his beard and clothing. P Why is it
that, while yet able to stablish and guide
many, and actually guiding them in the power
of the Spirit, you support yourself with a staff
and prop in your spiritual works?
Is it be
cause you have heard and know that even
with the illustrious Aaron were anointed Eleazar and Ithamar, the sons of Aaron ??
For I
pass over Nadab and Abihu,4 lest the allusion
be ill-omened i and Moses during his lifetime
appoints Joshua in his stead, as lawgiver and
general over those who were pressing on to
the land of promise? The office of Aaron
and Hur, supporting the hands of Moses on
the mount where Amalek was warred down • by
the Cross, f prefigured and typified long before,
I feel willing to pass by, as not very suitable
or applicable to us :
for Moses did not choose
them to share his work as lawgiver, but as
helpers in his prayer and supports for the
weariness of his hands.

.

3. What is it then that ails you ? What is
your weakness ?
I am ready
Is it physical ?
to sustain you, yea I have sustained, and been
sustained, like Jacob of old, by your fatherly
blessings. 1
Is it spiritual ? Who is stronger,
and more fervent, especially now, when the

J5 lb. cxxxiii. 2.

a Ps. cxli. 3.
6 lb. x. 1.
f The Cross. The stretching out of Moses' hands was a type of
the outstretched hands of our Lord Jesus, and His " intercession
for the transgressors," upon the Cross.

tj Gen. xxvii. 28.

« Kxod. xvii. 12.

y Lev. viii. 2.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

powers of the flesh are ebbing ancl*fading, like
so many barriers which interfere with, and
dim the brilliancy of a light?
For these
powers are wont, for the most part, to wage
war upon and oppose one another, while the
body's health is purchased by the sickness of
the soul, and the soul flourishes and looks up
ward when pleasures are stilled and fade away
But, wonderful as your
along w:ith the body.
simplicity and nobility have seemed to me be
fore, how is
it that you have no fear, espe
cially in times like these, that your spirit will
be considered a pretext, and that most men
will suppo.se, in spite of our spiritual profes
sions, that we are undertaking this from car
nal motives.
For most men have made" the
office to be looked upon as great and princely,
and accompanied with
considerable enjoy
ment, even though a man have the charge and
rule over a more slender flock than this, and
one which affords more troubles than pleas
Thus far of your simplicity, or parental
ures.
preference, if
it be so, which makes you
neither admit yourself, nor readily suspect
in others anything disgraceful; for a mind
hardly roused to evil, is slow to suspect evil.
My second duty is briefly to address this
people of yours, or now even of mine.

4. I have been overpowered, my friends
and brethren, for I will now, though I did
not at the time, ask for your aid.
I have
been overpowered by the old age of my father,
and, to use moderate terms, the kindliness of
So, help me, each of you who
my friend.
can, and stretch out a hand to me who am
pressed down and torn asunder by regret and
enthusiasm.
The one suggests flights, moun
tains and deserts, and calm of soul and body,
and that the mind should retire into itself,
and recall
its powers from sensible things, in
order to hold pure communion with God, and
be clearly illumined by the flashing rays of
the Spirit, with no admixture or disturbance
of the divine light by anything earthly or
clouded, until we come to the source of the
effulgence which we enjoy here, and regret
and desire are alike stayed, when our mirrors f
pass away in the light of truth.
The other
wills that I should come forward, and bear
fruit for the common good, and be helped by
helping others, and publish the Divine light,
and bring to God a people for His own pos
session, a holy nation, a royal priesthood,'!' and
His image cleansed in many souls. And this,
because, as a park is better than and prefera
ble to a tree, the whole heaven with its orna-

a Afin/e, by the manner in which they have sought for and ex

ercised tU

0 1 Cor. xui. 12.

y t Pet. ii. 9.

ments to a single star, and the body to a limb,
so also, in the sight of God, is the reformation
of a whole church preferable to the progress
of a single soul : and therefore, I ought not to
look only on my own interest, but also on that
of others."
For Christ also likewise, when it
was possible for him to abide in His own
honour and deity, not only so far emptied
Himself as to take the form of a slave,* but
also endured the cross, despising the shame,'*'
that he might by His own sufferings destroy
sin, and by death slay death.4
The former
are the imaginings of desire, the 1311* the
And I, standing mid
teachings of the Spirit.
way between the desire and the Spirit, and
not knowing to which of the two I should
rather yield, will impart to you what seems
to me the best and safest course, that you may
test it with me and take part in my design.

5.

It seemed to me to be best and least
dangerous to take a middle course between de
sire and fear, and to yield in part to desire, in
part to the Spirit : and that this would be the
case, if I neither altogether evaded the office,
and so refused the grace, which would be dan
gerous, nor yet assumed a burden beyond my
powers, for it is a heavy one.
The former in
deed is suited to the person of another, the lat
ter to another's power, or rather to undertake
both would be madness.
But piety and safety
would alike advise me to proportion the office
to my power, and as is the case with food, to
accept that which is within my power and re
fuse what is beyond it, for health is gained for
the body, and tranquillity for the soul, by such
a course of moderation.
Therefore I now
consent to share in the cares of my excellent
father, like an eaglet, not quite vainly flying
But
close to a mighty and high soaring eagle.
hereafter I will offer my wing to the Spirit to
be borne whither, and as, He wills: no one
shall force or drag me in any direction, con
trary to His counsel.
For sweet it is to inherit
a father's toils, and this flock is more familiar
than a strange and foreign one ;
I would even
add, more precious in the sight of God, unless
the spell of affection deceives me, and the force
of habit robs me of perception : nor is there
any more useful or safer course than that will
ing rulers should rule willing subjects: since
it is our practice not to lead by force, or by
compulsion, but by good will.
For this would
not hold together even another form of gov
ernment, since that which is held in by force
is wont, when opportunity offers, to strike
for freedom : but freedom of will more than

a Phil. ii. 4.

0 lb. it. 7.

y Heb. xii. 3.

_ 6 lb. u. 14.

/

■

ON HIS FATHER'S SILENCE.

anything eke it is, which holds together ourI will not call it rule, but-tutorship.
For
the mystery of godliness * belongs to those who
are willing, not to those who are overpowered.
6. This is my speech to you, my good men,
uttered in simplicity and with all good will, and
this is the secret of my mind.
And may the
victory rest with that which will be for the prof
it of both you and me, under the Spirit's guid
ance of our affairs, (for our discourse comes
back again to the same point,) • to Whom we
have given ourselves, and the head anointed
with the oil of perfection, in the Almighty
Father, and the Only-begotten Son, and the
Holy Spirit, Who is God.
For how long
shall we hide v the lamp under the bushel,5 and
withhold from others the full knowledge of the
Godhead, when it ought to be now put upon
the lam])stand and give light to all churches
and souls and to the whole fulness of the world,
no longer by means of metaphors, or intellect
ual sketches,
but by distinct declaration ?
And this indeed is a most perfect setting forth
of Theology to those who have been deemed
worthy of this grace in Christ Jesus Himself,
our .Lord, to Whom be glory, honour, and
power for ever.

Amen.

INTRODUCTION TO ORATION XVI.

On his Father's Silence, Because of the
Plague of Hail.

This Oration belongs to the year a. d. 373.
A series of disasters had befallen the people of
Nazianzus. A deadly cattle plague, which had
devastated their herds, had been followed by a
prolonged drought, and now their just ripened
crops had been ruined by a storm of rain and
hail.
The people flocked to the church, and
finding S. Gregory the elder so overwhelmed
by his sense of these terrible misfortunes that
address them, implored
he was unable to
his coadjutor to enter the pulpit.
The occa
sion gave no time for preparation, so S. Greg
ory poured out his feelings in a discourse which
was in the fullest sense of the words ex tempore.
Its present form, however, as Benoit suggests,
may be due to a later polishing of notes taken
down at the time of delivery.

1. Why do you infringe upon the ap-

a I Tim. iii. 16.
fi Tfu samefaint, i.e., from which it started, $ t.
y Hid*, etc. S. Gregory here alludes to the "economy " which
refrained from distinctly declaring the Divinity of the Holy Ghost.
Cf. Or. xliii., 68.
This declaration of his was afterwards com
mented on by his audience and others, cf. Kpist. 58, in which his
mode of teaching is contrasted with that of S. Basil.

3 S. Mau, r. 15.

proved order of things ? Why would you
do violence to a tongue which is under obli
gation to the law ? Why do you challenge
a speech which is in subjection to the Spir
it ?
the
Why, when you have excused
head, have you hastened to the feet? Why
do you pass by Aaron0 and urge forward
Eleazax ?
I cannot allow the fountain to be
dammed up, while the rivulet runs its course ;
the sun to be hidden, while the star shines
forth ; hoar hairs to \>e in retirement, while
youth lays down the law ; wisdom to be si
lent, while inexperience speaks with assur
ance. A heavy rain is not always more use
ful than a gentle shower.
Nay, indeed, if it
be too violent, it sweeps away the earth, and
increases the proportion of the farmer's loss :
while a gentle fall, which sinks deep, en
riches the soil, benefits the tiller and makes
the corn grow to a fine crop.
So the fluent
speech is not more profitable than the wise.
For the one, though it perhaps gave a slight
pleasure,
passes away, and is dispersed as
soon, and with as little effect, as the air on
which it struck, though it charms with its
eloquence the greedy ear.
But the other
sinks into the mind, and opening wide its
mouth, fills it*1 with the Spirit, and, showing
itself nobler than its origin, produces a rich
harvest by a few syllables.

2.

I have not yet alluded to the true and
first wisdom, for which our wonderful hus
bandman and shepherd is conspicuous.
The
first wisdom is a life worthy of praise, and
kept pure for God, or being purified for Him
Who is all-pure and all-luminous, Who de
mands of us, as His only sacrifice, purifica
tion-that is, a contrite heart and the sacri
fice of praise,'' and a new creation in Christ,4
and the new man,* and the like, as the Scrip
ture loves to call it.
The first wisdom is to
despise that wisdom which consists of language
and figures of speech, and spurious and un
Be it mine to
necessary
speak five words with my understanding in
the church, rather than ten thousand words
in a tongue, f and with the unmeaning voice
of a trumpet,'' which does not rouse my sol
This is the wis
dier to the spiritual combat.
dom which I praise, which I welcome.
By
this the ignoble have won renown, and the
despised have attained the highest honours.
By this a crew of fishermen have taken the
whole world in the meshes of the Gospel-net,

embellishments.

zianzcn.

a Aaron, S. Gregory the elder.
P I's. Ixxxi. 11.
c Eph. iv. 24.

y lb. 1. 33; li. 19.
£ 1 Cor. xiv. 19.

Eleazar, S. Gregory Na-

8 a Cor. v. 17.
1} lb. xiv. 8.

GREGORY

and overcome by a word finished and cut
short" the wisdom that comes to naught. 0
count not wise the man who is clever in
words, nor him who is of a ready tongue, but
unstable and undisciplined in soul,
like the
tombs which, fair and beautiful as they are
outwardly, are fetid with corpses within,')' and
but him who
full of manifold ill-savours;
yet gives many
speaks but little of virtue,
examples of it in
his practice, and proves
the trustworthiness of his language by his
life.

3. Fairer in my eyes, is the beauty which
we can gaze upon than that which is painted
in words : of more value the wealth which
our hands can hold, than that which is imag
ined in our dreams ; and more real the wis
dom of which we are convinced by deeds,
than that which is set forth in splendid lan
guage.
For "a good understanding," he
saith, " have all they that do thereafter," 4 not
they who proclaim it. Time is the best touch
stone of this wisdom, and " the hoary head
For if, as it seems to
is a crown of glory." '
me as well as to Solomon, we must "judge
none blessed before his death," f and it is un
certain " what a day may bring forth," 1 since
our life here below has many turnings, and the
body of our humiliation 8 is ever rising, falling
and changing ; surely he, who without fault
has almost drained the cup of life, and nearly
reached the haven of the common sea of ex
istence is more secure, and therefore more en
viable, than one who has yet a long voyage
before him.

in

hast

begotten

4. Do not thou, therefore, restrain a tongue
whose noble utterances and fruits have been
many, which has begotten many children of
righteousness-yea, lift up thine eyes round
about and see,' how many are its sons, and
what are its treasures ; even this whole peo
ple, whom thou
Christ
through the Gospel."
Grudge not to us those
words which are excellent rather than many,
and do not yet give us a foretaste of our im
pending loss.A
Speak in words which, if few,
are dear and most sweet to me, which, if
perceived from their
scarcely audible,
as God heard the silence of
spiritual cry,
Moses, and said to him when interceding
mentally, "Why criest thou unto Me?"'*
Comfort this people,
I, who
was thy nursling, and have since been made

I pray thee,

are

a Is;ii. x. 22. 23 (LXX.) : Rom. ix. 28.
y S. Matt, xxiii. 27.
3 t Cur. ii. 6.
« Prov. xvi. 31.
£ Eccles. xi. 28.
0 Phil. iii. 21.
1 Isai. xlix. 18.
K Loss, i.e.. the death of his father, which, from his age, could
not be long delayed.

6 Ps. cxi. 10.
I) Prov. xxvii. 1.
k i Cur. iv. 15.

ft Kxud. xiv. 15.

great

Pastor, and now even Chief Pastor.
Give a
lesson, to me in the Pastor's art, to this peo
ple of obedience.
Discourse awhile on our
present heavy blow, about the just judgments
of God, whether we grasp their meaning, or
are ignorant of their
deep." How
again " mercy is put in the balance," 3 as holy
Isaiah declares, for goodness is not without
the
discernment, as the first labourers in
vineyard » fancied, because they could not
perceive any distinction between those who
were paid alike : and how anger, which is
called " the cup in the hand of the Lord," 4
and " the cup of falling which is drained," *
is in proportion to transgressions, even though
He abates to all somewhat of what is their
due, and dilutes with compassion the un
mixed draught of His wrath.
For He in
to indulgence towards
clines from severity
those who accept chastisement with fear, and
who after a slight affliction conceive and are
in pain with conversion, and bring forth i the
perfect spirit of salvation ; but nevertheless he
reserves the dregs, * the last drop of His anger,
that He may pour it out entire upon those
who, instead of being healed by His kind
ness, grow obdurate, like the hard-hearted
Pharaoh,8 that bitter taskmaster, who is set
forth as an example of the power ' of God
over the ungodly.

5. Tell us whence come such blows and
scourges, and what account we can give of
them.
Is it some disordered and irregular
motion or some unguided current, some un
reason of the universe, as though there were no
Ruler of the world, which is therefore borne
along by chance, as is the doctrine of the fool
ishly wise, who are themselves borne along at
random by the disorderly spirit of darkness?
Or are the disturbances and changes of the
universe, (which was originally constituted,
blended, bound together, and set in motion in
a harmony known only to Him Who gave it
motion,) directed by reason and order under
the guidance of the reins of Providence ?
Whence come famines and tornadoes and hail
storms, our present warning blow? Whence
pestilences, diseases, earthquakes, tidal waves,
and fearful things in the heavens? And how
is the creation, once ordered for the enjoy
ment of men, their common and equal de
light, changed for the punishment of the un
godly, in order that we may be chastised
through that for which, when honoured with
it, we did not give thanks, and recognise in

a Ps. xxxvi. 6.
5 Ps. Ixxv. 9.
ij Ps. Ixxv. 10.

f$ Is. xxviit. 17. (LXX.). y S. Malt. xx. 12.
• Isai. Ii. 17 (LXX.).
9 Exod. v. 6.; vii. 22.

( lb. xxvi. 18.
I Rom. ix. 17.

i

our sufferings that power which we did not
recognise in our benefits? How is
it that
some receive at the Lord's hand double for
their sins," and the measure of their wicked
ness is doubly filled up, as in the correction
of Israel, while the sins of others are done
away by a sevenfold recompense into their
bosom ? ^ What is the measure of the Amorites that is not yet full?* And how is
the sinner either let go, or chastised again,
let go perhaps, because reserved for the other
world, chastised, because healed thereby in
this?
Under what circumstances again is the
righteous, when unfortunate, possibly being
put to the test, or, when prosperous, being
observed, to see if he be poor in' mind or
not very far superior to visible
things, as
indeed conscience, our interior, and unerring
What is our calamity,
tribunal,
Is it a test of virtue,
and what its cause?
or a touchstone of wickedness ? And is
it
better to bow beneath it as a chastisement,
even though it be not so, and humble our
selves under the mighty hand of God,5 or,
considering it as a trial, to rise superior to it ?
On these points give us instruction and warn
ing, lest we be too much discouraged by our
present calamity, or fall into the gulf of evil
and despise it ; for some such feeling is very
general ; but rather that we may bear our ad
monition quietly, and not provoke one more
severe by our insensibility to this.

tells

us.

6. Terrible is an unfruitful season, and the
It could not be otherwise,
loss of the crops.
when men are already rejoicing in their hopes,
and counting on their all but harvested stores.
Terrible again is an unseasonable harvest,
when the farmers labour with heavy hearts,
sitting as it were beside the grave of their
crops, which the gentle rain nourished, but
the wild storm has rooted up, whereof the
mower filleth not his hand, neither he that
bindeth up the sheaves his bosom,' nor have
they obtained the blessing which passers-by
lwstow upon the farmers. Wretched indeed is
the sight of the ground devastated, cleared,
and shorn of its ornaments, over which the
blessed Joel wails in his most tragic picture of
the desolation of the land, and the scourge of
famine ; f while another i prophet wails, as he
contrasts with its former beauty its final disor
der, and thus discourses on the anger of the
Lord when He smites the land : before him
is the garden of Eden, behind Him a desolate

a [sai. xl. a.
8 1 Pet. v 6.
H Another.

ft Ps. Ixxix. 12.
c Ps. exxix. 7.

y Gen. xv. 16.
£ Joel i. 10.

memory fails htm. The second quotation is also from Joel.

Either this is a wrong reading, or S. Gregory's

these

other

wilderness."
things
Terrible indeed
are, and more than terrible, when we are
grieved only at what is present, and are not
yet distressed by the feeling of a severer blow :
since, as in sickness, the suffering which pains
us from time to time is more distressing than
that which is not present.
But more terrible
still are those which the treasures'* of God's
wrath contain, of which God forbid that you
should make trial ; nor will you, if you fly for
refuge to the mercies of God, and win over by
your tears Him Who will have mercy,i and
avert by your conversion what remains of His
As yet, this is gentleness and lovingwrath.
kindness and gentle reproof, and the first ele
ments of a scourge to train our tender years :
as yet, the smoke * of His anger, the prelude of
His torments ; not yet has fallen the flaming
fire,* the climax of His being moved ; not yet
the kindled coals,^ the final scourge, part of
which He threatened, when He lifted up the
other over us, part He held back by force,
when He brought the
upon us ;
using the threat and the blow alike for our
instruction, and making a way for His indig
nation, in the excess of His goodness ; begin
ning with what is slight, so that the more
severe may not be needed ; but ready to in
struct us by what is greater, if He be forced
so to do.
7.

I know the glittering sword,i and the
blade made drunk in heaven, bidden to slay,
to bring to naught, to make childless, and to
spare neither flesh, nor marrow, nor bones.
know Him, Who, though free from passion,
meets us like a bear robbed of her whelps, like
a leopard in the way of the Assyrians,9 not only
those of that day, but if anyone now is an As
syrian in wickedness : nor is it possible to
escape the might and speed of His wrath when
He watches over our impieties, and His jeal
ousy,' which knoweth to devour His adver
saries, pursues His enemies to the death."
know the emptying, the making void, the
making waste, the melting of the heart, and
knocking of the knees together,* such are the
punishments of the ungodly.
I do not dwell
on the judgments to come, to which indul
gence in this world delivers us, as it is better
to be punished and cleansed now than to be
transmitted to the torment to come, when it is
the time of chastisement, not of cleansing.
For as he who remembers God here is con
queror of death (as David ** has most excellently

6 Ps. xviii. 8.

a Joel ii. 3.
rf Eiek. xxi. 9.
x Hos. viii. 3.

0 Deut. xxxii. 34 : Jer. 1. 25.
c lb. cv. 32.
0 Hos. xiii. 7. 8.
A Nahum ii. xo.

y Hos. vi. 6.
(lb. Ixxviii. 50.
t Isai. xxvi. 11 (l.XX.).
ftPi. vi. 5 (LXX.).

sung) so the departed have not in the grave
confession and restoration ; for God has con
fined life and action to this world, and to the
future the scrutiny of what has been done.

8. What shall we do in the day of visita
tion," with which one of the Prophets terrifies
me, whether that of the righteous sentence of
God against us, or that upon the mountains
and hills, of which we have heard, or what
ever and whenever it may be, when He will
reason with us, and oppose us, and set before
us3 those bitter accusers, our sins, comparing
our wrongdoings with our benefits, and strik
ing thought with thought, and scrutinising
action with action, and calling us to account
for the image v which has been blurred and
spoilt by wickedness, till at last He leads us
away self-convicted and self-condemned, no
longer able to say that we are being unjustly
treated-a thought which is able even here
sometimes to console in their condemnation
those who are suffering.

9. But then what advocate shall we have?
What
What pretext? What false excuse?
plausible artifice? What device contrary to
the truth will impose upon the court, and rob
it of its right judgment, which places in the
balance for us all, our entire life, action, word,
and thought, and weighs against the evil that
which is better, until that which preponder
ates wins the day, and the decision is given in
favour of the main tendency ; after which there
is no appeal, no higher court, no defence on
the ground of subsequent conduct, no oil ob
tained from the wise virgins, or from them
that sell, for the lamps going out,4 no repent
ance of the rich man wasting away in the
his
flame,' and begging for repentance for
but only
friends, no statute of limitations ;
that final and fearful judgment-seat, more just
even than fearful ; or rather more fearful be
cause it
is also just ; when the thrones are set
and the Ancient of days takes His seat,f and
the books are opened, and the fiery stream
conies forth, and the light before Him, and
the darkness prepared ; and they that have
done good shall go into the resurrection of
life,'' now hid in Christ* and to be mani
fested hereafter with Him, and they that have
done evil, into the resurrection of judgment,'
to which they who have not believed have
been condemned already by the word which
judges them."
Some will be welcomed by
the unspeakable light and the vision of the
holy and royal Trinity, Which now shines

a Isai. x. 3.
0Col. iii. 3.

< S. I.uk. xvi. 24.

0 Ps. 1. 21.

y Gen. i. 26.

(Dan. vn. 9.

6 S. Matt. xxv. 8.
ij S. ^John v. 29.
x S. John ill. 18 ; xii. 48.

1 S. John v. 29.

upon them with greater brilliancy and purity
and unites Itself wholly to. the whole soul, in
which solely and beyond all else I take it that
The others
the kingdom of heaven consists.
among other torments, but above and before
them all must endure the being outcast from
God, and the shame of conscience which has
no limit.

But of these anon.

10. What are we to do now, my brethren,
when crushed, cast down, and drunken but
not with strong drink nor with wine," which
excites and obfuscates but for a while, but
with the blow which the Lord has inflicted
upon us, Who says, And thou, O heart, be
stirred and shaken,0 and gives to the despisers
the spirit of sorrow and deep sleep to drink : i
to whom He also says, See, ye despisers, be
hold, and wonder and perish?8 How shall
we bear His convictions ; or what reply shall
we make, when He reproaches us not only with
the multitude of the benefits for which we
have continued ungrateful, but also with His
chastisements, and reckons up the remedies
with which we have refused to be healed?
Calling us His children' indeed, but unworthy
children, and His sons, but strange sons £ who
have stumbled from lameness out of their
paths, in the trackless and rough ground.
How and by what means could I have in
By
structed you, and I have not done so?
gentler measures?
passed by the blood drunk in Egypt from the
wells and rivers and all reservoirs of water' in
the first plague : I passed over the next scourg
es, the frogs, lice, and flies.
I began with the
flocks and the cattle and the sheep, the fifth
plague, and, sparing as yet the rational creat
ures, I struck the animals.
You made light
of the stroke, and treated me with less reason
and attention than the beasts who were struck.
I withheld from you the rain ; one piece
was rained upon, and the piece whereupon it
rained not withered,9 and ye said " We will
I brought the hail upon you,
brave it."'
chastising you with the opposite kind of blow,
I uprooted your vineyards and shrubberies,
and crops, but I failed to shatter your wicked
ness.

I have applied them.

11. Perchance He will say to me, who am
not reformed even by blows, I know that thou
art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew,"
the heedless is heedless and the lawless man
acts lawlessly/ naught is the heavenly correc
The bellows are
tion, naught the scourges.

a Isai. xxix. 9.

y Ps. lx. 2, 3 ; Isai. xxix. 10.
« Deut. xxxii. 5.
71 Exod. vii. 19.
x Isai. xlviii. 4.

9 Amos iv. 7.

$ Hab. ii. 16.

6 Hab. i. 5 ; Acts xiii. 41.
£ Ps. xviii. 46.
* Jcr. xviii. la (LXX.).
Alb. xxi. 2 (LXX.).

burnt, the lead is consumed," as I once re
proached you by the mouth of Jeremiah,
the founder melted the silver in vain, your
Can ye
wickednesses are not melted away.
abide my wrath, saith the Lord.
Has not
My hand the power to
inflict upon you
other plagues also?
There are still at My
command the Mains breaking forth from the
ashes of the furnace,*■ by sprinkling which to
ward heaven, Moses, or any other minister of
God's action, may chastise Egypt with dis
ease.
There remain also the locusts, the dark
ness that may be felt, and the plague which,
last in order, was first in suffering and power,
the destruction and death of the firstborn, and,
to escape this, and to turn aside the destroyer,
it were better to sprinkle the doorposts of
our mind, contemplation and action, with the
great and saving token, with the blood of the
new covenant, by being crucified and dying
with Christ, that we may both rise and be
glorified and reign with Him both now and
at His final appearing, and not be broken and
crushed, and made to lament, when the griev
ous destroyer smites us all too late in this life
of darkness, and destroys o:ir firstborn,
the
offspring and results of our life which we had
dedicated to God.

be

thus

other

12. Far be it from me that I should ever,
among
re
chastisements,
proached by Him Who is good, but walks
contrary to me in fury* because of my own
contrariness: I have smitten you with blast
ing and mildew, and blight ; 4 without result.
The sword from without* made you childless,
yet have ye not returned unto Me, saith the
Lord.
May I not become the vine of the
beloved, which after being planted and en
trenched, and made sure with a fence and
tower and every means which was possible,
when it ran wild and bore thorns, was conse
quently despised, and had its tower broken
down and its fence taken away, and was not
pruned nor digged, but was devoured and
laid waste and trodden down by all ! f
This is
what I feel I must say as to my fears, thus
have I been pained by this blow, and this, I
will further tell you, is my prayer. We have
sinned, we have done amiss, and have dealt
wickedly,'' for we have forgotten Thy com
mandments and walked after our own evil
thought,9 for we have behaved ourselves un
worthily of the calling and gospel of Thy
Christ, and of His holy sufferings and humili
ation for us ; we have become a reproach to

Thy beloved, priest and people, we have erred
together, we have all gone out of the way,
we have together become unprofitable, there
is none that doeth judgment and justice, no
not one." We have cut short Thy mercies and
kindness and the bowels and compassion of
our God, by our wickedness and the perversity
of our doings, in which we have turned away.
Thou art good, but we have done amiss ;
Thou art long-suffering, but we are worthy
of stripes ; we acknowledge Thy goodness,
though we are without understanding, we
have been scourged for but few of our faults ;
Thou art terrible, and who will resist Thee ?s
the mountains will
tremble before Thee ;
and who will strive against the might of
Thine arm ?
If Thou shut the heaven, who
will open it? And if Thou let loose Thy tor
It is a light
rents, who will restrain them?
thing in Thine eyes to make poor and to
make rich, to make alive and to kill, to strike
and to heal, and Thy will is perfect action.
Thou art angry, and we have sinned,? says
one of old, making confession ; and it is now
time for me to say the opposite, "We have
sinned, and Thou art angry : " therefore have
we become a reproach to our neighbours.*
Thou didst turn Thy face from us, and we
But stay, Lord,
were filled with dishonour.
cease, Lord, forgive, Lord, deliver us not up
for ever because of our iniquities, and let not
our chastisements be a warning for others,
when we might learn wisdom from the trials
Of whom? Of the nations which
of others.
know Thee not, and kingdoms which have
not been subject to Thy .power.
But we are
Thy people,* O Lord, the rod of Thine in
heritance ; therefore correct us, but in good
ness and not in Thine anger, lest Thou bring
us to nothingness £ and contempt among all
that dwell on the earth.

13. With these words I invoke mercy : and
if it were possible to propitiate His wrath with
I would
whole burnt offerings or sacrifices,
not even have spared these.
Do you also
yourselves imitate your trembling priest, you,
my beloved children, sharers with me alike
of the Divine correction and loving-kindness.
Possess your souls in tears, and stay His
wrath by amending your way of life.
Sanc
tify a fast, call a solemn assembly.i as blessed
Joel with as charges you :
gather the elders,
and the babes that suck the breasts, whose
tender age wins our pity, and is specially
worthy of the loving-kindness of God.
know also what he enjoins both upon me, the

a Ter. vi. 20.
£ Isai. v. x.

6 \xv. xxvi. I (LXX.) ; Amos iv. 9.

8 Exod. ix. 10.
i| Dan. ix. 5.

« l)cut. xxxii. 25.

y Lev. xxvi. 27, 28.
9 Isai. lxv. 2.

o Ps. xiv. 3.

8 Ps. Ixxix. 4.

P lb. lxxvi. 7.

« lb. 6, 13.

i Jcr. x. 24,

y Isai. Ixiv. 5.

i) Joel ii. 15.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

minister of God, and upon you, who have
been thought" worthy of the same honour,
that we should enter His house in sackcloth,
and lament night and day between the porch
and the altar, in piteous array, and with more
piteous voices, crying aloud without ceasing
on behalf of ourselves and the people, spar
ing nothing, either toil or word, which may
propitiate God : saying " Spare, O Lord, Thy
people, and give not Thine heritage to re
proach," a and the rest of the prayer ; surpass
ing the people in our sense of the affliction as
much as in our rank, instructing them in our
own persons in compunction and correction of
wickedness, and in the consequent long-suffer
ing of God, and cessation of the scourge.

14. Come then, all of you, my brethren,
let us worship and fall down, and weep before
the Lord our Maker ; • let us appoint a public
mourning, in our various ages and families,
let us raise the voice of supplication ; and let
this, instead of the cry which He hates, enter
into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth.
Let us
anticipate His anger by confession ; * let us de
sire to see Him appeased, after He was wroth.
Who knoweth, he says, if He will turn and
repent, and leave a blessing behind Him?*
This I know certainly, I the sponsor of the
And when He has
loving-kindness of God.
laid aside that which is unnatural to Him,
His anger, He will betake Himself to that
which is natural, His mercy.
To the one He
is forced by us, to the other He is inclined.
And if He is forced to strike, surely He will
refrain, according to His Nature. Only let us
have mercy on ourselves, and open a road for
our
Let us
sow in tears, that we may reap in joy,' let
11s show ourselves men of Nineveh, not of
Let us amend our wickedness, lest
Sodom. i
we be consumed with it ; let us listen to the
preaching of Jonah, lest we be overwhelmed
by fire and brimstone, and if we have de
parted from Sodom let us escape to the moun
tain, let us flee to Zoar, let us enter it as the
sun rises ; let us not stay in all the plain, let
us not look around us, lest we be frozen into
a pillar of salt, a really immortal pillar, to ac
cuse the soul which returns to wickedness.

Father's righteous affections.

15. Let us be assured that to do no wrong 1
is really superhuman, and belongs to God
alone.
I say nothing alxmt the Angels, that
we may give no room for wrong feelings, nor
Our
opportunity for harmful altercations.
unhealed condition arises from our evil and
y lb. xcv. a (LXX.).
3 Joel ii. 14.
£ Gen. xix. 17, 93 : Jonah iii. 5.
Clemencet quotes this as an aphorism

ojoclii. 17.
e Ps. cxxvi. 5.
^ To do no wrong, etc.

0 Ps. xcv. 6.

from Ocinosth. de Cor.

unsubdued nature, and from the exercise of its
I powers.
Our repentance when we sin, is a
I human action, but an action which bespeaks a
good man, belonging to that portion which is
in the way of salvation.
For if even our dust
contracts somewhat of wickedness, and the
earthly tabernacle presseth down the upward
flight of the soul," which at least was created
to fly upward, yet let the image be cleansed
from filth, and raise aloft the flesh, its yoke
fellow, lifting it on the wings of reason ; and,
what is better, let us neither need this cleans
ing, nor have to be cleansed, by preserving our
original dignity, to which we are hastening
through our training here, and let us not by
the bitter taste of sin be banished from the
tree of life : though it is better to turn again
when we err, than to be free from correction
For whom the Lord
when we stumble.
loveth He chasteneth.P and a rebuke is a
fatherly action ; while every soul which is unchastised, is unhealed.
Is not then freedom
from chastisement a hard thing? But to fail to
be corrected by the chastisement is still harder.
One of the prophets, speaking of Israel, whose
heart was hard and uncircumcised, says,
Lord, Thou hast stricken them, but they have
not grieved,' Thou hast consumed them but
they have refused to receive correction ; » and
again, The people turned not to Him that
smiteth them ; * and Why is my people slidden back by a perpetual backsliding,' because
of which it will be utterly crushed and de
stroyed ?
16.

It is a fearful thing, my brethren, to
fall into the hands of a living God.f and fear
ful is the face of the Lord against them that
do evil.i and abolishing wickedness with utter
Fearful is the ear of God, listen
destruction.
ing even to the voice of Abel speaking through
Fearful His feet, which over
his silent blood.
take evildoing.
Fearful also His filling of the
universe, so that it is impossible anywhere to
escape the action of God,* not even by flying
up to heaven, or entering Hades, or by escap
ing to the far East, or concealing ourselves in
the depths and ends of the sea'.'
Nahum the
Elkoshite was afraid before me, when he pro
claimed the burden of Nineveh, God is jealous,
and the Lord takes vengeance in wrath upon
His adversaries," and uses such abundance of
severity that no room is left for further ven
geance upon the wicked.
For whenever I
hear Isaiah threaten the people of Sodom
and rulers of Gomorrah/ and say Why will
3 Prov. iii. 12.
e Jer. viii. 5.
6 Jer. xxiii. 34.

y Jer. v. 3.
i Heb. x. jr.
4 Ps. cxxxix. 7, 6.

a Wisd. ix. 15.
6 Isai. ix. 13.
n Ps. xxxiv. 16.

x Nahum i. I, 2.

A lsai. L 10.

ON HIS FATHER'S SILENCE.

ye be smitten any more, adding sin to sin ?a
I am almost filled with horror, and melted to
tears.
It is impossible, he says, to find any
blow to add to those which are past, because
of your newly added sins ; so completely have
you run through the whole, and exhausted
every form of chastisement, ever calling upon
yourselves some new one by your wickedness.
There is not a wound, nor bruise, nor putrefy
ing sore ; 0 the plague affects the whole body
and is incurable: for it is impossible to apply
a plaster, or ointment or bandages.
1 pass
over the rest of the threatenings, that I may
not press upon you more heavily than your
present plague.

Alas ! what a spectacle !

17. Only let us recognise the purpose of
the evil. Why have the crops withered, our
storehouses been emptied, the pastures of our
flocks failed, the fruits of the earth been with
held, and the plains been filled with shame
instead of with fatness: why have valleys la
mented and not abounded in corn, the moun
tains not dropped sweetness, as they shall do
hereafter to the righteous, but been stript
and dishonoured, and received on the contrary
the curse of Gilboa?? The whole earth has
become as it was in the beginning, before it
was adorned with its beauties.
Thou visitedst the earth, and madest it to drink5-but
the visitation has been for evil, and the draught
destructive.
Our
prolific crops reduced to stubble, the seed we
sowed is recognised by scanty remains, and our
harvest, the approach of which we reckon from
the number of the months, instead of from
the ripening corn, scarcely bears the firstfruits
for the Lord.
Such is the wealth of the un
godly, such the harvest of the careless sower ;
as the ancient curse runs, to look for much,
and bring in little,' to sow and not reap, to
plant and not press,f ten acres of vineyard to
yield one bath : 1 and to hear of fertile harvests
in other lands, and be ourselves pressed by
famine. Why is this, and what is the cause
of the breach?
Let us not wait to be con
victed by others, let us be our own examiners.
An important medicine for evil is confession,
and care to avoid stumbling.
I will be first
to do so, as I have made my report to my peo
ple from on high, and performed the duty of a
watcher.9
For I did not conceal the coming
of the sword that I might save my own soul '
and those of my hearers.
So will I now an
nounce the disobedience of my people, making

a Isai. i. 5 (IJCX.).
8 Ps. lxv. 9.
^ Isai. v. io. _
i Ezek. xxxiii. 3.

(3 lb. i. 6.
vi Sam. i. 21.
£ Dcut. xxviii. 39.
c Hag. i. 9.
0 lb. xxi. 6 ; lxii. 6 ; Habak. ii. 1.

what is theirs my own, if I may perchance
thus obtain some tenderness and relief.

18. One of us has oppressed the poor, and
wrested from him his portion of land, and
wrongly encroached upon his landmark by
fraud or violence, and joined house to house,
and field
to field, to rob his neighbour of
something, and been eager to have no neigh
bour, so as to dwell alone on the earth."
Another has defiled the land with usury and
interest, both gathering where he had not
sowed and reaping where he had not strawed/
farming, not the land, but the necessity of the
Another has robbed God,* the giver
needy.
of all, of the firstfruits of the barnfloor and
winepress, showing himself at once thankless
and senseless, in neither giving thanks for what
he has had, nor prudently providing, at least,
Another has had no pity on
for the future.
the widow and orphan, and not imparted his
bread and meagre nourishment to the needy,
or rather to Christ, Who is nourished in the
persons of those who are nourished even in a
slight degree ; a man perhaps of much proper
ty unexpectedly gained, for this is the most
unjust of all, who finds his many barns too
narrow for him, filling some and emptying
others, to build greater6 ones for future crops,
not knowing that he is being snatched away
with hopes unrealised, to give an account of
his riches and fancies, and proved to have
been a bad steward of another's goods.
An
other has turned aside the way of the meek,'
and turned aside the just among the unjust ;
another has hated him that reproveth in the
gates,f and abhorred him that speaketh up
rightly ; 1 another has sacrificed to his net
which catches much,9 and keeping the spoil of
the poor in his house,1 has either remembered
not God, or remembered Him ill-by saying
" Blessed be the Lord, for we are rich," * and
wickedly supposed that he received these
things from Him by Whom he will be pun
For because of these things cometh
ished.
the wrath of God upon the children of disobe
dience/
Because of these things the heaven
is shut, or opened for our punishment ; and
much more, if we do not repent, even when
smitten, and draw near to Him, Who ap
proaches us through the powers of nature.

19. What shall be said to this by those of
us who are buyers and sellers of corn, and
watch the hardships of the seasons, in order to
grow prosperous, and luxuriate in the misfor-

a Isai. v. 8.
8 S. Luke xii. 18.
q Amos v. 10.

0 S. Matt. xxv. 36.
< Amos ii. 7.
0 Habak. i. 16.

k Zech. xi. 5.

y Ma!, iii. 8.
£ Isai. xxix. 21.
1 Isai. iii. 14.

A Eph. v. 6.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

tunes of others, and acquire, not, like Joseph,
the property of the Egyptians," as a part of a
wide policy, (for he could both collect and j
supply corn duly, as he also could foresee the
famine, and provide against it afar off,) but the
property of their fellow countrymen in an il
legal manner, for they say, " When will the
new moon be gone, that we may sell, and the
sabbaths, that we may oj)en our stores ? " 3 And
they corrupt justice with divers measures and
balances, » and draw upon themselves the ephah
of lead.4 What shall we say to these things who
know no limit to our getting, who worship gold I
and silver, as those of old worshipped Baal,
and Astarte and the abomination Chemosh ? *
Who give heed to the brilliance of costly
stones, and soft flowing garments, the prey of
moths, and the plunder of robl>ers and ty- ]
rants and thieves; who are proud of their
multitude of slaves and animals, and spread !
themselves over plains and mountains, with |
their possessions and gains and schemes, like
Solomon's horseleach? which cannot be satislied, any more than the grave, and the earth,
and fire, and water ; who seek for another world
for their possession, and find fault with the
bounds of God, as top small for their insatiable
cupidity? What of those who sit on lofty
thrones and raise the stage of government, with
a brow loftier than that of the theatre, tak
ing no account of the God over all, and the
height of the true kingdom that none can ap
proach unto, so as to rule their subjects as fellowservants, as needing themselves no less lovingkindness?
Look also, I pray you, at those
who stretch themselves upon beds of ivory,
whom the divine Amos fitly upbraids, who
anoint themselves with the chief ointments,
and chant to the sound of instruments of music,
and attach themselves to transitory things as
though they were stable, but have not grieved
nor had compassion for the affliction of Jo
seph ; ' though they ought to have been kind to
those who had met with disaster l>efore them, I
and by mercy have obtained mercy ; as the firtree should howl, because the cedar had fallen,9
and be instructed by their neighbours' chas
tisement, and be led by others' ills to regulate
their own lives, having the advantage of being
saved by their predecessors' fate, instead of
being themselves a warning to others.

20. Join with us, thou divine and sacred
person, in considering these questions, with
the store of experience, that source of wisdom,
which thoij hast gathered in thy long life.

Herewith instruct thy people. Teach them to
break their bread to the hungry, to gather
together the poor that have no shelter, to cover
their nakedness and not neglect those of the
same blood,* and now especially that we may
gain a benefit from our need instead of from
abundance, a result which pleases God more
than plentiful offerings and large gifts.
After
this, nay before it, show thyself, I pray, a
Moses/ or Phinehas* to day.
Stand on our
behalf and make atonement, and let the plague
be stayed, either by the spiritual sacrifice,4 or
by prayer and reasonable intercession.'
Res
train the anger of the Lord by thy mediation :
avert any succeeding blows of the scourge.
He knoweth to respect the hoar hairs of a
father interceding for his children.
Intreat
for our past wickedness : be our surety for the
Present a people purified by suffering
future.
and fear.
Beg for bodily sustenance, but beg
rather for the angels' food that cometh down
from heaven.
So doing, thou wilt make God
to be our God, wilt conciliate heaven, wilt
restore the former and latter rain : f the Lord
shall show loving-kindness ' and our land shall
yield her fruit;' our earthly land its fruit
which lasts for the day, and our frame, which
is but dust, the fruit which is eternal, which
we shall store up in the heavenly winepresses
by thy hands, who presentest both us and
ours in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be
glory for evermore.

Amen.

INTRODUCTION TO ORATION XVIII.

On the Death of his Father.

This Oration was delivered a. d. 374.

S.
Gregory the elder died early in that
year,
according to the Greek Mensa on the 1st of
January, though Clemencet and some others
place his death a few months later.
His wife,
S. Nonna, survived him, and was present to
hear the Oration, as was also S. Basil, who
desired to honour one who had consecrated
him to the Episcopate.
The aged Saint, who
died in his hundredth year, had originally
Our
belonged to a sect called Hypsistarii.
knowledge of the existence and tenets of this
sect is due to this Oration 1 and to a few sen
tences in that of S. Greg. Nyssen. (c. Eunom.
I. ed. 1615, ]>. 12), by whom they are called
Hypsistians. He was converted by the prayers,
influence and example of his wife, S. Nonna,

a Gen. xli. 39.
£ Prov. xxx. 15.

6 Zech. v. 8.

f} Amos viii. 5.
ij Amos vi. 4-6.

ci Kings xi. 33.

y Prov. xx. 10.
6 Zcch. xi. 2.

a Isai. Iviii. 7.
6 1 Pet. ii. 5.
ij Ps. Ixxxv. 13.

P Exo<). xxxii. it.
c Rom. xii. r.
B lb. lxvii. 6.

y Ps. cvi. 23. 30.
£ Joel ii. 23.

1 Cf. OraL viii. $ 4. now.

ON THE DEATH OF HIS FATHER.

and, soon after his baptism, consecrated Bishop
of Nazianzus.
He was eminent as an able
administrator, a devout Christian, an orthodox
teacher, a steadfast Confessor of the faith, a
sympathetic Pastor, an affectionate father.
In
his life and work he was seconded by his wife,
and followed by his three children," Gregory,
Gorgonia, and Cassarius, whose names are all
to be found upon the roll of the Saints.

Funeral Oration on his Father, in the
presence of s. basil.

1. O man of God,a and faithful servant,8 |

and steward of the mysteries of God,? and
man of desires 8 of the Spirit : • for thus Script
ure s[>eaks of men advanced and lofty, superior
I will call you also a God
to visible things.
to Pharaoh f and all the Egyptian and hostile
power, and pillar and ground of the Church i
and will of God * and light in the world,
holding forth the word of life,' and prop of
But
the faith and resting place of the Spirit.
why should I enumerate all the titles which
your virtue, in its varied forms, has won
for and applied to you as your own ?

2. Tell me, however, whence do you come,
what is your business, and what favour do
you bring us ?
Since I know that you are
entirely moved with and by God, and for
the l)enefit of those who receive you.
Are
you come to inspect us, or to seek for the
pastor, or to take the oversight of the flock ?
You find us no longer in existence, but for
the most part having passed away with him,
unable to bear with the place of our afflic
tion, especially now that we have lost our
skilful steersman, our light of life, to whom
we looked to direct our course as the blazing
beacon of salvation above us : he has departed
with all his excellence, and all the power of
pastoral organization, which he had gathered
in a long time, full of days and wisdom, and
crowned, to use the words of Solomon, with
the hoary head of glory."
His flock is desolate
and downcast, filled, as you see, with despond
ency and dejection, no longer reposing in
the green pasture,* and reared up by the water
of comfort, but seeking precipices,
deserts
and pits, in which it will be scattered and
perish
in despair of ever obtaining another
wise pastor, absolutely persuaded that it can-

« The first words arc addressed to S. Hasil, who was present
£ Exod. vii. 1.

n 1. Tim. vii. 15.

S Numb. xii. 7.
8 r>:in. ix. 23 (I.XX.V
6 Isai. lxii. 4. (LXX.)
k Prov. xvi. 31.
it Ezek. xxxiv. 14.

a Josh, xiv. 6.
Y > Cor. iv. I.

1 Phil. ii. 16.
A Ps. xxiii. a.

not find such an one as he, content if it
be one who will not be far inferior.

the other

ever marvel

3. There are, as I said, three causes to ne
cessitate your presence, all of equal weight,
ourselves, the pastor, and the flock : come then,
and according to the spirit of ministry which
is in you, assign to each its due, and guide
your words in judgment, so that we may
at your wisdom.
more than
And how will you guide them ?
First by
bestowing seemly
praise upon his virtue,
not only as a pure sepulchral tribute of speech
to him who was pure, but also to set forth
to others his conduct and example as a mark
of true piety.
Then bestow upon us some
brief counsels concerning life and death, and
the union and severance of body and soul,
the two worlds, the one present but
and
spiritually perceived
transitory,
and abiding ;
us to despise
and persuade
that which is deceitful and disordered and
uneven, carrying us and being carried, like
the waves, now up, now down ; but to cling
to that which is firm and stable and divine
and constant, free from all disturbance and
confusion.
For this would lessen our pain
liecause of friends departed before us, nay we
should rejoice
if your words should carry
us hence and set us on high, and hide distress
of the present in the future, and persuade
us that we also are pressing on to a good
Master, and that our home is better than our
pilgrimage ; and that translation and removal
thither is to us who are tempest-tost here like
a calm haven to men at sea ; or as ease and
relief from toil come to men who, at the close
of a long journey, escape the troubles of the
wayfarer, so to those who attain to the hostel
yonder comes a better and more tolerable ex
istence than that of those who still tread the
crooked and precipitous path of this life.

4. Thus might you console us ; but what
of the flock ?
Would you first promise the
oversight and leadership of yourself, a man
under whose wings we all would gladly repose,
and for whose words we thirst more eagerly
than men suffering from thirst for the purest
fountain ?
Secondly, persuade us that the
good shepherd who laid down his life for the
sheep0 has
not even now left us; but is
present, and tends and guides, and knows his
own, and is known of his own, and, though
bodily invisible, is spiritually recognized, and
defends his flock against the wolves, and al
lows no one to climb over into the fold as a
robber and traitor ; to pervert and steal away,

a S. John x. xi.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

by the voice of strangers, souls under the fair
guidance of the truth.
Aye, I am well as
sured that his intercession is of more avail now
than was his instruction in former days, since
he is closer to God, now that he has shaken
off his bodily fetters, and freed his mind from
the clay which obscured it, and holds inter
course naked with the nakedness of the prime
and purest Mind ; being promoted, if it be not
rash to say so, to the rank and confidence of
an angel.
This, with your power of speech
and spirit, you will set forth and discuss bet
ter than I can sketch it.
But in order that,
through ignorance of his excellences, your lan
guage may not fall very far short of his deserts,
I will, from ray own knowledgeof the departed,
briefly draw an outline, and preliminary plan
of an eulogy to be handed to you, the illus
trious artist of such subjects, for the details of
the beauty of his virtue to be filled in and
transmitted to the ears and minds of all.

5. Leaving to the laws of panegyric the
description of his country, his family, his
nobility of figure, his external magnificence,
and the other subjects of human pride,
begin with what is of most consequence and
comes closest to ourselves. He sprang from a
stock unrenowned, and not well suited for
piety, for I am not ashamed of his origin, in
my confidence in tBe close of his life, one
that was not planted in the house of God," 1
but far removed and estranged, the combined
product of two of the greatest oppositesGreek error and legal imposture, some parts of
each of which it escaped, of others it was
compounded.
For, on the one side, they re
ject idols and sacrifices, but reverence fire
and lights ; on the other, they observe the
Sabbath and petty regulations as to certain
meats, but despise circumcision.
These lowly
men call themselves Hypsistarii, and the Al
mighty is, so they say, the only object of
What was the result of this
their worship.
I know not
double tendency to impiety ?
whether to praise more highly the grace which
called him, or his own purpose.
However, he
so purged the eye of his mind from the hu
mours f which obscured it, and ran towards
the truth with such speed that he endured the
loss of his mother and his property for a while,
for the sake of his heavenly Father and the
true inheritance: and submitted more readily
to this dishonour, than others to the greatest
honours, and, most wonderful as this is, I won
Because this
der at

it but little. Why ?

a Ps. xcii. 13.
0 Humours. This word is used Aristoph. Plut. 581, of the ob

scuring effect ofold prejudices.

glory is common to him with many others,
and all must come into the great net of God,
and be caught by the words of the fishers, al
though some are earlier, some later, enclosed
by the Gospel.
But what does especially in
his life move my wonder, it is needful for me
to mention.

6. Even before he was of our fold, he was
His character made him one of us.
ours.
For, as many ofour own are not with us, whose
life alienates them from the common body, so,
many of those without are on our side, whose
character anticipates their faith, and need
only the name of that which indeed they 'xjssess. My father was one of these, an alien
shoot, but inclined by his life towards us.
He was so far advanced in self control, that
he became at once most beloved and most
modest, two qualities difficult to combine.
What greater and more splendid testimony
can there be to his justice than his exercise of
a position second to none in the state, with
out enriching himself by a single farthing,
although he saw everyone else casting the
hands of Briareus upon the public funds, and
For thus do I
swollen with ill-gotten gain ?
term unrighteous wealth.
Of his prudence
this also is no slight proof, but in the course
of my speech further details will be given.
It
was as a reward ■ for such conduct, I think,
that he attained to the faith. How this came
about, a matter too important to be passed
over, I would now set forth.

7.

I have heard the Scripture say : Who
can find a valiant woman ?P and declare that
she is a divine gift, and that a good marriage
is brought about by the Lord.
Even those
without are of the same mind ; if they say
that a man can win no fairer prize than a
good wife, nor a worse one than her opposite.''
But we can mention none who has been in
this respect more fortunate than he.
For I
think that, had anyone from the ends of the
earth and from every race of men attempted
to bring about the best of marriages, he could
not have found a better or more harmonious
one than this.
For the most excellent of men
and of women were so united that their mar
riage was a union of virtue rather than of
bodies : since, while they excelled all others,
they could not excel each other, because in
virtue they were quite equally matched.

8. She indeed who was given to Adam as
a help meet for him, because it was not good
for man to' be alone,4 instead of an assistant

-but cf. S. John vii. 17.

a Reward. Faith is, as Clemencet remarks, " the gift of God "
y Hesiod : Works and Days, 700.

0 PrOT. xxxi. 10. 7.

& Gen. ii. 18.

ON THE DEATH OF HIS FATHER.

best in

became an enemy, and instead of a yoke
fellow, an opponent, and beguiling the man
by means of pleasure, estranged him through
the tree of knowledge from the tree of life.
But she who was given by God to my father
became not only, as is less wonderful, his as
sistant, but even his leader, drawing him on
by her influence in deed and word to the
all
highest excellence; judging it
other respects to be overruled by her husband
according to the law of marriage, but not be
ing ashamed, in regard of piety, even to offer
herself as his teacher.
Admirable indeed as
was this conduct of hers, it was still more ad
mirable that he should readily acquiesce in it.
She is a woman who while others have been
honoured and extolled for natural and arti
ficial beauty, has acknowledged but one kind
of beauty, that of the soul, and the preserva
tion, or the restoration as far as possible, of
the Divine image.
Pigments and devices for
adornment she has rejected as worthy of wo
men on the stage.
The only genuine form of
noble birth she recognized is piety, and the
knowledge of whence we are sprung and
whither we are tending.
The only safe and
inviolable form of wealth is, she considered,
to strip oneself of wealth for God and the
poor, and especially for those of our own kin
who are unfortunate ; and such help only as is
necessary, she held to be rather a reminder, than
a relief of their distress, while a more liberal
beneficence brings stable honour and most
Some women have ex
perfect consolation.
celled in thrifty management, others in piety,
while she, difficult as it
is to unite the two
virtues, has surpassed all in both of them,
both by
her eminence in each, and by
the fact that she alone has combined them
together.
To as great a degree has she, by
her care and skill, secured the prosperity of her
household, according to the injunctions and
laws of Solomon as to the valiant woman, as if
she had had no knowledge of piety ; and she
applied herself to God and Divine things as
closely as if absolutely released from household
cares, allowing neither branch of her duty to
interfere with the other, but rather making
eacli of them support the other.

9. What time or place for prayer ever es
caped her ? To this she was drawn before all
other things in the day ; or rather, who had
such hope of receiving an immediate answer
to her requests ? Who paid such reverence
to the hand and countenance of £he priests ?
Or honoured all kinds of philosophy? Who
reduced the flesh by more constant fast and
Or stood like a pillar at the night
vigil?

«7

misfortunes

of the mourner ?

long and daily psalmody ?
Who had a
greater love for virginity, though patient of
the marriage bond herself? Who was a bet
ter patron of the orphan and the widow ?
Who aided as much in the alleviation of
! the
These
j things, small as they are, and perhaps con
temptible in the eyes of some, because not
easily attainable by most people (for that
which is unattainable comes, through envy, to
. be thought not even credible), are in my eyes
most honourable, since they were the discov
eries of her faith and the undertakings of her
So also in the holy assem
spiritual fervour.
blies, or places, her voice was never to be heard
except 0 in the necessary responses of the ser
vice.

10. And if it was a great thing for the altar
never to have had an iron tool lifted upon it,fl
and that no chisel should be seen or heard,
with greater reason, since everything dedi
cated to God ought to be natural and free
I from artificiality, it was also surely a great
thing that she reverenced the sanctuary by her
I silence ; that she never turned her back to the
; venerable table, nor spat upon the divine pave
ment ; that she never grasped the hand or kissed
the lips of any heathen woman, however hon
ourable in other respects, or closely related
she might be ; nor would she ever share the
salt, I say not willingly but even under com
pulsion, of those who came from the profane
and unholy table ; nor could she bear, against
the law of conscience, to pass by or look upon
a polluted hoase ; nor to have her ears or
tongue, which had received and uttered divine
things, defiled by Grecian tales or theatrical
songs, on the ground that what is unholy is
unbecoming to holy things ; and what is still
more wonderful, she never so far yielded to the
external signs of grief, although greatly moved
even by the misfortunes of strangers, as to
allow a sound of woe to burst forth before the
Eucharist, or a tear to fall from the eye mys
tically sealed, or any trace of mourning to be
left on the occasion of a festival, however fre
quent her own sorrows might be ; inasmuch as
the God-loving soul should subject every hu
man experience to the things of God.

11. I pass by in silence what is still more
ineffable, of which God is witness, and those
of the faithful handmaidens to whom she has
confided such things.
That which concerns
myself is perhaps undeserving of mention,
since I have proved unworthy of the hope

a Except, etc.
Ittureic.il) [wordsj."
0 Deut xxvii. 5.

Lit,, "except the necessary and mystical (i. e.,

cherished in regard to me : yet it was on her
part a great undertaking to promise me to
God before my birth, with no fear of the
future, and to dedicate me immediately after
Through God's goodness has it
I was born.
been that she has not utterly failed in her
prayer, and that the auspicious sacrifice was
not rejected.
Some of these things were
already in existence, others were in the future,
growing up by means of gradual additions.
And as the sun which most pleasantly casts
its morning rays, becomes at midday hotter
and more brilliant, so also did she, who from
the first gave no slight evidence of piety,
Then in
shine forth at last with fuller light.
deed he, who had established her in his house,
had at home no slight spur to piety, possessed,
by her origin and descent, of the love of God
and Christ, and having received virtue as her
patrimony ; not, as he had been, cut out of
the wild olive and grafted into the good olive,
yet imable
in the excess of her
faith, to be unequally yoked ; for, though sur
passing all others in endurance and fortitude,
she could not brook this, the being but half
united to God, because of the estrangement
of him who was a part of herself, and the fail
ure to add to the bodily union, a close con
nexion in the spirit : on this account, she fell
before God night and day, entreating for the
salvation of her head with many fastings and
tears, and assiduously devoting herself to her
husband, and influencing him in many ways,
by means of reproaches-, admonitions, atten
tions, estrangements, and above all by her
own character with its fervour for piety, by
which the soul is specially prevailed upon and
softened, and willingly submits to virtuous
pressure.
The drop" of water constantly
striking the rock was destined to hollow it,
and at length attain its longing, as the sequel
shows.

bear,

to

12. These were the objects of her prayers
and hopes, in the fervour of faith rather than
Indeed, none was as confident of
of youth.
things present as she of things hoped for, from
her experience of the generosity of God.
For
the salvation of my father there was a concur
rence of the gradual conviction P of his reason,
and the vision of dreams which God often be
stows upon a soul worthy of salvation.
What
This is to me the most
was the vision ?
pleasing part of the story.
He thought that
he was singing, as he had never done before,
though his wife was frequent in her supplica
tions and prayers, this verse from the psalms

a THf drop. A familmr provcrh.
Lit., "healing."
fi Conviction.

Choerilus, 9.

of holy David : I was glad when they said
unto me, we will go into the house of the
Lord." The psalm was a strange one to him,
and along with its words the desire came to
As soon as she heard it, having thus
him.
obtained her prayer, she seized the oppor
tunity, replying that the vision would bring
the greatest pleasure, if accompanied by its
fulfilment, and, manifesting by her joy the
greatness of the benefit, she urged forward his
salvation, before anything could intervene to
hinder the call, and dissipate the object of her
longing.
At that very time it happened that
a number of Bishops were hastening to Nicaia,
to oppose the madness of Arius, since the
wickedness of dividing the Godhead had just
arisen ; so my father yielded himself to God
and to the heralds of the truth, and confessed his
desire, and requested from them the common
salvation, one of them being the celebrated
Leon tius, at that time our own metropolitan.
It would be a great wrong to grace, were I
to pass by in silence the wonder which then
was bestowed upon him by grace.
The
The
witnesses of the wonder f are not few.
teachers of accuracy were spiritually at fault,
and the grace was a forecast of the future, and
the formula of the priesthood was mingled
with the admission of the catechumen. O
involuntary initiation ! bending his knee, he
received the form of admission to the state
of a catechumen in such wise, that many, not
only of the highest, but even of the lowest, in
tellect, prophesied the future, being assured by
no indistinct sighs of what was to be.

13. After a short interval, wonder succeeded
wonder.
I will commend the account of it
to the ears of the faithful, for to profane
minds nothing that is good is trustworthy.
He was approaching that regeneration by
water and the Spirit, by which we confess to
God the formation and completion of the
Christlike man, and the transformation and
reformation from the earthy to the Spirit.
He was approaching the laver with warm de
sire and bright hope, after all the purgation
possible, and a far greater purification uf soul
and body than that of the men who were to
receive fhe tables from Moses.
Their purifi
cation extended only to their dress, and a
slight restriction of the belly, and a teni|x>rary
continence.''
The whole of his past life had
been a preparation for the enlightenment, and

a Ps. cxxii. t.
0 The ivondfr.

S. Gregory the rider ought, according 10 the
rite of admission to the ranks of the Catechumens, to havr re
mained s'anding, and in that position have had his ears anointed.
He fell upon his knees and the Hishop, in forcelfulnes-s, pro
nounced over him the form of ordination to the Priesthood.

y Kxod. xix. to, 15.

ON THE DEATH OF HIS FATHER.

there

water,

a preliminary purification making sure the
gift, in order that perfection might be en
trusted to purity, and that the blessing might
incur no risk in a soul which was confident in
And as he was
its possession of the grace.
ascending out of the
flashed
around him a light and a glory worthy of the
disposition with which he approached the
gift of faith ; a this was manifest even to some
others, who for the time concealed the wonder,
from fear of speaking of a sight which each one
thought had been only his own, but shortly
afterwards communicated it to one another.
To the baptiser 0 and initiator, however, it
was so clear and visible, that he could not
even hold back the mystery, but publicly cried
out that he was anointing with the Spirit his
own successor.

14. Nor indeed would anyone disbelieve
this who has heard and knows that Moses,
when little in the eyes of men, and not yet of
any account, was called from the bush which
burned but was not consumed, or rather by
Him who appeared in the bush,* and was en
couraged by that first wonder : Moses, I say, for
whom the sea was divided,8 and manna rained
down,' and the rock poured out a fountain,f
and the pillar of fire and cloud led the way in
turn, and the stretching out of his hands gained
a victory, and the representation of the cross
overcame tens of thousands.
Isaiah, again,
who beheld the glory of the Seraphim,' and
after him Jeremiah, who was entrusted with
great power against nations and kings ; 9 the
one heard the divine voice and was cleansed
by a live coal for his prophetic office, and the
other was known before his formation and
sanctified before his birth.
Paul, also, while
yet a persecutor, who became the great herald
of the truth and teacher of the Gentiles in
faith,1 was surrounded by a light " and ac
knowledged Him whom he was persecuting,
and was entrusted with his great ministry,
and filled every ear and mind with the gospel.
15. Why need I count up all those who
have been called to Himself by God and associ
ated with such wonders as confirmed him in
his piety?
Nor was it the case that after such
and so incredible and startling beginnings, any
of the former things was put to shame by his
subsequent conduct, as happens with those

a The gift of faith. One of the questions in some ancient
rites of administering Holy Baptism was, " What seekest thou ot
the Church?" to which the answer was " Faith."
0 The baptiser. The Bishop of Naziartzus-not Leontius of
Gesarea, who had much to do with Gregory's instruction and had,
posvibiy. admitted him to the order of Catechumens.

y Kxod. iii. 4.
5 lb. xvii. 6.
1 1 Tirn. u. 7 ; 2 Tim. i. 1x«

& lb. xiv. 22.
n Isai. vi. 1 et seq.

€ lb. xvi. 4.
& Jer. i. 10.

* Acts ix. 3.

who very soon acquire a distaste for what is
good, and so neglect all further progress, if
they do not utterly relapse into vice.
This
cannot be said of him, for he was most con
sistent with himself and his early days, and
kept in harmony his life before the priest
hood with its excellence, and his life after it
with what had gone before, since it would
have been unbecoming to begin in one way
and end in another, or to advance to a differ
ent end from that which he had in view at
first. He was next entrusted with the priest
hood, not with the facility and disorder of
the present day, but after a brief interval, in
order to add to his own cleansing the skill and
power to cleanse others ; for this is the law of
And when he had been
spiritual sequence.
entrusted with it,
the grace was the more
glorified, being really the grace of God, and
not of men, and not, as the preacher" says, an
independent impulse and purpose^ of spirit.

16. He received a woodland and rustic
church, the pastoral care and oversight of which
had not been bestowed from a distance, but it
had been cared for by one of his predecessors of
admirable and angelic disposition, and a more
simple man than our present rulers of the
people ; but, after he had been speedily taken
to God, it had, in consequence of the loss of
its leader, for the most part grown careless and
run wild ; accordingly, he at first strove with
out harshness to soften
the habits of the
people, both by words of pastoral knowledge,
and by setting himself before them as an ex
ample, like a spiritual statue, polished into
the beauty of all excellent conduct. He next,
by constant meditation on the divine words,
though a late student of such matters, gathered
together so much wisdom within a short time
that he was in no wise excelled by those who
had spent the greatest toil upon them, and re
ceived this special grace from God, that he
became the father and teacher of orthodoxy
-not, like our modern wise men, yielding to
the spirit of the age, nor defending our faith
by indefinite and sophistical language, as if
they had no fixity of faith, or were adulterat
ing the truth ; but, he was more pious than
those who possessed rhetorical power, more
skilled in rhetoric than those who were up
right in mind ; or rather, while he took the
second place as an orator, he surpassed all in
piety. He acknowledged One God worshipped
in Trinity, and Three, Who are united in One
Godhead; neither Sabellianisingv as to .the

a K.ccles. 1. 17 ; Ixx.
(i Purpose, etc.

after wind."

A. V. " Vexation of Spirit."

y Sabeliianising, etc.

Cf. II. 36, 37 (notes).

R. V. " Striving

26o

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

One, nor Arianising as to the Three; either
by contracting and so atheistically annihilat
ing the Godhead, or by tearing It asunder by
distinctions of unequal greatness or nature.
For, seeing that Its every quality is incompre
hensible and beyond the power of our intellect,
how can we either perceive or express by defi
nition on such a subject, that which is beyond
our ken ?
How can the immeasurable be
measured, and the Godhead be reduced to the
condition of finite things, and measured by
degrees « of greater or less ?

17. What else must we say of this great man
of God, the true Divine, under the influence, in
regard to these subjects, of the Holy Ghost, but
that through his perception of these points, he,
like the great Noah, the father of this second
world, made this church to be called the new
Jerusalem, and a second ark borne up upon
since it both surmounted the
the waters ;
deluge of souls, and the insults of the heretics,
and excelled all others in reputation no less
than it fell behind them in numbers ; and has
had the same fortune as the sacred Bethlehem,
which can without contradiction be at once
said to be a little city and the metropolis of
the world, since it is the nurse and mother of
Christ, Who both made and overcame the
world.

18. To give a proof of what I say. When
a tumult of the over-zealous part of the Church
was raised against us, and we had been de
coyed by a document P and artful terms into
association with evil, he alone was believed to
have an unwounded mind, and a soul unstained
by ink, even when he had been imposed upon
in his simplicity, and failed from his guilelessness of soul to be on his guard against guile.
He it was alone, or rather first of all, who by
his zeal for piety reconciled to himself and the
rest of the church the faction opposed to us,
which was the last to leave us, the first to re
turn, owing to both their reverence for the
man and the purity of his doctrine, so that the
serious storm in the churches was allayed, and
the hurricane reduced to a breeze under the
influence of his prayers and admonitions;
while, if I may make a boastful remark, I was
his partner v in piety and activity, aiding him
in every effort on behalf of what is good, ac-

a Degrees. The heretics asserted that the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost were arranged in this order according to a real difference in
rank.
. 0 A document.
licnott (I. p. 179) gives reasons for believing
that this was the creed of the council of Antioch, A.D. 363-which
accepted the Creed of Nica;a. hnt explained it in terms capable of
The "over zealous pan" were the
a seniiarian construction.
monks.
S. Gregory had a considerable share in the ex
y Partner.
planations which made clear his father's real orthodoxy, and re-es
Orat. vi. was pronounced by him on the occatablished peace.

companying and running beside him, and
being permitted on this occasion to contribute
a very great share of the toil.
Here my ac
count of these matters, which is a little prema
ture, must come to an end.

19. Who could enumerate the full tale of
his excellences, or,
if he wished to pass by
most of them, discover without difficulty what
can be omitted?
For each trait, as it occurs
to the mind, seems superior to what has gone
before ;
it takes possession of me, and I feel
more at a loss to know what I ought to pass
by, than other panegyrists are as to what they
ought to say.
So that the abundance of ma
terial is to some extent a hindrance to me, and
my mind is itself put to the test in its efforts
to test his qualities, and its inability, where
all are equal, to find one which surpasses the
rest.
So that, just as when we see a pebble
falling into still water, it becomes the centre
and starting-point of circle after circle, each
by its continuous agitation breaking up that
which lies outside of it ; this is exactly the case
with myself.
For as soon as one thing enters
my mind, another follows and displaces it ;
and I am wearied out in making a choice, as
what I have already grasped is ever retiring in
favour of that which follows in its train.

20. Who was more anxious than he for the
common weal ? Who more wise in domestic
affairs, since God, who orders all things in due
variation, assigned to him a house and suita
ble fortune ? Who was more sympathetic in
mind, more bounteous in hand, towards the
poor, that most dishonoured portion of the
nature to which equal honour is due ?
For he
actually treated his own property as if it were
another's, of which he was but the steward, re
lieving poverty as far as he could, and expend
ing not only his superfluities but his necessi
ties-a manifest proof of love for the poor,
giving a portion, not only to seven, accord
ing to the injunction of Solomon,11 but if an
eighth came forward, not even in his case be
ing niggardly, but more pleased to dispose of
his wealth than we know others are to acquire
it ; taking away the yoke and election (which
means, as I think, all meanness in testing as to
whether the recipient is worthy or not) and
This
word of murmuring P in benevolence.
is what most men do : they give indeed, but
without that readiness, which is a greater and
more perfect thing than the mere offering.
For he thought it much better v to be gener
ous even to the undeserving for the sake of the
deserving, than from fear of the ; undeserving

i

o Eccles. xi. 2.
y Better.

Clemencet compares Dem. Dc Corona.

0 Isai. flviii- 9 (LXX.).

ON THE DEATH OF HIS FATHER.

to deprive those who were deserving.
And
this seems to be the duty of casting our
bread upon the waters," since it will not be
swept away or perish in the eyes of the just
Investigator, but will arrive yonder where all
that is ours is laid up, and will meet with us
in due time, even though we think it not.

21. But what is best and greatest of all, his
magnanimity was accompanied by freedom
Its extent and character I will
from ambition.
proceed to show.
In considering their wealth
to be common to all, andin liberalityinbestowing it, he and his consort rivalled each other
in their struggles after excellence ; but he in
trusted the greater part of this bounty to 'her
hand, as l)eing a most excellent and trusty
steward of such matters.
What a woman she
is ? Not even the Atlantic Ocean, or if there be
a greater one, could meet her drafts upon it.
So great and so boundless is her love of liber
ality.
In the contrary sense she has rivalled
the horse-leech 3 of Solomon, by her insatia
ble longing for progress, overcoming the ten
dency to backsliding, and unable to satisfy
her zeal for benevolence.
She not only con
sidered all the property which they originally
possessed, and what accrued to them later, as
unable to suffice her own longing, but she
would, as I have often heard her say, have
gladly sold herself and her children into slavery,
had there been any means of doing so, to ex
pend the proceeds upon the poor.
Thus en
tirely did she give the rein to her generosity.
This is, I imagine, far more convincing than
Magnanimity in
any instance of it could be.
regard to money may be found without diffi
culty in the case of others, whether it be dis
sipated in the public rivalries of the state, or
lent to God through the poor, the only mode
of treasuring it up for those who spend it: but
it is not easy to discover a man who has re
nounced the consequent reputation,
for it is
desire for reputation which supplies to most
men their readiness to spend.
And where the
bounty mast be secret, there the disposition to
it is less keen.

22. So bounteous was his hand-further de
tails I leave to those who knew him, so that
if anything of the kind is borne witness to in
regard to myself, it proceeds from that foun
tain, and is a portion of that stream. Who
was more under the Divine guidance in ad
mitting men to the sanctuary, v or in resenting
dishonour done to it, or in cleansing the holy
table with awe from the unholy? Who with
such unbiassed judgment, and with the scales

a Eccles- xi.

y To ike Sanctuary, i.e.. To ihe Priesthood.

3 Prov. xxx. 15.

of justice, either decided a suit, or hated vice,
or honoured virtue, or promoted the most ex
cellent ? Who was so compassionate for the
sinner, or sympathetic towards those who were
running well ? Who better knew the right
time for using the rod and the staff," yet
relied most upon the staff?
Whose eyes were
more upon the faithful in the land,^ espec
ially upon those who, in the monastic and unwedded life, have despised the earth and the
things of earth ?

23. Who did more to rebuke pride and fos
ter lowliness ? And that in no assumed or
external way, as most of those who now make
profession of virtue, and are in appearance as
elegant as the most mindless women, who, for
lack of beauty of their own, take refuge in pig
ments, and are, if I may say so, splendidly
made up, uncomely in their comeliness, and
more ugly than they originally were.
For
his lowliness was no matter of dress, but of
spiritual disposition : nor was it expressed by
a bent neck, or lowered voice, or downcast
look, or length of beard, or close-shaven head,
or measured gait, which can be adopted for a
while, but are very quickly exposed, for noth
ing which is affected can be permanent.
No !
he was ever most lofty in life, most lowly in
mind ; inaccessible in virtue, most accessible
in intercourse.
His dress had in it nothing
remarkable, avoiding equally magnificence and
sordidness, while his internal brilliancy was
supereminent.
The disease and insatiability
of the belly, he, if anyone, held in check, but
without ostentation ; so that he might be kept
down without being puffed up, from having
encouraged a new vice by his pursuit of repu
tation.
For he held that doing and saying
everything by which fame among externs might
be won, is the characteristic of the politician,
whose chief happiness is found in the present
life: but that the spiritual and Christian man
should look to one object alone, his salvation,
and think much of what may contribute to this,
but detest as of no value what does not ; and
accordingly despise what is visible, but be
occupied with interior perfection alone, and
estimate most highly whatever promotes his
own improvement, and attracts others through
himself to that which is supremely good.

24. But what was most excellent and most
characteristic, though least generally recog
nized, was his simplicity, and freedom from
guile and resentment.
For among men of
ancient and modern days, each is supposed to
have had some special success, as each chanced

a Ps. xxiii. 5. Rod and Slnff* i.e., Punishment and support.
3 Ps. ci. 6.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

to have received from God some particular
virtue : Job unconquered patience in misfort
une," Moses0 and David'' meekness, Samuel
prophecy, seeing into the
future,* Phineas
zeal,' for which he has a name, Peter and Paul
eagerness in preaching, i the sons of Zebedee
magniloquence, whence also they were entitled
Sons of thunder, i
But why should I enumerate
them all, speaking as I do among those who
know this ? Now the specially distinguishing
mark of Stephen and of my father was the ab
sence of malice.
For not even when in peril
did Stephen hate his assailants, but was stoned
while praying for those who were stoning him 9
as a disciple of Christ, on Whose behalf he was
allowed to suffer, and so, in his long-suffering,
bearing for God a nobler fruit than his death :
my father, in allowing no interval between
assault and forgiveness, so that he was almost
robbed of pain itself by the speed of pardon.

25. We both believe in and hear of the
dregs ' of the anger of God, the residuum of
For
His dealings with those who deserve it :
the Lord is a God of vengeance."
For al
though He is disposed by His kindness to gen
tleness rather than severity, yet He does not
absolutely pardon sinners, lest they should be
made worse by His goodness.
Yet my father
kept no grudge against those who provoked
him, indeed he was absolutely uninfluenced
by anger, although in spiritual things exceed
ingly overcome by zeal : except when he had
been prepared and armed and set in hostile
array against that which was advancing to in
So that this sweet disposition of
jure him.
his would not, as the saying goes, have been
stirred by tens of thousands.
For the wrath
which he had was not like that of the serpent,*
smouldering within, ready to defend itself,
eager to burst forth, and longing to strike
back at once on being disturbed ; but like the
sting of the bee, whjph does not bring death
with its stroke ; while his kindness was super
human.
The wheel and scourge were often
threatened, and those who could apply them
stood near ; and the danger ended in being
pinched on the ear, patted on the face, or
buffeted on the temple : thus he mitigated the
threat.
His dress and sandals were dragged
off, and the scoundrel was felled to the ground :
then his anger was directed not against his
assailant, but against his eager succourer, as a
minister of evil. How could anyone be more
conclusively proved to be good, and worthy
For often, instead
to offer the gifts to God ?
y Ps. exxxii. i (LXX.).
f Gal. ii. 7.
Cf. Orat. xvi. 4.
t Dregs.
A lb. Iviii. 4 iLXX).

6 1 Sam. ix. g.
« Pi. Ixxv. 8 ; xciv. 1.

a Job i. 21.
i) S. Mark iii. 17.

0 Numb. xii. 3.
9 Acts vii. 59.

< Numb. xxxv. 7.

of being himself roused, he made excuses for
the man who assailed him, blushing for his
faults as if they had been his own.

26. The dew would more easily resist the
morning rays of the sun, than any remains of
anger continue in him ; but as soon as he
had spoken, his indignation departed. with his
words, leaving behind only his love for what
is good, and never outlasting the sun ; nor
did he cherish anger which destroys even the
prudent, or show any bodily trace of vice
within, nay, even when roused, he preserved
calmness.
The result of this was most un
usual, not that he was the only one to give
rebnke, but the only one to be both loved and
admired by those whom he reproved, from the
victory which his goodness gained over warmth
of feeling ; and it was felt to be more ser
viceable to be punished by a just man than
besmeared by a bad one, for in one case the
severity becomes pleasant for its utility, in
the other the kindliness is suspected because
of the evil of the man's character.
But
though his soul and character were so simple
and divine, his piety nevertheless inspired the
insolent with awe :
or rather, the cause of
their respect was the simplicity which they
despised.
For it was impossible to him to
utter either prayer or curse without the im
mediate bestowal of permanent blessing or
transient pain.
The one proceeded from his
inmost soul, the other merely rested upon his
lips as a paternal reproof.
Many indeed of
those who had injured him incurred neither
lingerfng requital nor, as the poet a says, " ven
geance which dogs men's steps; " but at the
very moment of their passion they were struck
and converted, came forward, knelt
before
him, and were pardoned, going away glo
riously vanquished, and amended both by the
chastisement and the forgiveness.
Indeed, a
forgiving spirit often has great saving power,
checking the wrongdoer by the sense of shame,
and bringing him back from fear to love, a
In chastise
far more secure state of mind.
ment some were tossed by oxen oppressed by
the yoke, which suddenly attacked them,
though they had never done anything of the
kind before ; others were thrown and trampled
upon by most obedient and quiet horses ;
others seized by intolerable fevers, and appar
itions of their daring deeds ;
others being
punished in different ways, and learning obe
dience from the things which they suffered.
Such and so remarkable

being his
gentleness, did he yield the palm to others in

27.

a Thepoet.

Pindar.

By no means.

industry and practical virtue ?
Gentle as he was, he possessed, if any one did, ;
an energy corresponding to
his gentleness. 1
For although, for the most part, the two virtues
of benevolence and severity are at variance and
opposed to each other, the one being gentle
but without practical qualities, the other prac
tical but unsympathetic, in his case there was
a wonderful combination of the two, his action
being as energetic as that of a severe man, but
combined with gentleness; while his readiness
to yield seemed unpractical but was accom
panied with energy, in his patronage, his free
dom, of speech, and every kind of official duty.
He united the wisdom of the serpent, in regard
to evil, with the harmlessness of the dove, in
regard to good, neither allowing the wisdom
to degenerate into knavery, nor the simplic
ity into silliness, but as far as in him lay, he
combined the two in one perfect form of vir
tue.
Such being his birth, such his exercise
of the priestly office, such the reputation which
he won at the hands of all, what wonder if he
was thought worthy of the miracles by which
God establishes true religion ?

But what wonder is

28. One of the wonders which concern him
was that he suffered from sickness and bodily
pain.
it for even holy
men to be distressed, either for the cleansing
of their glay, slight though it may be, or a
touchstone of virtue and test of philosophy,
or for the education of the weaker, who learn
from their example to be patient instead of
Well,
giving way under their misfortunes ?
he was sick, the time was the holy and illus
trious Easter, the queen of days, the brilliant
night which dissipates the darkness of sin,
upon which with abundant light we keep the
putting ourselves to
feast of our salvation,
death along with the Light once put to death
for us, and rising again with Him who rose.
Of what
This was the time of his sufferings.
kind they were, I will briefly explain.
His
whole frame was on fire with an excessive,
burning fever, his strength had failed, he was
unable to take food, his sleep had departed
from him, he was in the greatest distress, and
agitated by palpitations.
Within his mouth,
the palate and the whole of the upper surface
was so completely and painfully ulcerated,
that it was difficult and dangerous to swallow
even water.
of physicians, the
prayers, most earnest though they were, of his
friends, and every possible attention were alike
of no avail.
this desperate
He himself in
condition, while his breath came short and
fast, had no perception of present things, but
was entirely absent, immersed in the objects

The skill

he had long desired, now made ready for him.
We were in the temple, mingling supplications
with the sacred rites,
for, in despair of all
others, we had betaken ourselves to the Great
Physician, to the power of that night, and to
the last succour, with the intention, shall I
say, of keeping a feast, or of mourning; of
holding festival, or paying funeral honours to
one no longer here ? O those tears ! which
were shed at that time by all the people. O
voices, and cries, and hymns blended with the
psalmody !
From the temple they sought the
priest, from the sacred rite the celebrant, from
God their worthy ruler, with my Miriam" to
lead them and strike the timbrel8 not of tri
umph, but of supplication ; learning then for
the first time to be put to shame by misfortune,
and calling at once upon the people and upon
God ; upon the former to sympathize with her
distress, and to be lavish of their tears, upon
the latter, to listen to her petitions, as, with
the inventive genius of suffering, she rehearsed
before Him all His wonders of old time.

for

29. What then was the response of Him who
was the God of that night and of the sick
man ? A shudder comes over me as I proceed
And though you, my hearers,
with my story.
may shudder, do not disbelieve :
that
would be impious, when I am the speaker,
and in reference to him.
The time of the
mystery was come, and the reverend station
and order, when silence is kept for the solemn
rites ; and then he was raised up by Him who
quickeneth the dead, and by the holy night. '
At first he moved slightly, then more decid
edly ; then in a feeble and indistinct voice he
called by name one of the servants who was
in attendance upon him, and bade him come,
and bring his clothes, and support him with
his hand.
He came in alarm, and gladly
waited upon him, while he, leaning upon his
hand as upon a staff, imitates Moses upon the
mount, arranges his feeble hands in prayer,
and in union with, or on behalf of,* his people
eagerly celebrates the mysteries, in such few
words as his strength allowed, but, as it seems
to me, with a most perfect intention.
What
a miracle !
In the sanctuary without a sanc
tuary, sacrificing without an altar, a priest far
from the sacred rites : yet all these were pres
ent to him in the power of the spirit, recog
nised by him, though unseen by those who
Then, after adding the customary
were there.
S. Nonna.

a My Miriam.
y On behalfof, or perhaps "at the head of." The passage
does not mean that he actually celebrated the Holy Mysteries,
but that he used some of the prayers of the service, and united
himself in intention with the service being at the time performed
in the church, and invoked the Divine blessing upon his people in
his absence.

0 Exod. xv. 90.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

words of thanksgiving, and after blessing the
people, he retired again to his bed, and after
taking a little food, and enjoying a sleep, he
recalled his spirit, and, his health being grad
ually recovered, on the new day" of the feast,
as we call the first Sunday after the festival of
the Resurrection, he entered the temple and
inaugurated his life which had been preserved,
with the full complement of clergy, and offered
the sacrifice of thanksgiving.
To me this
seems no less remarkable than the miracle in
the case of Hezekiah,^ who was glorified by
God in his sickness and prayers with an ex
tension of life, and this was signified by the
return of the shadow of the degrees,* accord
ing to the request of the king who was re
stored, whom God honoured at once by the
favour and the sign, assuring him of the ex
tension of his days by the extension of the
day.

30. The same miracle occurred in the case
of my mother not long afterwards.
I do not
think it would be proper to pass by this
for we shall both pay the meed of
either :
honour which is due to her, if to anyone at
all, and gratify him, by her being associated
with him in our recital.
She, who had always
been strong and vigorous and free from dis
ease all her life, was herself attacked by sick
ness.
In consequence of much distress, not
to prolong my story, caused above all by in
ability to eat, her life was for many days in
danger, and no remedy for the disease could
Not
be found. How did God sustain her ?
by raining down manna, as for Israel of old,8
or opening the rock, in order to give drink
to His thirsting people,' or feasting her by
means of ravens, as Elijah, £ or feeding her by
a prophet carried through the air, as He did
to Daniel when a-hungered in the den.''
But
how? She thought she saw me, who, was
her favourite, for not even in her dreams did
she prefer any other of us, coming up to her
suddenly at night, with a basket of pure
white loaves, which I blessed and crossed as I
was wont to do, and then fed and strength
ened her, and she became stronger.
The
nocturnal vision was a real action.
For, in
consequence, she became more herself and of
better hope, as is manifest by a clear and
evident token.
Next morning, when I paid
her an early visit, I saw at once that she was
brighter, and when I asked, as
usual, what
kind of a night she had passed, and if she

was preached.

a The ntlf day. On this feast (in another year) Oral. xliv.
6 K*od. xti. 14: xvii. 6.
i 1 Kings xvii. 6.

y Isai. xxxviii. 8.
e P*. Ixxviii 34, 15.
q Dan. xiv. 33 (>,c. Hist, of Bel. v. 33).

0 2 Kings xx. 1 et seq.

wished for anything, she replied, " My child,
you most readily and kindly fed me, and
then you ask how I am.
I am very well and
Her maids too made signs to me to
at ease. ' '
offer no resistance, and to accept her answer
at once, lest she should be thrown back into
despondency, if the truth were laid bare.
will add one more instance common to them
both.

-31. I was on a voyage from Alexandria to
Greece over the Parthenian Sea. The voyage
was quite unseasonable, undertaken in
an
^Eginetan vessel, under the impulse of eager
desire ; for what specially induced me was that
I had fallen in with a crew who were well
known to me.
After making some way on
the voyage, a terrible storm came upon us, and
such an one as my shipmates said they had
While we were all
but seldom seen before.
in fear of a common death, spiritual death
was what I was most afraid of ; for I was in
danger of departing in misery, being unbaptised, and I longed for the spiritual water
On this account
among the waters of death.
I cried and begged and besought a slight re
spite. My shipmates, even in their common
danger, joined in my cries, as not even my
I own relatives would have done, kindly souls
I as they were, having learned sympathy from
their dangers.
In this my condition, my
parents felt for me, my danger having been
communicated to them by a nightly vision,
and they aided me from the land, soothing
the waves by prayer, as I afterwards learned
by calculating the time, after I had landed.
This was also shown me in a wholesome sleep,
of which I had experience during a slight
lull of the tempest.
I seemed to be holding a
Fury, of fearful aspect, boding danger; for
the night presented her clearly to my eyes.
Another of my shipmates, a boy most kindly
disposed and dear to me, and exceedingly
anxious on my behalf, in my then present
condition, thought he saw my mother walk
upon the sea, and seize and drag the ship to
land with no great exertion.
We had confi
dence in the vision, for the sea began to grow
calm, and we soon reached Rhodes after the
intervention of no great discomfort. We our
selves became an offering in consequence of
that peril ; for we promised ourselves if we were
saved, to God, and, when we had been saved,
gave ourselves to Him.

32. Such were their common experiences.
But I imagine that some of those who have
had an accurate knowledge of his life must
have been for a long while wondering why we
have dwelt upon these points, as if we thought

them his only title to renown, and postponed
the mention of the difficulties of his times,
against which he conspicuously arrayed him
self, as though we were either ignorant of
them, or thought them to be of no great con
Come, then, we will proceed to
sequence.
speak upon this topic.
The first, and I think
the last, evil of our day, was the Emperor
who apostatised from God and from reason,
and thought it a small matter to conquer the
Persians, but a great one to subject to himself
the Christians ; and so, together with the
demons who led and prevailed upon him, he
failed in no form of impiety, but by means
of persuasions, threats, and sophistries, strove
to draw men to him, and even added to his
various artifices the use offeree.
His design,
however, was exposed, whether he strove to
conceal persecution under sophistical devices,
or manifestly made use of his authoritynamely by one means or the other-either by
cozening or by violence, to get us into his
power. Who can be found who more utterly
despised or defeated him ? One sign, among
many others, of his contempt, is the mission
to our sacred buildings of the police and their
commissary, with
intention of taking
the
either voluntary or forcible possession of them :
he had attacked many others, and came hither
with like intent, demanding the surrender of
the temple according to the Imperial decree,
but was so far from succeeding in any of his
wishes that, had he not speedily given way
before my father, either from his own good
sense or according to some advice given to
him, he would have had to retire with his
feet mangled, with such wrath and zeal did
the priest boil against him in defence of his
And who had a manifestly greater
shrine.
share in bringing about his end, both in pub
lic, by the prayers and united supplications
which he directed against the accursgd one,
without regard to the [dangers of] the time;
him his
and in
nightly armoury, of sleeping on the ground,
by which he wore away his aged and tender
frame, and of tears, with whose fountains he
watered the ground for almost a whole year,
directing these practices to the Searcher of
hearts alone, while he tried to escape our no
tice, in his retiring piety of which I have
spoken. And he would have been utterly un
observed, had I not once suddenly rushed in
to his room, and noticing the tokens of his
lying upon the ground, inquired of his atten
dants what they meant, and so learned the
mystery of the night.

private, arraying

against

33. A further story of the same period and

the same courage.
The city of Csesarea was
in an uproar about the election of a bishop ;
for one" had
just departed, and another
must be found, amidst heated partisanship
not easily to be soothed.
For the city was
naturally exposed to party spirit, owing to
the fervour of its faith, and the rivalry was
increased by the illustrious position of the
Such was the state of affairs ; several
see.
Bishops had arrived to consecrate the Bishop ;
the populace was divided into several par
ties, each with its own candidate, as is usual
in such cases, owing to the influences of pri
vate friendship or devotion to God ; but at
last the whole people came to an agreement,
and, with the aid of a band of soldiers at that
time quartered there, seized one ofP their lead
ing citizens, a man of excellent life, but not
yet sealed with the divine baptism, brought
him against his will to the sanctuary, and set
ting him before the Bishops, begged, with
entreaties mingled with violence, that he might
be consecrated and proclaimed,
not in the
best of order, but with all sincerity and ar
dour.
Nor is it possible to say whom time
pointed out as more illustrious and religious
What then took place, as the
than he was.
result of the uproar?
Their v resistance was
overcome, they purified him, they proclaimed
him, they enthroned him, by external action,
rather than by spiritual judgment and dispo
sition, as the sequel shows.
They were glad
to retire and regain freedom of judgment, and
agreed upon a plan-I do not know that it was
inspired by the Spirit-to hold nothing which
had been done to be valid, and the institution
to have been void, pleading violence on the
part of him who had had no less violence done
to himself, and laying hold of certain words
which had been uttered on the occasion with
greater vigour than wisdom.
But the great
high-priest and just examiner of actions was
not carried away by this plan of theirs, and did
not approve of their judgment, but remained
as uninfluenced and unmoved as if no pressure
at all had been put upon him.
For he saw that,
the violence having been common, if they
brought any charge against him, they were
themselves liable to a counter-charge, or, if
they acquitted him, they themselves might be
acquitted, or rather with still more justice, they
were unable to secure their own acquittal, even
by acquitting him : for if they were deserving
of excuse, so assuredly was he, and if he was
not, much less were they :
for it would have
been far better to have at the time run the risk

a One, i.c Dianius.

0 One of. etc., Eusebius.

y Their, i.e., of the Bishops.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

of resistance to the last extremity, than after
wards to enter into designs against him, espe
cially at such a juncture, when it was better to
put an end to existing enmities than to devise
new ones.
For the state of affairs was as fol
lows.

34. The Emperor ■

had come, raging
against the Christians ; he was angry at the
election and threatened the elect, and the city
stood in imminent peril P as to whether, after
that clay it should cease to exist, or escape and
be treated with some degree of mercy.- The
innovation in regard to the election was a new
ground of exasperation, in addition to the
destruction of the temple of Fortune in a time
of prosperity, and was looked upon as an in
vasion of his rights.
The governor of the
province also was eager to turn the opportun
ity to his own account, and was ill disposed
to the new bishop, with whom he had never
had friendly relations, in consequence of their
different political views.
Accordingly he sent
letters to summon the consecrators to invali
date the election, and in no gentle terms, for
they were threatened as if by command of the
Emperor.
Hereupon, when the letter reached
him, without fear or delay, he replied-con
sider the courage and spirit of his answer-
" Most excellent governor, we have one Cen
sor of all our actions, and one Emperor,
against whom his enemies are in arms.
He
will review the present consecration, which we
have legitimately performed according to His
In regard to any other matter, you
will.
may, if you will, use violence with the great
est ease against us.
But no one can prevent
us from vindicating the legitimacy and justice
of our action in this case ; unless you should
make a law on this point, you, who have no
right to interfere in our affairs."
This let
ter excited the admiration of its recipient,
although he was for a while annoyed at it, as
we have been told by many who know the
It also stayed the action of the
facts well.
Emperor, and delivered the city from peril,
and ourselves, it
is not amiss to add, from
disgrace.
This was the work of the occupant
of an unimportant and suffragan see. . Is not
a presidency of this kind far preferable to a
title derived from a superior see, and a power
which is based upon action rather than upon
a name.

35. Who is so distant from this world of
ours, as to be ignorant of what is last in order,
but the first and greatest proof of his power ?
The same city was again in an uproar for the

same reason, in consequence of the sudden re
moval of the Bishop chosen with such honour
able violence, who had now departed to God,
on Whose behalf he had nobly and bravely
contended in the persecutions.
The heat of
the disturbance was in proportion to its un
reasonableness.
The man of eminence was
not unknown, but was more conspicuous than
the sun amidst the stars, in the eyes not only
of all others, but especially of that select and
most pure portion of the people, whose busi
ness is in the sanctuary, and the Nazarites"
amongst us, to whom such appointments should,
if not entirely, as much as possible belong,
and so the church would be free from harm,
instead of to the most opulent and powerful,
or the violent and unreasonable portion of the
people, and especially the most corrupt of
Indeed, I am almost inclined to believe
them.
that the civil government is more orderly than
ours, to which divine grace is attributed, and
that such matters are better regulated by fear
than by reason.
For what man in his senses
could ever have approached another, to the
neglect of your divine 3 and sacred person,
who have been beautified by the hands of the
Lord, the unwedded, the destitute of property
and almost of flesh and blood, who in your
words come next to the Word Himself, who
are wise among philosophers, superior to the
world among worldlings, my companion and
workfellow, and to speak more daringly, the
sharer with me of a common soul, the partaker
Would that I could
of my life and education.
speak at liberty and describe you before others
without being obliged by your presence, in
dwelling upon such topics, to pass over the
I should incur the
greater part of them, lest
as I began by
suspicion of flattery.
saying, the Spirit must needs have known him
as His own ; yet he was the mark of envy, at
the hajids of those whom I am ashamed to
mention, and would that it were not possible
to hear their names from others who studiously
ridicule our affairs.
Let us pass this by like
a rock in the midstream of a river, and treat
with respectful silence a subject which ought
to be forgotten, as we pass on to the remainder
of our subject.

But,

36. The things of the Spirit were exactly
known to the man of the Spirit, and he felt
that he must take up no submissive posi
tion, nor side with factions and prejudices
which depend upon favour rather than upon
God, but must make the advantage of the
Church and the common salvation his sole ob-

o The Emperor, jGlian.
0 In imminent peril, lit. " or. a razor's edge.'' Homer Ij. x. 173.

a Nazarites, i.e., " the monks."
p Your divine, etc., addressed to S. Basil.

ON THE DEATH OF HIS FATHER.

ject. Accordingly he wrote, gave advice, strove
to unite the people and the clergy, whether
ministering in the sanctuary or not, gave his
testimony, his decision and his vote, even in
his absence, and assumed, in virtue of his gray
hairs, the exercise of authority among strangers
no less than among his own flock.
At last,
since it was necessary that the consecration
should be canonical, and there was* lacking
one of the proper number of Bishops for the
proclamation, he tore himself from his couch,
exhausted as he was by age and disease, and
manfully went to the city, or rather was borne,
with his body dead though just breathing, per
suaded that, if anything were to happen to
him, this devotion would be a noble windingsheet.
Hereupon once more there was a
prodigy, not unworthy of credit. He re
ceived strength from his toil, new life from his
zeal, presided at the function, took his place
in the conflict, enthroned the Bishop, and
was conducted home, no longer borne upon a
bier, but in a divine ark.
His long-suffering,
over whose praises I have already lingered,
was in this case further exhibited.
For his
colleagues were annoyed at the shame of being
overcome, and at the public influence of the
old man, and allowed their annoyance to
show itself in abuse of him ; but such was the
strength of his endurance that he was superior
even to this, finding in modesty a most pow
erful ally, and refusing to bandy abase with
them.
For he felt that it would be a terrible
thing, after really gaining the victory, to be
vanquished by the tongue.
In consequence,
he so won upon them by his long-suffering,
that, when time had lent its aid to his judg
ment, they exchanged their annoyance for ad
his
miration, and knelt before him to ask
pardon, in shame for their previous conduct,
and flinging away their hatred, submitted to
him as their patriarch, lawgiver, and judge.

37. From the same zeal proceeded his op
position to the heretics, when, with the aid of
the Emperor's impiety, they made their expe
dition, in the hope of overpowering us also,
and adding us to the number of the others
whom they had, in almost all cases, succeeded
For in this he afforded us no
in enslaving.
slight assistance, both in
himself, and by
hounding us on like well-bred dogs. against
these most savage beasts, through his training
in piety.
On one point I blame you both,
and pray do not take amiss my plainspeaking, if I should annoy you by expressing the
When I was disgusted at
cause of my pain.

a There was lucking. The Council of Nicara ordered that a
Hishop should bo consecrated by at least three Bishops.

the evils of life, and longing, if anyone of our
day has longed, for solitude, and eager, as
speedily as possible, to escape to some haven of
safety, from the surge and dust of public life,
it was you who, somehow or other seized and
I gave me up by the noble title of the priest
hood to this base and treacherous mart of
I souls.
In consequence, evils have already beI fallen me, and others are yet to be antici
pated.
For past experience renders a man
somewhat distrustful of the future, in spite of
the better suggestions of reason to the con
trary.

38. Another of his excellences I must not
leave unnoticed.
In general, he was a man of
great endurance, and superior to his robe of
flesh : but during the pain of his last sickness, a
serious addition to the risks and burdens of old
j age, his weakness was common to him and all
other men ; but this fitting sequel to the other
marvels, so far from being common, was pe
culiarly his own.
He was at no time free
from the anguish of pain, but often in the day,
sometimes in the hour, his only relief was the
liturgy, to which the pain yielded, as if to an
edict of banishment.
At last, after a life of
almost a hundred years, exceeding David's
limit of our age," forty-five of these, the aver
age life of man, having been spent in the
I priesthood, he brought it to a close in a good
With the
And in what manner?
! old age.
words and forms of prayer, leaving behind no
I trace of vice, and many recollections of virtue.
The reverence felt for him was thus greater
than falls to the lot of man, both on the lips
and in the hearts of all.
Nor is it easy to find
anyone who recollects him, and does not, as
the Scripture says, lay his hand upon his
Such was his
mouth P and salute his memory.
life, and such its completion and perfection.

39. And since some living memorial of his
munificence ought to be left behind, what
j other is required than this temple, which he
j reared for God and for us, with very little conj tribution from the people in addition to the
expenditure of his private fortune? An ex
ploit which should not be buried in silence,
I since in size it is superior to most others, in
It surrounds itself
I with eight regular equilaterals, and is raised
I aloft by the beauty of two stories of pillars
and porticos, while the statues placed upon
them are true to the life ; its vault flashes down
upon us from above, and it dazzles our eyes
j with abundant sources of light on every side,
It
I being indeed the dwelling-place of light.

beauty absolutely to all.

a Ps. xc. 10.

PJobxl. 4.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

is surrounded by excrescent equiangular am
bulatories of most splendid material, with a
wide area in the midst, while its doors and
vestibules shed around it the lustre of their
gracefulness, and offer from a distance their
welcome to those who are drawing nigh.
have not yet mentioned the external ornament,
the beauty and size of the squared and dove
tailed stonework, whether it be of marble in
the bases and capitals, which divide the angles,
or from our own quarries, which are in no
wise inferior to those abroad ; nor of the belts
of many shapes and colours, projecting or in
laid from the foundation to the roof-tree, which
robs the spectator by limiting his view. How
could anyone with due brevity describe a work
which cost so much time and toil and skill :
or will it suffice to say that amid all the works,
private and public, which adorn other cities,
this has of itself been able to secure us celebrity
among the majority of mankind ? When for
such a temple a priest was needed, he also
at his own expense provided one, whether
worthy of the temple or no, it is not for me
And when sacrifices were required,
to say.
he supplied them also, in the misfortunes of
his son, and his patience under trials, that God
might receive at his hands a reasonable whole
burnt offering and spiritual priesthood, to be
honourably consumed, instead of the sacrifice
of the Law.

40. What sayest thou, my father?

Is this
sufficient, and dost thou find an ample recom
pense for all thy toils, which thou didst under
go for my learning, in this eulogy of farewell
or of entombment ? And dost thou, as of old,
impose silence on my tongue, and bid me stop
in due time, and so avoid excess ?
Or dost
I know thou
thou require some addition ?
Yet
bidst me cease, for I have said enough.
suffer me to add this.
Make known to us
where tho.i art in glory, and the light which
encircles thee, and receive into the same abode
thy partner soon to follow thee, and the chil
to rest before
dren whom thou hadst laid
thee, and me also, after no further, or but a
slight addition to the ills of this life: and be
fore reaching that abode receive me in this
sweet stone, a which thou didst erect for both
of us, to the honour even here of thy conse
crated namesake, and excuse me from the care
both of the people which I have already re
signed,3 and of that which for thy sake I have
since accepted : and mayest thou guide and
as I earnestly entreat, the
free from peril,

a Stone, i.e.. the tomb in which his father was buried.
^ Which 1 have resigned, i.e., Sasima. Accepted, i.e., Nazian-

zus.

whole flock and" all the clergy, whose father'
thou art said to be, but especially him who
was overpowered by thy paternal and spiritual
coercion, so that he may not entirely consider
that act of tyranny obnoxious to blame.

41. And what do you think of us, O judge
of my words and motions ?
If we have spoken
adequately, and to the satisfaction of your
desire, confirm it by your decision, and we
for your decision is entirely the de
accept it :
cision of God.
But if it falls far short of his
glory and of your hope, my ally is not far to
seek.
Let fall thy voice, which is awaited by
his merits like a seasonable shower. And in
deed he has upon you the highest claims, those
of a pastor upon a pastor and of a father upon
his son in grace.
What wonder if he, who
has* through your voice thundered throughout
the world, should himself have some enjoy
Only to
ment of it ?
unite with our spiritual Sarah, the consort and
fellow-traveller through life of our great father
Abraham, in the last Christian offices.

What more is needed ?

But how is

42. The nature of God, my mother, is not
the same as that of men ; indeed, to speak gener
ally, the nature of divine things is not the same
as that of earthly things.
They possess unchangeableness and immortality, and absolute
being with its consequences, for sure are the
it with
properties of things sure.
what is ours ?
It is in a state of flux and cor
ruption, constantly undergoing some fresh
change.
Life and death, as they are called,
apparently so different, are in a sense resolved
For the
into, and successive to, each other.
one takes its rise from the corruption which is
our mother, runs its course through the corrup
tion which is the displacement of all that is
present, and comes to an end in the corruption
which is the dissolution of this life ; while the
other, which is able to set us free from the ills
of this life, and oftentimes translates us to the
life above, is not in my opinion accurately
called death, and is more dreadful in name
than in reality ; so that we are in danger of
irrationally being afraid of what is not fearful,
and courting as preferable what we really ought
There is one life, to look to life.
to fear.
There is one death, sin, for it is the destruc
But all else, of which some
tion of the soul.
are proud, is a dream-vision, making sport of
realities, and a series of phantasms which lead
the soul astray.
If this be our condition,
mother, we shall neither be proud of life, nor
What grievance can
greatly hurt by death.
we find in being transferred hence to the true

a He who has.

S. Gregory the elder was the principal mover

in S. Basil's election and consecration.

ON THE GREAT ATHANASIUS.

Let hope cheer you.

Let us not, by ignoble reasonings, make ,

life ?
In being freed from the vicissitudes, the
agitation, the disgust, and all the vile tribute
we must pay to this life, to find ourselves, amid
stable things, which know no flux, while as
lesser lights, we circle round the great light ? a
43. Does the sense of separation cause you
Is widowhood
pain ?
grievous to you?
is not so to him.
Yet it
And what is the good of love, if it gives itself
easy things, and assigns the more difficult to its
neighbour? And why should it be grievous at
all, to one who is soon to pass away? The ap
pointed day is at hand, the pain will not last
long.
a burden of things which are really light.
We have endured a great loss-because the
Loss is com
privilege we enjoyed was great.
mon to all, such a privilege to few.
Let us
rise superior to the one thought by the con
solation of the other.
For it is more reason
that that which is better should win
able,
the day.
You have borne, in a most brave,
Christian spirit, the loss of children, who were
still in their prime and qualified for life ; bear
also the laying aside of his aged body by one
who was weary of life, although his vigor of
mind preserved for him his senses unimpaired.
Do you want some one to care for you ? Where
is your Isaac, whom he left behind for you, to
take his place in all respects ? Ask of him small
things, the support of his hand and service,
and requite him with greater things, a mother's
blessing and prayers, and the consequent free
Are you vexed at being admonished ?
dom.
I praise you for it.
For you have admonished
many whom your long life has brought under
your notice.
What I have said can have no
application to you, who are so tmly wise ; but j
let it be a general medicine of consolation for
mourners, so that they may know that they
are mortals following mortals to the grave.

INTRODUCTION TO ORATION XXI.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of
Alexandria.

.

The reference in § 22 to "the Council
. and afterwards
which sat first at Seleucia .
at this mighty city,'1 leaves no room for doubt
ing that the Oration was delivered at Constan
tinople.
Further local colour is found in the
allusions of § 5. We are assured by the pane
1) that it
gyric on S. Cyprian (Orat. xxiv.
was already the custom of the Church of Con
stantinople to observe annual festivals in hon

a Gen. i. 16.

our of the Saints : and at present two days are
kept by the Eastern Church, viz., Jan. 18th,
as the day of the actual death of S. Athana
sius, and May 2d, in memory of the translation
of his remains to the church of S. Sophia
at Constantinople.
Probably, therefore, this
Oration was delivered on the former day, on
which Assemani holds that S. Athanasius died.
Papebroke and (with some hesitation) Dr.
Bright pronounce in favour of May 2d.
Tillemont supposes that a.d. 379 is the year of its
delivery ; in which case it must have been very
shortly after S. Gregory's arrival in the city.
Since, however, no allusion is made to this, it
seems, on the whole, more likely that it should
be assigned to a.d. 380.
The sermon takes
high rank, even among S. Gregory's discourses,
as the model of an ecclesiastical panegyric.
It lacks, however, the charm of personal affec
tion and intimate acquaintance with the inner
life, which is characteristic of the orations con
cerned with his own relatives and friends.

Oration.

hence.

1. In praising Athanasius, I shall be prais
ing virtue.
To speak of him and to praise
virtue are identical, because he had, or, to
speak more truly, has embraced virtue in its
entirety.
For all who have lived according
to God still live unto God, though they have
departed
For this reason, God is
called the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
since He is the God, not of the dead, but of
the living."
Again, in praising virtue, I shall
be praising God, who gives virtue to men
and lifts them up, or lifts them up again, to
Himself by the enlightenment which is akin to
Himself. P For many and great as are our bless
ings-none can say how many and how great
-which we have and shall have from God,
this is the greatest and kindliest of all, our in
clination and relationship to Him.
For God
is to intelligible things what the sun is to the
The one lightens the visible,
things of sense.
the other the invisible, world.
The one makes
our bodily eyes to see the sun, the other makes
our intellectual natures to see God.
And, as
that, which bestows on the things which see
and are seen the power of seeing and being
seen, is
itself the most beautiful of visible
things ; so God, who creates, for those who
think, and that which is thought of, the power
of thinking and being thought of, is Him
self the highest of the objects of thought, in
Whom every desire finds its bourne, beyond

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

Whom it can no further go.
For not even
the most philosophic, the most piercing, the
most curious intellect has, or can ever have,
For this is the utmost
a more exalted object.
of things desirable, and they who arrive at
it find an entire rest from speculation.

2. Whoever has been permitted to escape
by reason and contemplation from matter and
this fleshly cloud or veil (whichever it should
be called) and to hold communion with God,
and be associated, as far as man's nature can
attain, with the purest Light, blessed is he,
both from his ascent from hence, and for his
deification there, which is conferred by true
philosophy, and by rising superior to the dual
ism of matter, through the unity which is per
ceived in the Trinity.
And whosoever has
been depraved by being knit to the flesh, and
so. far oppressed by the clay that he cannot
look at the rays of truth, nor rise above things
below, though he is born from above, and
called to things above, I hold him to be mis
erable in his blindness, even though he may
abound in things of this world ; and all the
more, because he is the sport of his abundance,
and is persuaded by it that something else is
beautiful instead of that which is really beauti
ful, reaping, as the poor fruit of his poor opin
ion, the sentence of darkness, or the seeing
Him to be fire, Whom he did not recognize
as light.

%. Such has been the philosophy of few,
both nowadays and of old-for few are the men
of God, though all are His handiwork,-among
lawgivers, generals, priests, Prophets, Evange
lists, Apostles, shepherds, teachers, and all the
spiritual host and band-and, among them all,
of him whom now we praise.
And whom do
I mean by these? Men like Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the twelve Patriarchs,
Moses, Aaron, Joshua, the Judges, Samuel,
David, to some extent Solomon, Elijah, Elisha,
the Prophets before the captivity, those after
the captivity, and, though last in order, first
in truth, those who were concerned with Christ's
Incarnation or taking of our nature, the lamp*
before the Light, the voice before the Word,
the mediator before the Mediator, the mediator
between the old covenant and the new, the
famous John, the disciples of Christ, those after
Christ, who were set over the people, or illus
trious in word, or conspicuous for miracles, or
made perfect through their blood.

4. With some of these Athanasius vied, by
some he was slightly excelled, and others, if it is
not bold to say so, he surpassed : some he made

a S. John 1, 33 ; v. 35.

his models in mental power, others in activity,
others in meekness, others in zeal, others in
dangers, others in most respects, others in all,
gathering from one and another various forms
of beauty (like men who paint figures of ideal
excellence), and combining them in his single
soul, he made one perfect form of virtue out of
all, excelling in action men of intellectual ca
pacity, in intellect men of action; or, if you
will, surpassing in intellect men renowned for
intellect, in action those of the greatest active
power ; outstripping those who had moderate
reputation in both respects, by his eminence in
either, and those who stood highest in one or
other, by his powers in both ; and, if it is a great
thing for those who have received an example,
so to use it as to attach themselves to virtue,
he has no inferior title to fame, who for our
advantage has set an example to those who
come after him.

-5. To speak of and admire him fully, would
perhaps be too long a task for the present pur
pose of my discourse, and would take the form
of a history rather than of a panegyric : a history
which it has been the object of my desires to
commit to writing for the pleasure and instruc
tion of posterity, as he himself wrote the life of
the divine Antony," and set forth, in the form
of a narrative, the laws of the monastic life.
Accordingly, after entering into a few of the
many details of his history, such as memory
suggests at the moment as most noteworthy, in
order both to satisfy my own longing and ful
fil the duty which befits the festival, we will
leave the many others to those who know them.
For indeed, it is neither pious nor safe, while
the lives of the ungodly are honoured by recol
lection, to pass by in silence those who have
lived piously, especially in a city which could
hardly be saved by many examples of virtue,
making sport, as it does, of Divine things, no
less than of the horse-race and the theatre.

6. He was brought up, from the first, in re
ligious habits and practices, after a brief study
of literature and philosophy, so that he might
not be utterly unskilled in such subjects, or ig
norant of matters which he had determined to
despise.
For his generous and eager soul
could not brook being occupied in vanities,
like unskilled athletes, who beat the air in
stead of their antagonists and lose the prize.
From meditating on every book of the Old
and New Testament, with a depth such as none
else has applied even to one of them, he grew

a Antony, " the founder of asceticism." the most celebrated of
the monks and hermits of the Thebaid desert.
His life by _S.
Athanasius is certainly genuine, and even if, as some suspect, in
terpolations have been inserted, its substantial integrity is un
doubted. (Newman, Ch. of the Fathers, p. 176.)

rich in contemplation, rich in splendour of
life, combining them in wondrous sort by that
golden bond which few can weave ; using life
as the guide of contemplation, contemplation
as the seal of life.
For the fear of the Lord is
the beginning of wisdom, and, so to say, its
first swathing band ; but, when wisdom has
burst the bonds of fear and risen up to love, it
makes us friends of God, and sons instead of
bondsmen.

7. Thus brought up and trained, as even
now those should be who are to preside over
the people, and take the direction of the
mighty body of Christ," according to the will
and foreknowledge of God, which lays long
before the foundations of great deeds, he was
invested with this important ministry, and
made one of those who draw near to the God
Who draws near to us, and deemed worthy of
the holy office and rank, and, after passing
through the entire series of orders, he was (to
make my story short) entrusted with the chief
rule over the people, in other words, the charge
of the whole world : nor can I say whether he
received the priesthood as the reward of virtue,
or to be the fountain and life of the Church.
For she, like Ishmael,^ fainting from her thirst
for the truth, needed to be given to drink, or,
like Elijah,'*' to be refreshed from the brook,
when the land was parched by drought ; and,
when but faintly breathing, to l>e restored to
life and left as a seed to Israel,8 that we might
not become like Sodom and Gomorrah,'
whose destruction by the rain of fire and
brimstone is only more notorious than their
wickedness.
Therefore, when we were cast
down, a horn of salvation was raised up for us,f
and a chief corner stone,1 knitting us to itself
and to one another, was laid in due season, or
a fire9 to purify our base and evil matter,' or a
farmer's fan* to winnow the light from the
weighty in doctrine, or a sword to cut out the
roots of wickedness ; and so the Word finds
him as his own ally, and the Spirit takes pos
session of one who will breathe on His behalf.
8. Thus, and for these reasons, by the vote
of the whole people, not in the evil fashion
which has since prevailed, nor by means of
bloodshed and oppression, but in an apostolic
and spiritual manner, he is led up to the throne*
of Saint Mark, to succeed him in piety, no
less than in office ; in the latter indeed at a
great distance from him, in the former, which

a Body of Christ, i.e., the Church, His mystical body.
8 Isai. i. 9.
y 1 Kings xvii. 4.
.8 Gen. xxi. 19.
« Gen. xix. 24.
1) Isai. xxviii. 16.
5 S. Luke i. 69.
k S. Matt. iii. 12.
11 Cor. lit, 13, 15.
0 Mat. iii. 2, 3.
A The throne, etc., as Patriarch of Alexandria. The date of

his consecration is A.D. 326.

is the genuine right of succession, following
him closely.
For unity in doctrine deserves
unity in office ; and a rival teacher sets up a
rival throne ; the one is a successor in reality,
the other but in name.
For it is not the in
truder, but he whose rights are intruded upon,
who is the successor, not the lawbreaker, but
the lawfully appointed, not the man of con
trary opinions, but the man of the same faith ;
if this is not what we mean by successor, he
succeeds in the same sense as disease to health,
darkness to light, storm to calm, and frenzy
to sound sense.

9. The duties of his office he discharged in
the same spirit as that in which he had been
preferred to it.
For he did not at once, after
taking possession of his throne, like men who
have unexpectedly seized upon some sovereignty
or inheritance, grow insolent from intoxication.
This is the conduct of illegitimate and intru
sive priests, who are unworthy of their voca
tion ; whose preparation for the priesthood
has cost them nothing, who have endured no
inconvenience for the sake of virtue, who only
begin to study religion when appointed to
teach it, and undertake the cleansing of others
before being cleansed themselves ; yesterday
sacrilegious, to-day sacerdotal ; yesterday ex
cluded from the sanctuary," to-day its offici
ants ; proficient in vice, novices in piety ; the
product of the favour of man, not of the grace of
the Spirit ; who, having run through the whole
gamut of violence, at last tyrannize over even
piety ; who, instead of gaining credit for their
office by their character, need for their char
acter the credit of their office, thus subverting
the due relation between them ; who ought to
offer more sacrifices0 for themselves than for
the ignorances of the people ; i who inevitably
fall into one of two errors, either, from their
own need of indulgence, being excessively in
dulgent, and so even teaching, instead of
checking, vice, or cloaking their own sins un
Both these
der the harshness of their rule.
extremes he avoided ; he was sublime in action,
inaccessible in virtue, most
lowly in 4nind ;
accessible in intercourse ;
gentle, free from
anger, sympathetic, sweet in words, sweeter in
disposition ; angelic in appearance, more an
gelic in mmd ; calm in rebuke, persuasive in
praise, without spoiling the good effect -of
either by excess, but rebuking with the tender
ness of a father, praising with the dignity of a

-

a The Sanctuary, or " the Sacraments.**
8 To offer more sacrifices, i.e.. These priests are not only " men
which have infirmity." who need to offer for their own sins, as
well as for those of the people : but because they are even more
sinful than their flocks, they need a greater and more frequent
atonement.

y Heb. vii. vj: ix. 7.

Exod. xxvi. 33.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

ruler, his tenderness was not dissipated, nor
his severity sour ; for the one was reasonable,
the other prudent, and both truly wise; his
the training of his
for
disposition sufficed
spiritual children, with very little need of
words ; his words with very little need of the
rod,a and his moderate use of the rod with still
less for the knife.

10. But why should I paint for you the por
St. Paul^ has sketched him
trait of the man?
by anticipation.
This 'he does, when he sings
the praises of the great High-priest, who hath
passed through the heavens » (for I will venture
to say even this, since Scripture* can call those
who live according to Christ by the name of
Christs) : ■ and again when by the rules in his
letter to Timothy, £ he gives a model for future
Bishops : for if you will apply the law as a test
to him who deserves these praises, you will
clearly perceive his perfect exactness.
Come
then to aid me in my panegyric ; for I am
labouring heavily in my speech, and though I
desire to pass by point after point, they seize
upon me one after another, and I can find no
surpassing excellence in a form which is in all
respects well proportioned and beautiful ; for
each as it occurs to me seems fairer than the rest
and so takes by storm my speech.
Come then,
I pray, you who have been his admirers and
witnesses, divide among yourselves his excel
lences, contend bravely with one another, men
and women alike, young men and maidens,
old men and children, priests and people,
solitaries and cenobites.i men of simple or
of exact life, contemplatives or practically
minded.
Let one praise him in his fastings
and prayers as if he had been disembodied
and
immaterial, another his unweariedness
and zeal for vigils and psalmody, another his
patronage of the needy, another his dauntlessness towards the powerful, or his conde
scension to the lowly.
Let the virgins cele
brate the friend of the Bridegroom ; 9 those
under the yoke 1 their restrainer, hermits him
who lent wings to their course, cenobites their
lawgiver, simple folk their guide* contem
platives the divine, the joyous their bridle,
the unfortunate their consolation, the hoaryheaded their staff, youths their instructor, the
poor their resource, the wealthy their steward.
F.ven the widows will, methinks, praise their
protector, even the orphans their father, even

a i Cor. iv. 21.
0 St. Pawl. To whom here the Ep. to the Hebrews is assigned.
6 Ps. cv. 15.
y Heb. iv. 14.
t Christs.
15. "Touch not Mine anointed."
rtCenobites fuyaoec.
9 S. John iii. 29.
t Under the yoke, i.e. "Married." Cf. Orat. xlii. n.

Cf. Orat. ii. 29 ; xhii. 62.

(I.XX.) and Vulff. "my Christs."

£ 1 Tim. iii. 2 et seq.

i.e., Ps. cv.

the poor their benefactor, strangers their en
tertainer, brethren the man of brotherly love,
the sick their physician, in whatever sickness
or treatment you will, the healthy the guard of
health, yea all men him who made himself
all things to all men that he might gain al
most, if not quite, all.

11. On these grounds, as I have said, I
leave others, who have leisure to admire the
minor details of his character, to admire and
extol him.
I call them minor details only in
comparing him and his character with his own
standard, for that which hath
been made
glorious hath not been made glorious, even
though it be exceeding splendid by reason of
the glory that surpasseth,a as we are told ; for
j indeed the minor points of his excellence
would suffice to win celebrity for others.
But
since it would be intolerable for me to leave
; the word and served less important details, 1
must turn to that which is his chief character
istic ; and God alone, on Whose behalf I am
speaking, can enable me to say anything worthy
of a soul so noble and so mighty in the word.
12. In the palmy days of the Church, when
all was well, the present elaborate, far-fetched
and artificial treatment of Theology had not
made its way into the schools of divinity,
but playing with pebbles which deceive the
eye by the quickness of their changes, or
dancing before an audience with varied and
effeminate contortions, were looked upon as all
one with speaking or hearing of God in a way
But since the Sexunusual or frivolous.
tusesY and Pyrrhos, and the antithetic style,
like a dire and malignant disease, have infected
our churches, and babbling is reputed cul
ture, and, as the book of the Acts8 says of the
Athenians, we spend our time in nothing else
but either to tell or to hear some new thing.
O what Jeremiah * will bewail our confusion
and blind madness ; he alone co::ld
utter
lamentations befitting our misfortunes.

13. The beginning of this madness was
Arius (whose name is derived from frenzy f),
who paid the penalty of his unbridled tongue
by his death in a
profane spot.i brought
about by prayer not by disease, when he like
Judas 9 burst asunder1 for his similar treachery

a 2 Cor. iii. 10.
y Se.ttuses.
later Sceptic school.
founder of the earlier.

3 Acts vi. 9.
Sextus Kmpiricus fecnt. 3 a.ij. ) a leader of the
Pyrrho of Klis (cent. 4 B.C.) was the.

5 Acts xvii. 21.

e Lam. i. 1.

£ Frenzy. Cf. Orat. ii. 37 : xxxiv. 8.
if A frofun? sj»>ty lit " profane places "-pttiral as contrasted
with the eV Totro) ayita. Lev. vi. 16. etc., etc. : in which the priests
must eat of the sacrifices. The meaning of the phrase is "Arius
died excommunicated "'- indeed on the eve of the day on which
the Kmperor Constantine had ordered him to he restored to com
munion.
8 Like Judas. Cf. Epipb. Haer. 68.7 ; S >cr. i. 38. Thcodoret
i. 4.

i Acts i. 18.

ON THE GREAT ATHANASIUS.

to the Word.
Then others, catching the in
fection, organized an art of impiety, and, con
fining Deity to the Unbegotten, expelled from
Deity not only the Begotten, but also the Pro
ceeding one, and honoured the Trinity with
communion in name a alone, or even refused
to retain this for'it.
Not so that blessed one,
who was indeed a man of God and a mighty
trumpet of truth : but being aware that to
contract 3 the Three Persons to a numerical
Unity is
heretical, and the innovation of
Sabellius, who first devised a contraction of
Deity ; and that to sever the Three Persons by
a distinction of nature, is an unnatural muti
lation of Deity ; he both happily preserved the
Unity, which belongs to the Godhead, and
religiously taught the Trinity, which refers v
to Personality, neither confounding the Three
Persons in the Unity, nor dividing the Sub
stance among the Three Persons, but abiding
within the bounds of piety, by avoiding ex
cessive inclination or opposition to
either
side.

14. And therefore, first in the holy Synod
of Nicsea,* the gathering of the three hun
dred and eighteen chosen men, united by the
Holy Ghost, as far as in him lay, he stayed
the disease.
Though not yet ranked among
the Bishops, he held the first rank among the
members of the Council, for preference was
given to virtue just as much as to office.
Afterwards, when the flame had been fanned
by the blasts of the evil one, and had spread
of
very widely (hence came the tragedies
which almost the whole earth and sea are full),
the fight raged fiercely around him who was
the noble champion of the Word.
For the
assault is hottest upon the point of resistance,
while various dangers surround it on every
side : for impiety is skilful in designing evils,
and excessively daring in taking them in
hand : and how would they spare men, who
had not spared the Godhead ? Yet one of the
assaults • was the most dangerous of all : and I
myself contribute somewhat to this scene ;
yea, let me plead for the innocence of my dear
fatherland, for the wickedness was not due to
the land that bore them, but to the men who
For holy indeed is that land,
undertook it.
and everywhere noted for its piety, but "these
men are unworthy of the Church which bore

a In name, etc.. i.e.. They used the name Trinity, although it
was rendered meaningless by their false doctrine as to the in
equality of the Three Blessed Persons.
,i To contract, etc. On this whole passage cf. Orat. ii. 36, 37,
notes.
y Which refers, etc., or " which consists in personal relations."
Cf. on ioionjv. Orat. xliii. 30. note.
Athanasius was present as theological
tNicaa, a.d. 335.
assistant to Alexander of Alexandria.

them, and ye have heard of a briar growing
in a vine ; a and the traitor P was Judas, one of
the disciples.

15. There are some who do not excuse even
my namesake'' from blame; who, living at
Alexandria at the time for the sake of culture,
although he had been most kindly treated by
him, as if the dearest of his children, and re
ceived his special confidence, yet joined in the
revolutionary plot against his father and patron :
for, though others took the active part in it,
the hand of Absalom 4 was with them, as the
saying goes.
If any of you had heard of the
hand which was produced by fraud against the
Saint, and the corpse ' of the living man, and
the unjust banishment, he knows what I mean.
But this I will gladly forget.
For on doubtful
points, I am disposed to think we ought to in
cline to the charitable side, and acquit rather
than condemn the accused.
For a bad man
would speedily condemn even a good man,
while a good man would not be ready to con
demn even a bad one.
For one who is not
ready to do ill, is not inclined even to suspect
it.
I come now to what is matter of fact, not
of report, what is vouched for as truth instead
of unverified suspicion.

1 6. There was a monster £ from Cappadocia,
born on our farthest confines, of low birth,
and lower mind, whose blood was not per
fectly free, but mongrel, as we know that of
mules to be ; at first, dependent on the table of
others, whose price was a barley-cake, who had
learnt to say and do everything with an eye to
his stomach, and, at last, after sneaking into
public life, and filling its lowest offices, such
as that of contractor for swine's flesh, the sol
diers' rations, and then having proved himself
a scoundrel for the sake of greed in this public
trust, and been stripped to the skin, contrived
to escape, and after passing, as exiles do, from
country to country and city to city, last of
all, in an evil hour for the Christian commun
like one of the plagues of Egypt, he
ity,
There, his wanderings
reached Alexandria.
being stayed, he began his villany.
Good
for nothing in all other respects, without cul
ture, without fluency in conversation, without
even the form and pretence of reverence, his

afsai. v. s iLXX.) ; vii. 33, v. I. " in a vineyard.'4
P S. I.uke vi. 16.
y Namesake. Oregon', a Cappadocian, nominated to the see
of Alexandria, by the Arian Hishops at Anlioch, after the banish
ment of Athin.isius, *.D. 340.
'"The hand of Absalom," prob. a mis
'.^«r<r<tAufi
quotation of 2 Sam. xiv. 19.
2 Sam. xv. 5.
''The hand of Joab."
Athanasius was charged with having murdered
Arscnius. and his enemies produced a hand which, they said, had
belonged to the dead man.
George of Cappadocia, Arian intruder into the see
of Alexandria, A.D. 356-361.

S q
e Corpse, etc.

£ Monster.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

skill in working villany and confusion was un
equalled.

17. His acts of insolence towards the saint
Often were the
you all know in full detail.
righteous given into the hands of the wick
ed," not that the latter might be honoured,
but that the former might be tested : and
though the wicked come, as it
is written,
to an awful death,0 nevertheless for the pres
ent the godly are a laughing stock,
while
the goodness of God and the great treas
uries of what is in store for each of them here
after are concealed.
Then indeed word and
deed and thought will be weighed in the just
balances of God, as He arises to judge the
earth,t gathering together counsel and works,
and revealing what He had kept sealed up.4
Of this let the words and sufferings of Job
convince thee, who was a truthful, blameless,
just, godfearing man, with all those other
qualities which are testified of him, and yet was
smitten with such a succession of remarkable
visitations, at the hands of him who begged
for power over him, that, although many
have often suffered in the whole course of
time, and some even have, as is probable, been
grievously afflicted, yet none can be compared
with him in misfortunes.
For he not only
suffered, without being allowed space to mourn
for his losses in their rapid succession, the loss
of his money, his possessions, his large and
fair family, blessings for which all men care ;
but was at last smitten with an incurable dis
ease horrible to look upon, and, to crown his
misfortunes, had a wife whose only comfort
was evil counsel.
For his surpassing troubles
were those of his soul added to those of the
body.' He had also among his friends truly
miserable comforters, ? as he calls them, who
could not help him.
For when they saw his
suffering, in ignorance of its hidden meaning,
they supposed his disaster to be the punish
ment of vice and not the touchstone of virtue.
And they not only thought this, but were not
even ashamed to reproach him with his lot,''
at a time when, even if he had been suffering
for vice, they ought to have treated his grief
with words of consolation.

18. Such was the lot of Job: such at first
sight his history.
In reality it was a contest
between virtue and envy : * the one straining
every nerve to overcome the good, the other
enduring everything, that it might abide un

0 lb. ix. 23.
y Ps. Ixxxxi. 8.
ci Job. ix. 24.
& Dan. xii. a.
5 lb xvi. 2.
• Job ii. 7 et scq.
ij His lot, lit " tbc dreadful (thing) " i.e. "reproach him. as hav
ing brought his sufferings upon himself-or * reproach him with
imniety '-the cause of his sufferings.
0 Envy, i.e., of the devil. Wisdom ii. 24. Ct. $ 32 of this Ora
tion.

subdued ; the one striving to smooth the way
for vice, by means of the chastisement of the
upright, the other to retain its hold upon the
good, even if they do exceed others in misfor
tunes.
What then of Him who answered Job
out of the whirlwind and cloud," Who is slow
to chastise and swift to help*, Who suffers not
utterly the rod of the wicked to come into the
lot of the righteous, lest the righteous should
learn iniquity?*3 At the end of the contests
He declares the victory of the athlete in a
splendid proclamation and lays bare the secret
of his calamities, saying:
" Thinkest thou
that I have dealt with thee for any other pur
pose than the manifestation of thy righteous
ness ? " v This is the balm for his wounds, this
is the crown of the contest, this the reward for
his patience.
his subsequent
For perhaps
prosperity was small, great as it may seem to
some, and ordained for the sake of small
minds, even though he received again twice
as much as he had lost.

19. In this case then it is not wonderful, if
George had the advantage of Athanasius ; nay it
would be more wonderful, if the righteous were
not tried in the fire of contumely ; nor is
this very wonderful, as it would have been had
the flames availed for more ijhan this.
Then
he was in retirement, and arranged his exile
most excellently, for he betook himself to the
holy and divine homes 8 of contemplation in
Egypt, where, secluding themselves from the
world, and welcoming the desert, men live to
God more than all who exist in the body.
Some struggle on in an utterly monastic and
solitary life, speaking to themselves alone and
to God,« and all the world they know is what
meets their eyes in the desert.
Others, cher
ishing the law of love in community, are at
once Solitaries and Ccenobites, dead to all
other men and to the eddies of public affairs
which whirl us and are whirled about them
selves and make sport of us in their sudden
changes, being the world to one another and
whetting the edge of their love in emulation.
During his intercourse with them, the great
Athanasius, who was always the mediator and
reconciler of all other men, like Him Who
made peace through His blood f between
things which were at variance, reconciled the
solitary with the community life : by showing
that the Priesthood is capable of contempla
tion, and that contemplation is in need of a
spiritual guide.

20. Thus he combined the two, and so

0 Ps. cxxv. 3.
o Job xxxviii. I.
& Homes, etc. The monasteries of lower Egypt and the Thebaid.
c t Cor. xiv. 28.
This was a.u. 356.

y Job xL 3 (I.XX.).
£ Col. 1. ao.

life,

if any one thinks

united the partisans of both calm action and
of active calm, as to convince them that the
monastic life is characterised by steadfastness
of disposition rather than by bodily retire
ment.
Accordingly the great David was a
man of at once the most active and most soli
tary
the verse, I
am in solitude, till I pass away," of value and
authority in the exposition of this subject.
Therefore, though they surpass all others in
virtue, they fell further short of his mind than
others fell short of their own, and while con
tributing little to the perfection of his priest
hood, they gained in return greater assistance
in contemplation. Whatever he thought, was a
law for them, whatever on the contrary he dis
approved, they abjured : his decisions were to
them the tables of Moses,*3 and they paid him
more reverence than is due from men to the
Saints. Aye, and when men came to hunt the
Saint like a wild beast, and, after searching
for him everywhere, failed to find him, they
vouchsafed these emissaries not a single word,
and offered their necks to the sword, as risk
ing their lives for Christ's sake, and consid
ering the most cruel sufferings on behalf of
Athanasius to be an important step to contem
plation, and far more divine and sublime than
the long fasts and hard lying and mortifications
in which they constantly revel.

21. Such were his surroundings when he
approved the wise counsel of Solomon that
their is a time to every purpose : v so he hid
himself for a while, escaping during the time
of war, to show himsjlf when the time of
peace came, as it did soon afterwards.
Mean
while George, there being absolutely no one to
resist him, overran Egypt, and desolated Syria,
in the might of ungodliness. He seized upon
the East also as far as he could, ever attracting
the weak, as torrents roll down objects in their
course, and assailing the
unstable or faint
hearted.
He won over also the simplicity of
the Emperor, for thus I must term his instabil
ity, though I respect his pious motives.
For,
to say the truth, he had zeal, but not accord
ing to knowledge.'
He purchased those in
authority who were lovers of money rather than
lovers of Christ-for he was well supplied with
the funds for the poor, which he embezzledespecially the effeminate and unmanly men,'
of doubtful sex, but of manifest impiety ; to
whom, I know not how or why, Emperors
of the Romans entrusted authority over men,
though their proper function was the charge of

a Ps. cxli. to I XX .
Y Eccles. iii. I.
c Unmanly men, the Eunuchs, the chamberlains of Constan*

0 Kxod. xxxii. 15 ; xxxiv. 1.
6 Rom. x. a.

tins.

women.
In this lay the power of that servant a
of the wicked one, that sower of tares, that
forerunner of Antichrist ; foremost in speech
of the orators of his time among the Bishops ;
if any one likes to call him an orator who was
not so much an impious, as he was a hostile
and contentious reasoner,-his name I will
gladly pass by : he was the hand of his party,
perverting the truth by the gold subscribed
for pious uses, which the wicked made an
instrument of their impiety.

22. The crowning feat of this faction was
the council which sat first at Seleucia, the city
of the holy and illustrious virgin Thekla, and
afterwards at this mighty city, thus connecting
their names, no longer with noble associations,
but with these of deepest disgrace ; whether we
must call that council, which subverted and
disturbed everything, a tower of Chalane,^
which deservedly confounded the tongueswould that theirs had been confounded for
their harmony in evil ! -or a Sanhedrim of
Caiaphas v where Christ was condemned, or some
The ancient and pious doc
other like name.
trine which defended the Trinity was abolished,
by setting up a 4 palisade and battering down
the Consubstantial : opening the door to im
piety by means of what is written, using as their
pretext, their reverence for Scripture and for the
use of approved terms, but really introducing
unscriptural Arianism.
For the phrase " like,
according to the Scriptures," was a bait to the
simple, concealing the hook of impiety, a figure
seeming to look in the direction of all who
passed by, a boot fitting either foot, a win
nowing with every wind,' gaining authority
from the newly written villany and device
against the truth.
For they wrere wise to do
evil, but to do good they had no knowledge, i
23. Hence came their pretended condemna
tion 1 of the heretics, whom they renounced in
words, in order to gain plausibility for their ef
forts, but in reality furthered; charging them
not with unbounded impiety, but with exagger
ated language. Hence came the profane judges
of the Saints, and the new combination, and
public view and discussion of mysterious ques
tions, and the illegal enquiry into the actions
of life, and the hired informers, and the pur-

0 Gen. xi. 4.

a Serjmnt, etc., probably, Acacius.
y S. John xi. 47 ft ifq.
o xo'poxa lit.

.1 pale "-one of the many which formed the pali
sade.
Perhaps there is a play on the word v,apax7Tjpa " a letter "
in reference to the insertion of the letter iota in the Nicene formula
-which then became Homoiousion. i.e.. " Like in substance."
This action on the part of the Semi-Arians (who formed the ma
jority of the Council of Seleucia A.l>. 359). was the first step to the
Homoion of the Acacian party, who prevailed at the council of
Constantinople, a.d. 360, and professed great devotion to the use
of .Scriptural terms.
e Eccles. v. 9.
n Contitmnatwti, i.e., of Aetius, who was banished by Constantius after the Council.

£ Jer. iv. 23.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

chased sentences.
Some were unjustly de
posed" from their sees, others intruded, and
among other necessary qualifications, made to
sign the bonds of iniquity : the ink was ready,
This the majority even
the informer at hand.
of us, who were not overcome, had to endure,
not falling in mind, though prevailed upon to
sign,8 and so uniting with men who were in
both respects wicked, and involving ourselves
Over this
in the smoke,» if not in the flame.
I have often wept, when contemplating the con
fusion of impiety at that time, and the perse
cution of the orthodox teaching which now
arose at the hands of the patrons of the Word.
24. For in reality, as the Scripture says,
the shepherds became brutish,* and many
shepherds destroyed My vineyard, and defiled
my pleasant portion,' I mean the Church of
God, which has been gathered together by
the sweat and blood of many toilers and vic
tims both before and after Christ, aye, even
the great sufferings of God for us.
For with
very few exceptions, and these either men who
from their insignificance were disregarded, or
from their virtue manfully resisted, being left
unto Israel,* as was ordained, for a seed and
root,'' to blossom and come to life again amid
the streams of the Spirit, everyone9 yielded to
the influences of the time, distinguished only
by the fact that some did so earlier, some later,
that some became the champions and leaders
of impiety, while such others were assigned a
lower rank, as had been shaken by fear, en
slaved by need, fascinated by flattery, or be
guiled in ignorance ; the last being the least
guilty, if indeed we can allow even this to be
a valid excuse for men entmsted with the lea
dership of the people.
For just as the force of
lions and other animals, or of men and of
women, or of old and of young men is not the
same, but there is a considerable difference
due to age or species-so it is also with rulers
and their subjects.
For while we might par
don laymen in such a case, and often they
escape, because not put to the test, yet how can
we excuse a teacher, whose duty it is, unless
falsely so-called, to correct the igno
he is
rance of others.
For is it not absurd, while
no one, however great his boorishness and
want of education, is allowed to be ignorant
of the Roman law, and while there is no law
in favour of sins of ignorance, that the teachers

a Defviseit.
Ancyra and others.
fl To sign. etc.
y The smoke, etc.
6 Jer. x. 21.
£Isai. i. 9.
0 Everyone.

Cyril of Jerusalem, F.ustathius of Sebastc, Basil of

Cf. Orat- xviii. 18.

Cf. Orat. xvi. 6 ; Vs. xviii. 9, cv. 3a.

< lb. ii. 10.
ri lb. xxxvii. 31 (l.XX.)-
This was the time of which S. Jerome wrote

" lngemuit totus orbis, et miralus est sc Arianum esse."

of the mysteries of salvation should be igno
rant of the first principles of salvation, however
simple and shallow their minds may be in
regard to other subjects.
But, even granting
indulgence to them who erred in ignorance,
what can be said for the rest, who lay claim to
subtlety of intellect, and yet yielded to the
court-party for the reasons I have mentioned,
and alter playing the part of piety for a long
while, failed in the hour of trial.

25. " Yet once more," B I hear the Scripture
say that the heaven and the earth shall be
shaken, inasmuch as this has befallen them
before, signifying, as I suppose, a manifest re
novation of all things. And we must believe
S. Paul when he says 0 that this last shaking is
none other than the second coming of Christ,
and the transformation and changing of the
universe to a condition of stability which can
not be shaken. And I imagine that this pres
ent shaking, in which* the contemplatives and
lovers of God, who before the time exercise
their heavenly citizenship, are shaken from us, is
of no less consequence than any of former days.
For, however peaceful and moderate in other
respects these men are, yet they cannot bear to
carry their reasonableness so far as to be trai
tors to the cause of God for quietness' sake :
nay on this point they are excessively warlike
and sturdy in fight; such is the heat'of their
zeal, that they would sooner proceed to excess
in disturbance, than fail to notice anything
that is amiss. And no small portion of the
people is breaking away with them, flying
away, as a flock of birds does, with those who
lead the flight, and even now does not cease
to fly with them.

26. Such was Athanasius to us, when pres
ent, the pillar of the Church ; and such, even
when he retired before the insults of the
wicked.
For those who have plotted the
capture of some strong fort, when they see no
other easy means of approaching or taking it,
betake themselves to arts, and then, after se
ducing the commander by money or guile,
without any effort possess themselves of the
stronghold, or,
as those who
if you will,
plotted against Samson first cut off his hair,*
in which his strength lay, and then seized
upon the judge, and made sport of him at
will, to requite him for his former power : so
did our foreign foes, after getting rid of our
source of strength, and shearing off the glory
of the Church, revel in like manner in utter
Then the supances and deeds of impiety.

o Haizg. ii. 7 ; Heb. xii. 26.
y In which, etc.

sive zeal of the monks of Nazianzus.

This sentence probably alludes to the exces

8 Hcb. xii. 27.
6 Judges xvi. 19.

ON THE GREAT ATHANASIUS.

porter" and patron of the hostile shepherd P
died, crowning v his reign, which had not
been evil, with an evil close, and unprofitably
repenting, as they say, with his last breath,
when each man, in view of the higher judge
ment seat, is a prudent judge of his own con
duct.
For of these three evils, which were
unworthy of his reign, he said that he was
conscious, the murder of his kinsmen, the
proclamation of the Apostate, and the inno
vation upon the faith ; and with these words
he is said to have departed.
Thus there was
once more authority to teach the word of
truth, and those who had suffered violence
had now undisturbed
freedom of speech,
while jealousy was whetting the weapons of
its wrath.
Thus it was with the people of
Alexandria, who, with their usual impatience
of the insolent, could not brook the excesses
of the man, and therefore marked his wicked
ness by an unusual death, and his death by
an unusual ignominy.
For you know that
camel,* and its strange burden, and the new
form of elevation, and the first and, I think,
the only procession, with which to this day
the insolent are threatened.

27. But when from this hurricane of un
righteousness, this corrupter of godliness, this
precursor of the wicked one, such satisfaction
had been exacted, in a way I cannot praise,
for we must consider not what he ought to
have suffered, but what we ought « to do :
exacted however it was, as the result of the
public anger and excitement : and thereupon,
our champion was restored from his illustrious
banishment, for so I term his exile on behalf
of, and under the blessing of, the Trinity,
amid such delight of the people of the city
and of almost all Egypt, that they ran to
gether from every side, from the furthest limits
of the country, simply to hear the voice of
Athanasius, or feast their eyes upon the sight
of him, nay even, as we are told of the Apos
that they might be hallowed by the
tles,
shadow i and unsubstantial image of his body :
so that, many as are the honours, and wel
comes bestowed on frequent occasions in the
course of time upon various individuals, not
only upon public rulers and bishops, but also
upon the most illustrious of private citizens,

a The Supporter, Cnnstantius. who died A. D. 360.
fi Thf hostile skefrherd, George.
y Crowtinf, Clemencet renders "Appointing an evil head over
an empire which was not evil," sc. Julian the Apostate.
6 Camel. On the death of Onstanttns, the pilaris of Alexan
dria m-irdcrcd George, and carried his mangled body through
the streets on the back of a camel.
S. Gregory seems to imply that the dee.l had
been done by Christians.
Historical writers and Julian's letter to
the people make it clear that this was not realty the case.

e We ought, etc.

f Acts v. 15.

not one has been recorded more numerously
attended or more brilliant than this. And
only one honour can be compared with it by
Athanasius himself, which had been conferred
upon him on his former entrance into the
city, when returning from the same exile for
the same reasons.

28. With reference to this honour there was
also current some such report as the following ;
for I will take leave to mention it, even though
it be superfluous, as a kind of flavouring to my
speech, or a flower scattered in honour of his
entry.
After that entry, a certain officer,
who had been twice Consul, was riding into
the city ; he was one of us, among the most
noted of Cappadocians.
I am sure that you
know that I mean Philagrius, who won upon
our affections far beyond any one else, and
was honoured as much as he was loved, if I
may thus briefly set forth all his distinctions :
who had been for a second time entrusted
with the government of the city, at the re
quest of the citizens, by the decision of the
Then one of the common people
Emperor.
present, thinking the crowd enormous, like
an ocean whose bound no eye can see, is
reported to have said to one of his comrades
and friends-as often happens in such a case-
"Tell me, my good fellow, have you ever
before seen the people pour out in such num
bers and so enthusiastically to do honour to
any one man?" "No!" said the young
man, "and I fancy that not even Constantius
himself would be so treated ; " indicating, by
the mention of the Emperor, the climax of
possible honour. "Do you speak of that,"
said the other with a sweet and merry laugh,
"as something wonderfully great?
I can
scarcely believe that even the great Athana
sius would be welcomed like this," adding at
the same time one of our native oaths in con
firmation of his words. Now the point of
what he said, as I suppose you also plainly
see, is this, that he set the subject of our
eulogy before the Emperor himself.

29. So great was the reverence of all for
the man, and so amazing even now seems the
reception which I have described.
For if
divided according to birth, age and profes
sion, (and the city is most usually arranged
in this way, when a public honour is bestowed
on anyone) how can I set forth in words that
mighty spectacle? They formed one river,
and it were indeed a poet's task to describe
that Nile, of really golden stream and rich
in cro|xs, flowing back again from the city to
the Chaereum, a day's journey, I take it, and
Permit me to revel a while longer in
more.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

forth.

my description :
for I am going there, and it
is not easy to bring back even my words
from that ceremony.
He rode upon a colt,
almost, blame me not for folly, as my Jesus
did upon that other colt," whether it were the
people of the Gentiles, whom He mounts in
kindness, by setting it free from the bonds of
ignorance, or something else, which the Scrip
ture sets
He was welcomed with
branches of trees, and garments with many
flowers and of varied hue were torn off and
strewn before him and under his feet : there
alone was all that was glorious and costly and
peerless treated with dishonour.
Like, once
more, to the entry of Christ were, those that
went before with shouts and followed with
dances ;
only the crowd which sung his
praises was not of children only, but every
tongue was harmonious, as men contended only
I pass by the univer
to outdo one another.
sal cheers, and the pouring forth of unguents,
and the nightlong festivities, and the whole
city gleaming with light, and the feasting in
public and at home, and all the means of
testifying to a city's joy, which were then in
lavish and incredible profusion bestowed upon
him.
Thus did this marvellous man, with
such a concourse, regain his own city.

By no means.

30. He lived then as becomes the rulers of
such a people, but did he fail to teach as he
Were his contests out of harmony
lived?
with his teaching ?
Were his dangers less
than those of men who have contended for
any truth ?
Were his honours inferior to the
Did he
objects for which he contended ?
after his reception in any way disgrace that
reception ?
Everything was
harmonious, as an air upon a single lyre, and
in the same key ; his life, his teaching, his
struggles, his dangers, his return, and his con
duct after his return.
For immediately on
his restoration to his Church, he was not like
those who are blinded by unrestrained passion,
who, under the dominion of their anger, thrust
away or strike at once whatever comes in their
way, even though it might well be spared.
But, thinking this to be a special time for him
to consult his reputation, since one who is illtreated is usually restrained, and one who has
the power to requite a wrong is ungoverned,
he treated so mildly and gently those who had
injured him, that even they themselves, if I
may say so, did not find his restoration dis
tasteful.

31. He cleansed the temple of those who
made merchandise of God, and trafficked in
the things of Christ, imitating Christ P in this

a S. Luke xix. 35.

0 S. John ii. 15.

also ; only it was with persuasive words, not
with a twisted scourge that this was wrought.
He reconciled also those who were at variance,
both with one another and with him, without
the aid of any coadjutor.
Those who had
been wronged he set free from oppression,
making no distinction as to whether they were
of his own or of the opposite party. He re
stored too the teaching which had teen over
thrown : the Trinity was once more boldly
spoken of, and set upon the lampstand, flash
ing with the brilliant light of the One Godhead
into the souls of all.
He legislated again for
the whole world, and brought all minds under
his influence, by letters to some, by invitations
to others, instructing some, who visited him
uninvited, and proposing as the single law to
For this alone was able
all- Good will*
to conduct them to the true issue.
In brief,
he exemplified the virtues of two celebrated
stones-for to those who assailed him he was
adamant, and to those at variance a magnet,
which by some secret natural power draws iron
to itself, and influences the hardest of sub
stances.

32. But yet it was not likely that envy
could brook all this, or see the Church restored
again to the same glory and health as in former
days, by the speedy healing over, as in the
Therefore
body, of the wounds ofseparation.
it was, that he raised up against Athanasius the
Emperor, a rebel like himself/ and his peer
in villany, inferior to him only from lack of
time, the first of Christian Emperors to rage
against Christ, bringing forth all at once the
basilisk of impiety with which he had long
been in labour, when he obtained an oppor
tunity, and shewing himself, at the time when
he was proclaimed Emperor, to be a traitor to
the Emperor who had entrusted him with the
empire, and a traitor double dyed to the God
who had saved him.
He devised the most in
human of all the persecutions by blending
speciousness with cruelty, in his envy of the
honour won by the martyrs in their struggles ;
and so he called in question their repute for
courage, by making verbal twists and quibbles
a part of his character, or to speak the real
truth, devoting himself to them with an eager
ness born of his natural disposition, and imi
tating in varied craft the Evil one who dwelt
within him.
The subjugation of the whole
race of Christians he thought a simple task ;
but found it a great one to overcome Atha-

oto SouAetrflai, lit. " to will "-i.e. be willing to listen to, and un
derstand the interests for which others were contending, in a concili
atory spirit-for the sake of truth, not of victory.
Envy, personifying the Evil
. a rebel like himself.
one.

Cf. supra §i3.

*J He

.

nasius and the power of his teaching over us.
For he
saw that no success could be gained in the plot against
us, because of this man's resistance and opposition ;
the places of the Christians cut down being at once
filled up, surprising though it seems, by the accession
of Gentiles and the prudence of Athanasius.
In full
view therefore of this, the crafty perverter and perse
cutor, clinging no lunger to his cloak of illiberal sophis
try, laid bare his wickedness and openly banished the
Bishop from the city.
For the illustrious warrior must
needs conquer in three struggles" and thus make good
his perfect title to fame.

33. Brief was the interval before Justice pronounced
sentence, and handed over the offender 3 10 the Per
sians : sending him forth an ambitious monarch-and
bringing him back a corpse for which no one even felt
pity ; which, as I have heard, was not allowed to rest
in the grave, but was shaken out and thrown up by
the earth which he had shaken : a prelude- I take it
-to his future chastisement.
Then another king y
arose,* not shameless in countenance like the former,
nor an oppressor of Israel with cruel tasks and task
masters, but most pious and gentle.
In order to lay
the best of foundations for his empire, and begin, as
is right, by an act of justice, he recalled from exile all
the Bishops, but in the first place him who stood first
in virtue and had conspicuously championed the cause
of piety.
Further, he inquired into the truth of our
faith which had been torn asunder, confused, and
parcelled out into various opinions and portions by
many ; with the intention, if it were possible, of re
ducing the whole world to harmony and union by the
co-operation of the Spirit : and, should he fail in ihis,
of attaching himself to the best party, so as to aid and
be aided by it, thus giving token of the exceeding
loftiness and magnificence of his ideas on questions of
Ilcie too was shown in a very
the greatest moment.
high degree the simple-mindedness of Athanasius, and
the steadfastness of his faith in Christ.
For, when all
the rest who sympathised with us were divided into
three parties, and many were faltering in their concep
tion of the Son, and still more- in that of the Holy
Ghost, (a point on which to be only slightly in error
was to be orthodox) and few indeed were sound upon
both points, he was the first and only one, or with the
concurrence of but a few, to venture to confess in
writing, with entire clearness and distinctness, the
Unity of Godhead and Essence of the Three Persons,
and thus to attain in later days, under the influence of
inspiration, to the same faith in regard to the Holy
Ghost, as had been bestowed at an earlier time on
most of the Fathers in regard to the Son.
This con
fession, a truly royal and magnificent gift, he presented
to the Emperor, opposing to the unwritten innovation,
a written account' of the orthodox faith, so that an
emperor might be overcome by an emperor, reason by
reason, treatise by treatise.

34. This confession was, it seems, greeted with re
spect by all, both in West and East, who were capable
of life ; some cherishing piety within their own bo
soms, if we may credit what they say, but advancing
no further, like a still-born child which dies within its
mother's womb ; others kindling to some extent, as it
were, sparks, so far as to escape the difficulties of the
lime, arising either from the more fervent of the ortho
dox, or the devotion of the people ; while others spoke

Htf was thrice banished.

a.i>. 336^ by
Constantine, A.u. 356 under Constantius, and A.u. 362 by Julian.

a lu three struggles.
0 /'/*/ offender, Julian.
y Another king-the Emperor Jovian.
* A written account. A synodal letter drawn up in council,
probably at Alexandria, and conveyed and presented to Jovian at
Antioch by S. Athanasius.

6 Kxod. i. 8.

1 the truth with boldness, on whose side I would be, for
I dare make no further boast ; no longer consulting
my own tearfulness-in other words, the views of men
more unsound than myself (for this we have done
enough and to spare, without either gaining anything
from others, or guarding from injury that which was
our own, just as bad stewards do) but bringing forth
to light my offspring, nourishing it with eagerness, and
exposing it, in its constant growth, to the eyes of all.
35. This, however, is less admirable than his con
duct.
What wonder that he, who had already made
actual ventures on behalf of the truth, should confess
it in writing? Yet this point I will add to what has
been saitl, as it seems to me especially wonderful, and
cannot with impunity be passed over in a time so fer
tile in disagreements as this.
For his action, if we
take note of him, will afford instruction even to the
For as, in the case of one and the
men of this day.
same quantity of water, there is separated from it, not
only the residue which is left behind by the hand when
I drawing it, but also those drcps, once contained in the
hand, which trickle out through the fingers ; so also
there is a separation between us and, not only those
who hold aloof in their impiety, but also those who
are most pious, and that both in regard to such doc
trines as are of small consequence (a matter of less
moment) and also in regard to expressions intended to
bear the same meaning. We use in an orthodox
sense the terms one Essence and three Hypostases,
the one to denote the nature of the Godhead, the
other the properties" of the Three ; the Italians 0
mean the same, but, owing to the scantiness of their
vocabulary, and its poverty of terms, they are unable
to distinguish between Essence and Hypostases, and
therefore introduce the term Persons, to avoid being
understood to assert three Essences.
The result,
This slight
were it not piteous, would be laughable.
difference of sound was taken to indicate a difference
of faith.
Then, Sabellianism was suspected in the
doctrine of Three Persons, Arianism in that of Three
Hypostases, both being the offspring of a contentious
spirit.
And then, from the gradual but constant
growth of irritation (the unfailing result of contentious
ness) there was a danger of the whole world being
torn asunder in the strife about syllables.
Seeing and
hearing this, our blessed one, true man of God ami
great steward of souls as he was, felt it inconsistent
with his duty to overlook so absurd and unreasonable
a rending of the word, and applied his medicine to
In what manner? He conferred in his
the disease.
gentle and sympathetic way with both parties, and
after he had carefully weighed the meaning of their
expressions, and found that they had the same sense,
and were in nowise different in doctrine, by permit
ting each party to use its own terms, he bound them y
together in unity of action.

36. This in itself was more profitable than the long
course of labours and teaching on which all writers en
large, for in it somewhat of ambition mingled, and
consequently, perhaps, somewhat of novelty in expres
sions.
This again was of more value than his many
vigils and acts of discipline, * the advantage of which
is limited to those who perform them.
This was
worthy of our hero's famous banishments and flights ;
for the object, in view of which he chose to endure
sucli sufferings, he still pursued when the sufferings

Cf. Orat. xliii. 30. note.

a Properties.
3 The Italians, etc.

Cf. Newman's Arians. pp. 176-384. S.
Athanasius' Orations against the Arians. Ed. Bright, p. lxxxi.
Pelav. de Trin. IV. ii. 5-10 and iv.
y Hound then/, etc. At the Council of Alexandria, A.D. 36a.
Newman's Arians, pp. 364, sqq.
fi Acts 0/ discipline.

'• lying on the ground."

28o

were past.
Nor did he cease to cherish the same ar
dour in others, praising some, gently rebuking others ;
rousing the sluggishness of these, restraining the pas
sion of those ; in some cases eager to prevent a fall,
in others devising means of recovery after a fall ; sim
ple in disposition, manifold in the arts of government ;
clever in argument, more clever still in mind ; conde
scending to the more lowly, outsoaring the more lofly ;
hospitable," protector of suppliants, averter of evils,
really combining in himself alone the whole of the at
tributes parcelled out by the sons of Greece among
Further he was the patron of the
their deities.
wedded and virgin state alike, both peaceable and a
peacemaker, and attendant upon those who are passing
from hence.
Oh, how many a title dees his virtue af
ford me, if I would detail its many-sided excellence.

37. After such a course, as taught and teacher, that
his life and habits form the ideal of an Episcopate,
and his teaching the law of orthodoxy, what reward
does he win for his piety ?
It is not indeed right to
pass this by.
In a good old age he closed his life,3
and was gathered to his fathers, the Patriarchs, and
Prophets, and Apostles, and Martyrs, who contended
for the truth. To be brief in my epitaph, the hon
ours at his departure surpassed even those of his re
turn from exile ; the object of many tears, his glory,
stored up in the minds of all, outshines all its visible
tokens.
Yet, O thou dear and holy one, who didst
thyself, with all thy fair renown, so especially illus
trate the due proportions of speech and of silence, do
thou stay here my words, falling short as they do of
thy true meed of praise, though they have claimed the
full exercise of all my powers. And mayest thou cast
upon us from above a propitious glance, and conduct
this people in its perfect worship of the perfect Trin
ity, which, as Father, Son, Holy Ghost, we contem
plate and adore. And mayest thou, if my lot be
peaceful, possess and aid me in my pastoral charge, or
if it pass through struggles, uphold me, or take me to
thee, and set me with thyself and those like thee
(though I have asked a great thing) in Christ Himself,
our Lord, to whom be all glory, honour, and power
for evermore.

Amen.

Introduction to the "Theological"
Orations.

.

.

.

"It has been said with truth," says the
writer of the Article on Gregory of Nazianzus
in the Dictionary of Christian Biography,
" that these discourses would lose their chief
Critics have
charm in a translation.
rivalled each other in the praises they have
heaped upon them, but no praise is so high as
that of the many Theologians who have found
in them their own best thoughts. A Critic
who cannot be accused of partiality towards
Gregory has given in a few words perhaps the
truest estimate of them :
' A solidity of thought,
the concentration of all that is spread through
the writings of'Hilary, Basil, and Athanasius,
a flow of softened eloquence which does not
halt or lose itself for a moment, an argument
nervous without dryness on the one hand, and

a Hospitable, etc., titles given to Zeus, and other Greek gods.
0 Closed his life A.D. 373.

without useless ornament on the other, give
these five Discourses a place to themselves
among the monuments of this fine Genius,
who was not always in the same degree free
from grandiloquence and affectation.
In a
few pages, and in a few hours, Gregory has
summed up and closed the controversy of a
whole Century.' " a They were preached in the
Church called Anastasia,^ at Constantinople,
between 379 and 381, and have gained for
their author the title of The Theologian,
which he shares with S. John the Evangelist
alone.
It should perhaps, however, be noted
that the word is not here used in the wide and
general sense in which we employ it, but in a
narrower and more specific way, denoting em
phatically the Defender of the Deity of the
Logos.
His principal opponents were the fol
lowers of Eunomius and Macedonius, and it
is almost entirely against them that these Ora
tions on Theology, or the Godhead of the
Word and the Holy Ghost, are directed.
The
chief object of the Preacher in these and most
other of his public utterances, is to maintain
the Nicene Faith of the Trinity or Tri-unity of
God ; that is, the Doctrine that while there is
but One Substance or Essence* in the God
head, and by consequence God is in the most

o De ltroglie, " I.'Eglise et 1'Empire," v..385.-" Ce sont autant
de modeles dans Tart tlclicat d'impi imer la forme oratoire aux developpemcnts philosophiques.
Une pensee substantielle, formec
de tuns les sues repandus dans les ecrits d'Hilaire, de Kasile et
d'Athanase; un courant d'eloquence tempvrec qui ne se ralcntit,
ni ne s'egarc en aucun moment; une argumentation nerveuse sans
socheresse, mais sans vaine panire d'ornemcnts, font a ces cinq
discours une place a part parmi les monuments de cc beau gt nic,
auquel I'emphasc et ranectation pe furent pas toujour? aussi
elrangers. En quelques pages, et en quelques heures, Grcgoire
avail resume et clos la controverse de tout un siecle."

0 See Prolegomena p. 171.
V " There is but one divine Essence or Substance ; Father, Son,
and Spirit, are one in essence, or coiiMibstantial. They are in one
anoiher, inseparable, and cannot tie conceived without each other.
the Nicene doctrine is thoroughly monotheistic, or
In this point
monarcnian, in distinction from trilheism, winch is but a new form
of the polytheism of the pagans.
" The terms Essence (ovatn) and Nature (<fit'(nc),in the philosoph
ical sense, denote not an individual, a personality, but the Genus
AU
or Species: not Unum in Numero, but Ens Unum in Multis.
men are of the same substance, partake of the same human nature;
though as persons and individuals they are very different.
The
term Homo-ousion, in its strict grammatical sense, differs from
Moiio-ousion or Touto-ousion. as well as from Hetero-ousion. and
signifies not numerical identity, but equality of essence or com
munity of nature among several beings.
It is clearly thus used in
the Chalcedonian Symbol, where it is said that Christ is 'consubstantial (Momo-ousios) with the Father as touching the Godhead,
and cousubstaiitial with us (and yet individually distinct from us)
as touching the Manhood.'
Hut in the Divine Trinity consubstantiahty denotes not only sameness of kind, but at the same time
Numerical unity; not merely the Unum in Specie, but also ihe
Unum in Numero. The three Persons are related to the Divine
.Substance not as three individuals to their species, as Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, or Peter, John, and Paul, to human nature; they
are only one God. The divine Substance is absolutely indivisible
by reason of its simplicity, and absolutely inexlensiblc and un
transferable by reason of its infinity; whereas a corporeal substance
can be divided, and the human nature can be muliiplied by gener
ation. Three Divine substances would limit and exclude each
The whole
other, and therefore could not be infinite or absolute.
fulness of the one undivided Essence of God, with all its. attributes
is in all the Persons of the Trinity, though in each in His own way;
in the Father as Original Principle, in the Son by eternal Gener
ation, in the Spirit by eternal Procession.
The Church teaches
not One Divine Essence ««rfThree Persons, but One Essence /*
Father, Son, and Spirit cannot be conceived as
Three Persons.

INTRODUCTION TO THE "THEOLOGICAL" ORATIONS.

absolute sense One, yet God is not Unipersonal, but within this Undivided Unity there
are three Self-determining Subjects or Persons,
distinguished from one another by special
characteristics (i&orqres) or personal proper
ties-Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
this object he entered into conflict with the
heretics named above, who denied either the
Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father,
or the perfect Godhead and Personality of the I
Holy Ghost.

With ■

Eunomius, whom Ullmann calls one of the
most interesting heretics of the Fourth Cen
tury, was by birth a Cappadocian, and slightly
older than Gregory.
As a young man he was
a pupil and amanuensis of Aetius, by whom
the Arian heresy was developed to its extreme
results.
The disciple never shrank from draw
ing the furthest logical conclusions from hip
master's premises, or from stating them with
a frankness, which to those who regarded the
premises themselves from which he reasoned
as horrible blasphemies, seemed nothing less
So precisely
than diabolical in its impiety.
did he complete and formulate his teacher's
heretical tenets, that the Anomoean Arians j
were ever afterwards called Eunomians, rather
than Aetians.
They asserted the absolute
Unlikeness of the Being of the Father and
of the Son.
Starting with the conception of
God as Absolute Being, of Whom no Genera
tion can be predicated, Unbegotten and in
capable of Begetting, they went on to say that
an Eternal Generation is inconceivable, and
that the Generation of the Son of God must
have had a beginning.
Of course, therefore,
the Arian conclusion followed, "namely, that
there was a time when the Son did not exist
(y]v irori ore ovk 7jv), and His Essence is alto
gether unlike that of the Unbegotten Father.
Equality of essence and Similarity of essence,
are alike untenable, from the mere fact that
the one Essence is Unbegotten, and the other
The Son. they said, is the First
is Begotten.
Creation of the Divine Energy, and is the In
strument by whom God created the world,
and in this sense, as the Organ of creative
power, may be said to be the Express Image
and Likeness of the Energy of the Father.*

As they viewed the Holy Ghost as shar
ing the Divine Nature in an even remoter de
gree, as being only the noblest production of

Three separate individual*, but are in one another, and form a
(SchafF, History of the Church. Nic. & PostsnliJaric Unity."
Nic. Period. Div. ii. p. 672.)
But
observe, borrowed with a difference-not " the Image of His Sub
stance," which they would not admit, but of His " Energy.** which
is a very different conception.

a Two terms borrowed from Holy Scripture (Heb. i. 3).

the Only-begotten Son, Eunomius was the
first person heretically to discontinue the prac
tice of threefold immersion in Holy Baptism.
He also corrupted the Form of that Sacra
ment, by setting aside the use of the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and baptiz
ing people " in the name of the Creator, and
into the death of Christ."
Therefore the
Council of Constantinople ordered that con
verts from Eunomianism should be baptized,
although those from other forms of Arianism
were admitted into the Catholic Church by
simple imposition of hands.
Through the in
fluence of the followers of Aetius, Eunomius
became, in 360, Bishop of Cyzicus in Mysia,
but he does not appear to have occupied the
See very long.
At any rate when Gregory
came, in 379, to Constantinople, he was liv
All parties
ing in retirement near Chalcedon.
concur in representing him as a consummate
Dialectician, but the Orthodox declared that
he had turned Theology into a mere Tech
nology.
Readiness of Dialectic was the great
characteristic of his Sect, and it was they who
introduced into the Capital that bad spirit of
theological disputatiousness which Gregory
deplores in the first of these famous Orations.
He also differed entirely from Gregory, not
merely in the conclusions at which he arrived,
but in the method by which he reached them ;
following the system of Aristotle, rather than
of Plato, and using an exclusively intellectual
method, while Gregory treated Religion as
The point at
belonging to the entire man.
issue between them, besides this of the Interior
relations of the Three Blessed 'Persons within
the Godhead, was mainly the question as to
the complete comprehensibility of the Divine
Nature, which the Eunomians maintained, and
Gregory denied.
The latter argued that,
while we have a sure conviction that God is,
we have not a full understanding of What He
is. He would not, however, exclude us from
all knowledge of God's Nature, only he limits
our capacity to so much as God has been
pleased to reveal to us of Himself.
"In my
opinion," he says (Or. xxiv. 4), "it is im
possible to express God, and yet more impos
sible to conceive Him-seeing that the thick
covering of the flesh is an obstacle to the full
understanding of the truth."
Similarly in
the Fourth of these Orations (Or. xxx. 17)
he says, "The Deity cannot be expressed in
And this is proved to us, not only by
words.
arguments, but by the wisest and most ancient
of the Hebrews, so far as they have given us
reason for conjecture.
For they appropriated
certain characters to the honour of the Deity,

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

and would not even allow the name of any
thing inferior to God to be written with the
same letters as that of God, because to their
mind it was improper that the Deity should
even to that extent admit any of His creatures
to a share with Himself.
How then could
they have admitted that the indivisible and
separate Nature .can be explained by divisible
words?"

in

In the mind of Gregory, the Orthodox
doctrine of the Blessed Trinity is the funda
mental dogma of Christianity,
contrast
with all other religions, and with all heretical
" Remember your confession," he
systems.
says to his hearers in an Oration against the
Arians ; " Into what were you baptized ? The
Father?
The Son ?
Good, but still Jewish.
Good ; no longer Jewish, but not yet perfect.
The Holy Ghost ? Very good ; this is perfect.
Was it then simply into these, or was there
some one common Name of these ? Yes, there
was, and it is God." And in the same ora
tion he calls Arianism a new Judaism, because
it ascribes full Deity only to the Father ; and
he speaks of One Nature in Three Individual
ities, intelligent, perfect, self-existent, distinct
numerically, but one in Godhead.
"In
created things," says Ullmann, " the several
individuals are embraced in a common con
ception, though in themselves only connected
together in thought, while in fact they are not
Manhood is only an intellectual concep
one.
tion ; in fact there exist only Men.
But in
the Godhead the Three Persons are not only
in conception, but in fact, One; and this
Unity is not only a relative but an alsolute
Unity, because the Divine Being is perfect in
all Three Persons, and in all in a perfect
In this sense therefore Gregory and
equality.
all orthodox Trinitarians maintain the Unity
of God.
But within this Unity there is a
true Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, a
Trinity of Persons in a Unity of Nature."
We worship, he says (Or. xxxiii. 16), the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, One Nature in
Three Individualities.
So that, as he says
elsewhere (Or. in laud. Athanasii, xxi. 10),
the Trinity is a true Trinity ; not a number
ing of unlike things, but a binding together of
Each of the Persons is God in the
equals.
fullest sense.
The Son and the Holy Ghost
have their Source of Being in the Father, but
in such sense that They are fully consubstantial with Him, and that neither of Them dif
fers from Him in any particular of Essence.
The points of difference lie in the Person
al Attributes ; the Father Unoriginate, and
Source of Deity ; the Son deriving His Being

eternally from the Father, and Himself the
Source of all created existence ;
the Holy
Ghost proceeding eternally from God, and
sent into the world.

In the first of these five

discourses the
Preacher sets himself to clear the ground for
the fitting presentation of his great theme.
He endeavours to lay down the principles on
which Theologians should proceed in such
discussions, and very earnestly deprecates the
habit of promiscuous argument in all sorts of
places, upon all sorts of occasions, and before
all sorts of hearers, of the deepest and most
Faith.
sacred truths and mysteries of the
They only should be allowed to engage in such
conversation who are fitted for it by the prac
tice of Christian virtue.
For others there are
many other subjects upon which they can ex
ercise their dialectical attainments, without
doing or incurring any injury.

In the second oration Gregory lays down
the position referred to above, that it is impossi ble for even the most exalted human reason
fully to grasp the Nature of God, though His
Existence is patent to all. We can only, he
says, predicate negatives concerning Him. He
gives three reasons for this incapacity.
First
to enhance our estimation of this knowledge,
when attained, hereafter ; secondly to save us
from the danger of falling through pride, like
Lucifer, if we attained it prematurely ; and
thirdly, to support and sustain us in the trials
and conflicts of this life, by the certainty that
its attainment hereafter will be the reward of
faithful service in them.
The cause of our
present inability is the body with which our
soul is united, the grossness of whose present
condition hinders us from rising to the com
plete apprehension of the invisible and im
material.
God, out of compassion for our
weakness, has been pleased to designate Him
self in Holy Scripture by various names taken
from material objects, or from moral virtues ;
but these are only stepping-stones to the truth,
and have indeed been sometimes perverted,
and made a basis for polytheism.
It is, how
ever, only natural that the Divine Essence
should be shrouded in Mystery, for the same
is the case with the created essences also.

In the Third and Fourth he deals with the
question of the Son.
His position may be
summed up as follows : The Son is absolutely
of One Substance with the Father, and shares
with Him all the Attributes of Godhead. Yet
He is a distinct Person, marked off by the
fact that He is begotten of the Father.
But
we must be careful not to allow this term
' ' Begotten ' ' to suggest to us any analogy

INTRODUCTION TO THE "THEOLOGICAL" ORATIONS.

with created things.
dent of time and space and sense.

It is wholly indepen

This position he had to defend against many
assailants, and especially against the Eunomians.
These heretics maintained that the
use of this term necessarily implied a begin
ning of the Essence of the Son, and they asked
the orthodox to tell them when that begin
Gregory replies that the
ning took place.
Generation of God the Son is beyond all
time ; pointing out .that Paternity is an Es
sential attribute of God the Father, and there
fore is as eternal as His Essence, so that there
never was a time when He was not the Father,
and consequently never a time when the Gen
eration of the Son began. He admits that
there is a sense in which it is possible to say
that the Son and the Spi r i t are not unoriginate, but then you must be careful not to use
the word Origin in the sense of Beginning,
but in that of Cause.
They derive Their Be
ing eternally from the Father, and all Three
Persons are coeternal together.
In respect
of Cause They are not unoriginate, but the
cause is not necessarily prior in time to its
effect, just as the Sun is not prior to its own
light.
In respect of time, then, They may be
said to be unoriginate, for the Sources of time
" If the Father
cannot be subject to time.
has not ceased to beget, His Generation is
an imperfect one; and if He has ceased, He
must have begun, for an end implies a be
ginning."
" Not so," says Gregory, " unless
you are prepared to admit that what has no
end has necessarily no beginning; and in that
case what will you say about the Angels, or
the human soul?
These will have no end;
had either of them therefore no beginning? "
By a similar process of Reductio ad absurdum he dissipates all the quibbles of Eunomian sophistry, and lays down the orthodox
Faith of the Church.
Then in the remainder
of the Third and Fourth Orations he goes on
to examine the Scriptural testimony adduced
by his opponents, and to shew by a similar
catena on the other side that the overwhelm
ing preponderance of the authority of the
In connection
with this point he lays down the canon that
in the interpretation of Scripture in regard to
our Lord, all expressions savouring of humil
ity or weakness are to be referred to that pure
Humanity which He assumed for our sake;
while all that speaks of Majesty and Power
belongs to His Godhead.

• Bible is clearly against them.

In the Fifth he deals with the doctrine of
the Holy Ghost.
The heresy of Arius was at
first directly concerned only with the Person

of our Lord, though not without a side-glance
at that also of the Holy Ghost.
The Council
of Nica;a had confined itself to the first ques
tion, and its Creed ended with, " We believe
in the Holy Ghost."
This, it was afterwards
argued, was enough to proclaim His Divinity,
and so Gregory argues in this Oration, "If
He be only a creature, how do we believe on
Him, how are we made perfect in Him, for
the first of these belongs to Deity, the second
may be said of anything " (c. vi.).
The rea
son, however, that the Great Synod made no
express definition on the point seems to have
been that the controversy had not yet been
carried so far in direct terms (cf. S. Basil, Epp.
lxxviii. ccclxxxvii.).
But fifty years later the
growth of the heresy rendered a definition of
the Church's faith on this point needful ; and
in 363, on his return from his fourth period
of exile, S. Athanasius held a provincial Synod
at Alexandria, in whose Synodical Letter to
the Emperor Jovian the Godhead of the Holy
Ghost is maintained in terms which, as Canon
Bright says, partly anticipate the language of
the Creed of Constantinople (Diet. Biog. Art.
Athanasius).
The new development of the
heresy had begun to appear at Constantinople
as well as in Thrace and Asia Minor.
Mace
donia, a Semi-Arian, had been elected Bishop
of Constantinople in 341, and in spite of vio
lent opposition, which he met by still more
violent measures, had maintained his position
till 360, when he was deposed and driven out
He then in his
by the Anomcean Arians.
retirement became the leader of the SemiArian party.
Accepting the statement that
the Son was Like in Essence to the Father, he
would not concede even this
to the Holy
Ghost, but declared Him to be a mere creat
ure (Thdt. Hist. Eccl. ii. 6), and the servant
or minister of the Son ; applying to Him terms
which without error could only be used of the
Angels (Sozomen. H. E. iv. 27).
His follow
ers were known as Macedonians, or sometimes
Marathonians, from a certain Marathonius,
formerly a Paymaster of the Prretorian Guards,
who had become a Deacon of Constantinople,
and, having done much in the way of found
ing and maintaining Monastic Houses and
Houses of Charity in the City, was conse
crated by Macedoniusas Bishop of Nicomedia.
They were also known as Pneumatomachi,
from the nature of their Heresy. A contro
versy had now begun to arise as to the precise
position which the true faith was to assign to
the Holy Spirit.
There were those who left
it doubtful whether He had indeed a separate
Personality, or whether He were not rather a

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

is on that of the Son.

mere Influence or Activity of the Father and
the Son.
Gregory tells us how, when he
came to the Metropolis, he found the wildest
confusion prevalent. Some, he says, conceived
of the Holy Ghost as a mere Energy of God,
others thought Him a Creature, others believed
Him to be God ; while many out of an alleged
reverence for Holy Scripture, hesitated to give
To this last class
Him the Name of God.
belonged, according to Socrates (H. E. ii. 45),
Eustathius, who had been ejected from the
Bishopric of Sebasteia in Pontus.
He refused
to admit that the Holy Spirit is God, while
yet He did not dare to affirm that He is a
mere creature.
When Gregory proceeded to
preach the Deity of the Spirit, he was accused
of introducing a strange and unscriptural god,
because, as he acknowledges, the letter of the
Bible is not so clear on the doctrine of the
Spirit as it
But he
points out that it is possible to be superstitious
in one's reverence for the letter of the Bible,
and that such superstition leads directly to
heresy. He explains the reticence of the New
Testament on this point by shewing (in this
Oration, cc. 26, 27) how God's Self-Revela
tion to man has always been a gradual one ; how
the Old Testament revealed the Father clearly,
with obscure hints about the Son; and the
New Testament manifested the Son, but only
hinted at the Godhead of the Spirit ; but now,
he says, the Spirit dwells among us, and allows
us to recognize Him more clearly.
For it
would not have been advisable, as long as the
Godhead of the Father was not acknowledged,
to proclaim that of the Son ; and while the
Deity of the Son was not yet accepted, to add
another burden in that of the Holy Spirit.
Recognizing thus a Divine economy in the
Self-Revelations of God, he was not averse to
using a similar caution in his own dealings
with weak or ill-instructed minds. * But yet
when real necessity arose, he could speak out
with perfect plainness on this subject ; and he
even incurred danger to life and limb from the
violence of the opposing party.
He met their
opposition by the clearest statements of the
" Is the Spirit God ? " he
Catholic Dogma.
" But is He consubstantial? "
asks.
"Yes, if He is God."
10.)
(Orat.
He appeals both to the Bible, and to the ex
perience of the Christian life.
If the Spirit is
not to be adored, how can He deify me in
From the Spirit comes our new
Raptism?
Birth ; from the new Birth our new Life ; and

"Yes."

xxxi.

a In his Fifty-third Epistle, addressed to S. Rnsil, there is an
amusing instnnre of his defence of ttiis tolerant disposition, which
S. Basil also displayed in dealing with minds of this class.

from the new Life our knowledge of the Dig
nity of Him from Whom it is derived (Ibid,
c. 29).
He is, however, milder in his treat
ment of these heretics than of the strict Arians,
both, as he says, because they approached more
I nearly to the Orthodox belief on the subject
I of the Son, and because their conspicuous
piety of life shewed that their error was not
In this Oration he shews
altogether wilful.
that though the Name of God may not actu
ally be given in the New Testament to the
Holy Ghost, yet all the attributes of God are
ascribed to Him, and that therefore the use of
the Name is a matter of legitimate inference.
He carries on the argument in the Oration on
Pentecost (No. XLI.
Seethe Introduction to
that Oration in the present Volume).

With fegard to the doctrine of the Proces
sion, Gregory gives us no clear information.
He is silent as to the Procession from the Son.
It is enough for him that the Spirit is not Be
gotten but Proceeding (in SS. Lumina, c. 12),
and that Procession is His distinctive Prop
erty, which involves at once His Personality
and His Essential Deity.

At length in 381 the work of local Synods
and episcopal conferences was completed and
clinched by the Ruling of a Second Ecumeni
It is true that the Council which
cal Council.
Theodosius summoned to meet at Constanti
nople could scarcely have regarded itself as
possessing Ecumenical authority ; whilst in the
West it certainly was not regarded in this light
Nevertheless the
before the Sixth Century.
honours of Ecumenicity were ultimately award
ed to it by the whole Church, because it com
pletes the scries of Great Councils by which
the Doctrine of the Deity of the Holy Spirit
was affirmed ; and in fact it expressed the final
judgment of the Catholic Church upon the
Macedonian controversy.
first Canon
anathematises the Seniiarians or Pneumatomachi by name as well as the Eunomians or
Anomcean Arians (cf. Diet. Biog. Art. Greg
ory of Nazianzus, by Dr. H. B. Swete).

Its

■

XXVII. THE FIRST THEOLOGICAL
ORATION.

A Preliminary Discourse against the
Eunomians.

I.

I am to speak against persons who pride
so, to begin
themselves on their eloquence ;
with a text of Scripture, "Behold, I am
against thee, O thou proud one," ° not only in

ajer.l. 31.

A PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE AGAINST THE EUNOMIANS. 28;

thy system of teaching, but also in thy hear
ing, and in thy tone of mind.
For there are
certain persons who have not only their ears"
and their tongues, but even, as I now perceive,
their hands too, itching for our words ; who
delight in profane babblings, and oppositions
of science falsely so called,3 and strifes about
words, which tend to no profit ; for so Paul,
the Preacher and Establisher of the "Word
cut short," y the disciple and teacher of the
Fishermen,8 calls all that is excessive or super
fluous in discourse.
But as to those to whom
we refer, would that they, whose tongue is so
voluble and clever in applying itself to noble
and approved language, would likewise pay
some attention to actions.
For then perhaps
in
a little while they would become less
sophistical, and less absurd and strange acro
bats of words, if I may use a ridiculous expres
sion about a ridiculous subject.

II. But since they neglect every path of
righteousness, and look only to this one point,
namely, which of the propositions submitted
to them they shall bind or loose, (like those
persons who in the theatres perform wrestling
matches in public, but not that kind of wrest
ling in which the victory is won according to
the rules of the sport, but a kind to deceive
the eyes of those who are ignorant in such
matters, and to catch applause), and every
marketplace must buzz with their talking ;
and every dinner party be worried to death
with silly talk and boredom ; and every fes
tival be made unfestive and full of dejection,
and every occasion of mourning be consoled
by a greater calamity*-their questions-and
all the women's apartments accustomed to
simplicity be thrown into confusion and be
robbed of its flower of modesty by the torrent
of their words
since, I say this is
.
so, the evil is intolerable and not to be borne,
and our Great Mystery is in danger of being
made a thing of little moment.
Well then,
let these spies < bear with us, moved as we are
with fatherly compassion, and as holy Jere
miah says, torn in our hearts ; 1 let them bear
with us so far as not to give a savage reception
to our discourse upon this subject ; and let
they can, restrain their
them,
tongues for a short while and lend us their
However that may be, you shall at any
ears.
For either we shall have
rate suffer no loss.

if indeed

.

.

S lb. ii. 16.

y Rom. ix. 38.

a Tim. iv.
8 S. Paul is called a disciple of thefishermen^ as having been
in some sense their follower (though in fact he was never aliteral
disciple of any of them): and their teackrr as having taught such
Successors of the Apostles as SS. Timothy and Titus.
• i.e. be thrown into the shade by something more serious which
caused them by comparison to be scarcely felt any longer.
n. Jer. iy. 19.
£ xaTeuricoiroi quasi ^ffv&emrooiroi.

spoken in the ears of them that will hear," and
our words will bear some fruit, namely an
advantage to you (since the Sower soweth the
Word 3 upon every kind of mind ; and the
good and fertile bears fruit), or else you will
depart despising this discourse of ours as you
have despised others, and having drawn from
it further material for gainsaying and railing at
us, upon which to feast yourselves yet more.

And you must not be astonished if I speak
a language which is strange to you and con
trary to your custom, who profess to know
everything and to teach everything in a too
not
.
impetuous and generous manner .
to pain you by saying ignorant and rash.

.

III. Not to every one, my friends, does it
belong to philosophize about God ; not to
every one ; the Subject is not so cheap and
low; and I will add, not before every audi
ence, nor at all times, nor on all points ; but
on certain occasions, and before certain per
sons, and within certain limits.

Not to all men, because it is permitted only
to those who have been examined, and are
passed masters in meditation, and who have
been previously purified in soul and body, or
at the very least are being purified.
For the
impure to touch the pure is, we may safely
say, not safe, just as it is unsafe to fix weak
And what is the
eyes upon the sun's rays.
permitted occasion ?
It is when we are free
from all external defilement or disturbance,
and when that which rules within us is not
confused with vexatious or erring images ; like
persons mixing up good writing with bad, or
filth with the sweet odours of unguents.
For
it is necessary to be truly at leisure to know
God; and when we can get a .convenient
season, to discern the straight road of the
things divine.
And who are the permitted
persons?
They to whom the subject is of
real concern, and not they who make it a
matter of pleasant gossip, like any other thing,
after the races, or the theatre, or a concert,
or a dinner, or still lower employments. To
I such men as these, idle jests and pretty con-
! tradictions about these subjects are a part of

their amusement.

IV. Next, on what subjects and to what ex
tent may we philosophize ? On matters within
our reach, and to such an extent as the mental
power and grasp of our audience may extend.
No further, lest, as excessively loud sounds
injure the hearing, or excess of food the body,
or, if you will, as excessive burdens beyond

a, KcrJus. xxv. 9.
0 S. Mark iv.

*' He that soweth the Word soweth
upon," etc. So Billius and the Benedictines, but the rendering in
the text seems preferable.

1 and 14.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

the strength injure those who bear them, or
excessive rains the earth ; so these too, being
pressed down and overweighted by the stiff
ness, if I may use the expression, of the argu
ments should suffer loss even in respect of the
strength they originally possessed."

V. Now, I am not saying that it is not need

.

.

.

ful to remember God at all times ;
must not be misunderstood, or I shall be having
these nimble and quick people down upon me
again.
For we ought to think of God even
more often than we draw our breath ; and if
the expression is permissible, we ought to do
Yea, I am one of those who
nothing else.
entirely approve that Word which bids us
meditate day and night/ and tell at eventide
and morning and noon day,? and praise the
Ixjrd at every time ; * or, to use Moses' words,
whether a man lie down, or rise up, or walk
by the way. or whatever else he be doing'-
and by this recollection we are to be moulded
to purity.
So that it is not the continual re
membrance of God that I would hinder, but
only the talking about God ; nor even that as
in itself wrong, but only when unseasonable ;
nor all teaching, but only want of moderation.
As of even honey repletion and satiety, though
it be of honey, produce vomiting : f and, as
Solomon says and 1 think,' there is a time for
every thing, * and that which is good ceases to
be good if it be not done in a good way ; just
as a flower is quite out of season in winter,
and just as a man's dress does not become a
woman, nor a woman's a man ; and as geo
metry is out of place in mourning, or tears at
a carousal ; shall we in this instance alone
disregard the proper time, in a matter in
which most of all due season should be
Surely not, my friends and breth
respected ?
ren (for I will still call you Brethren, though
you do not behave like brothers).
Let us not
think so nor yet, like hot tempered and hard
mouthed horses, throwing off our rider Rea
son, and casting away Reverence, that keeps
us-within due limits, run far away from the
turning point,* but let us philosophize within
our proper bounds, and not be carried away

a i.e.

8 Ps. xxxiv. i.

17 Kccles. iii. 1.

y P*. Iv. 17.
£Prov. xxv. 16.

Shouid not only full to be strengthened theteby. but be
actually weakened, through their inability to understand the argu
ment. A bad defence weakens a good cause.

0 Ps. i. a.
€ Dent. vi. 7.
0 The course of the chariot races in the Greek Games was round
the Hippodrome a certain number of times!
To facilitate this
arrangement a party wall was built down the middle, and at either
end ot it certain posts were set up called vvatrai, or in T.alin Mette,
round which the cars were to turn. The object of the charioteers
was to turn round these as close as possible, to save distance : and
to do this well it was necessary to have the horses under perfect
, control, as well as perfectly trained, to make the semicircle at full
gallop almost on the axis of the car. The horses that got out of
hand and galloped wildly round a large circle would almost cer
tainly lose distance enough to lose the race, while the driver would
be laughed at for his unskilfulncss.

or

or

For since

into Egypt, nor be swept down into. Assyria,*
nor sing the Lord's song in a strange land, by
which I mean before any kind of audience,
friendly,
kindred, hostile
strangers
kindly or the reverse, who watch what we do
with over great care, and would like the spark
of what is wrong in us to become a flame,
and secretly kindle and fan it and raise it to
heaven with their breath and make it higher
than the Babylonian flame which burnt up
every thing around it.
their
strength lies not in their own dogmas, they
hunt for it in our weak points. And there
fore they apply themselves to our-shall I
say "misfortunes" or "failings"?--like (lies
to wounds.
But let us at least be no longer
ignorant of ourselves, or pay too little atten
tion to* the due order in these matters.
And
if it be impossible to put an end to the exist
ing hostility, let us at least agree upon this,
that we will utter Mysteries under our breath,
and holy things in a holy manner, and we
will not cast to ears profane that which may
not be uttered, nor give evidence that we pos
sess
those who worship
demons, and serve shameful fables and deeds ;
for they would sooner give their blood to the
uninitiated than certain words.
But let us
recognize that as in dress and diet and laugh
ter and demeanour there is a certain decorum,
so there is also in speech and silence; since
among so many titles and powers of God, we
pay the highest honour to The Word.
Let
kept within
even
bounds.

disputings then be

gravity than

our

less

VI. Why should a man who is a hostile
listener to such words be allowed to hear about
the Generation of God, or his creation, or how
God was made out of things which had no
existence, or of section and analysis and
division ?£ Why do we make our accusers
judges? Why do we put swords into the
hands of our enemies ? How, thinkest thou,
arguments
or with what temper, will
about such subjects be received by one who
approves
of adulteries, and corruption of
children, and who worships the passions and
cannot conceive of aught higher than the
who till very lately set up
body
gods for himself, and gods too who were noted
for the vilest deeds?
Will it not first be
from a material standpoint, shamefully and
ignorantly, and in the sense to which he has
Will he not make thy
been accustomed?
Theology a defence for his own gods and pas-

the

.

.

.

n Dan. iii. ta.
0 The allusion is to the Ari.nn and Eunomian habit of gossiping
about the most sacred subjects in every sort of place or company
or time, in order to promote their heresy.

...

A PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE AGAINST THE EUNOMIANS. 287

.sions?
For if we ourselves wantonly misuse
these words," it will be a long time before we
shall persuade them to accept our philosophy.
And if they are in their own persons inventors
of evil things, how should they refrain from
grasping at such things when offered to them?
Such results come to us from mutual contest.
Such results follow to those who fight for the
Word beyond what the Word approves ; they
are behaving like mad people, who set their
own house on fire, or tear their own children,
or disavow their own parents, taking them
for strangers.

VII. But when we have put away from the
conversation those who are strangers to it, and
sent the great legion f on its way to the abyss
into the herd of swine, the next thing is to
look to ourselves, and polish our theological
The first point to
self to beauty like a statue.
be considered is-What is this great rivalry
of speech and endless talking?
What is this
new disease of insatiability? Why have we
tied our hands and armed our tongues ? We
do not praise either hospitality, or brotherly
love, or conjugal affection, or virginity; nor
do we admire liberality to the poor, or the
chanting of Psalms, or nightlong vigils,» or
tears. We do not keep under the body by
fasting, or go forth to God by prayer ; nor
do we subject the worse to the better-1 mean
the dust to the spirit-as they would do who
form a just judgment of our composite nature ;
we do not make our life a preparation for
death ; nor do we make ourselves masters of
our passions, mindful of our heavenly nobility ;
nor tame our anger when it swells and rages,
nor our pride that bringeth to a fall, nor un
reasonable grief, nor unchastened pleasure,
nor meretricious laughter, nor undisciplined
eyes, nor insatiable ears, nor excessive talk,
nor absurd thoughts, nor aught of the occa
sions which the Evil One gets against us from
sources within ourselves ; bringing upon us the
death that comes through the windows,8 as
Holy Scripture saith ;
that is, through the
senses.
Nay we do the very opposite, and
have given lil>erty to the passions of others, as
kings give releases from service in honour of a
victory, only on condition that they incline to
our side, and make their assault upon God
And we give
more boldly, or more impiously.

« Such expressions as Generation and the like would certainly
lie understood in a materi.il sen'e by the heathen ; and so would
Place an unnecessary stumbling-block in the way of their conver
sion.
0 Luke viii. 31.
. T S> J°hn Chrysostom, consecrated Archbishop of Constan
tinople in 397, incurred much unpopularity among his clergy by
insisting on the revival of the Night Hours of prayer.

» Jer. ix. ai.

them an evil reward for a thing which is not
good, license of tongue for their impiety.

VIII. And yet, O talkative Dialectician, I
will ask thee one small question," and answer
thou me, as He saith to Job, Who through
whirlwind and cloud giveth Divine admoni
tions. 0
Are there many mansions in God's
House, as thou hast heard, or only one? Of
course you will admit that there are many, and
not only one.
Now, are they all to be filled,
or only some, and others not ; so that some will
be left empty, and will have been prepared to
no purpose?
Of course all will be filled, for
nothing can be in vain which has been done
And can you tell me what you will
by God.
consider this Mansion to be?
Is it the rest
and glory which is in store There for the
Blessed, or something else ?-No, not any
Since then we are agreed upon
thing else.
this point, let us further examine another also.
Is there any thing that procures these Man
sions, as I think there is ; or is there nothing?
-Certainly there is-What is it ?
Is it not
are various modes of conduct,
that there
and various purposes, one leading one way,
another another way, according to the propor
tion of faith, and these we call Ways?
Must
we, then, travel all, or some of these Ways
the same individual along them all,
if that be possible; or,
if not, along as
many as may be ; or eke along some of them ?
And even if this may not be, it would still be
a great thing, at least as it appears to me, to
travel excellently along even one. -" You are
right in your conception."-What then when
you hear there is but One way, and that a
narrow one,'* does the word seem to you to
That there is but one on account of
shew ?
For it is but one, even though
its excellence.
And narrow be
it be split into many parts.
cause
is
trodden by few in comparison with the multi
tude of the adversaries, and of those who
" So I
travel along the road of wickedness.
think too." Well, then, my good friend, since
this is so, why do you, as though condemning
our doctrine for a certain poverty, rush head
long down that one which leads through what
you call arguments and speculations, but I
frivolities and quackeries?
Let Paul reprove
you with those bitter reproaches, in which,
after his list of the Gifts of Grace, he says,
Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? etc.*

difficulties, and because

of its

it

IX. But, be it so.

Lofty thou art, even be
yond the lofty, even above the clouds, if thou
wilt, a spectator of things invisible, a hearer

a Job xxxviiL 3.
y Matt. vii. 14.

fi Joh xxxviii. 1.
8 1 Cor. xii. 29.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

of things unspeakable ; one who hast ascended
after Elias, and who after Moses hast been
deemed worthy of the Vision of God, and
after Paul hast been taken up into heaven ;
why dost thou mould the rest of thy fellows in
one day into Saints, and ordain them Theo
logians, and as it were breathe into them
instruction, and make them many councils of
ignorant oracles? Why dost thou entangle
those who are weaker in thy spider's web, as
if it were something great and wise? Why
dost thou stir up wasps' nests against
the
Faith? Why dost thou suddenly spring a
flood of dialectics upon us, as the fables of old
did the Giants? Why hast thou collected all
that is frivolous and unmanly among men,
like a rabble, into one torrent, and having
made them more effeminate
by flattery,
fashioned a new workshop, cleverly making a
harvest for thyself out of their want of under
standing?
so,
and are the other matters of no account to
thee ?
Must thy tongue rule at any cost, and
canst thou not restrain the birthpang of thy
find many other
speech?
Thou mayest
honourable subjects for discussion.
To these
turn this disease of thine with some advantage.
Attack the silence of Pythagoras," and the
Orphic beans, and the novel brag about " The
Master said."
Attack the ideas of Plato,0
and the transmigrations and courses of our
souls, and the reminiscences, and the unlovely
loves of the soul for lovely bodies.
Attack
the atheism of Epicurus,'' and his atoms, and
his unphilosophic pleasure ;
Aristotle's
petty Providence, and his artificial system,
and his discourses about the mortality of the
soul, and the humanitarianism of his doctrine.
Attack the superciliousness of the Stoa,* or
the greed and
Cynic.'
vulgarity
Attack the "Void and Full" (what non

Dost thou deny that this is

of the

or

et The disciples of Pythagoras were made to keep silence ab
solutely for five years as a qualification for initiation into the
mysteries of his order.
Further, they were bidden to abstain
from eating beans, as these were said to be one receptacle of
human souls in the course of their peregrinations ; and when
asked for proof of their peculiar doctrines, contented themselves
with the reply, "aurbeWa" " the master said so"
(3 Plato taught that nil things that exist are copies of certain
objective archetypal Forms, emanations from the Mind of God,
which God copied in creation. He also taught a doctrine oftrans
migration of souls.
y Epicurus, an Athenian philosopher, of a materialistic type,
taught that God had no existence, and that the world was made
by a fortuitous concourse of innumerable atoms of matter, which
are self-existent : and he placed the highest good in pleasure,
which he defined as the absence of pain. '
6 The Stoa. a school of philosophers opposed to the Epicu
reans, took their name from a certain Colonnade at Athens, in
which Zeno, their founder, used to teach.
Their highest good
consisted in the complete subdual of all feelint; : and so they were
not unnaturally characterized by a haughty affectation of indiffer
ence.
f The Cynics, so called from their snarling way, were a school
founded by Antisthenes. They professed to despise everything
human.

sense), and all the details about the gods
and the sacrifices and the idols and demons,
whether beneficent or malignant, and all the
tricks that people play with divination, evok
ing of gods, or of souls, and the power of the
stars.
And if these things seem to thee un
worthy of discussion as petty and already
often confuted, and thou wilt keep to thy line,
and seek the satisfaction of thy ambition in
it ; then here too I will provide thee with
broad paths.
Philosophize about the world
or worlds ; about matter ; about soul ; about
natures endowed with reason, good or bad;
about resurrection, about judgment, about
reward, or the Sufferings of Christ.
For in
these subjects to hit the mark is not useless,
and to miss it
But with
God we shall have converse, in this life only in
a small degree; but a little later, it may be,
more perfectly, in the Same, our Lord Jesus
Amen.
Christ, to Whom be glory for ever.

is not dangerous.

ORATION XXVIII.

The Second Theological Oration.

I. In the former Discourse we laid down
clearly with respect to the Theologian, both
what sort of character he ought to bear, and on
what kind of subject he may philosophize, and
when, and to what extent. We saw that he
ought to be, as far as may be, pure, in order that
light may be apprehended by light ; and that
he ought to consort with serious men, in order
that his word be not fruitless through falling
on an unfruitful soil ; and that the suitable
season is when we have a calm within from
the whirl of outward things ; so as not like
madmen • to lose our breath ; and that the ex
tent to which we may go is that to which
we have ourselves advanced, or to which we
are advancing.
Since then these things are
so, and we have broken up for ourselves the
fallows of Divinity,• so as not to sow upon
thorns,> and have made plain the face of the
ground,4 being moulded and moulding others
by Holy Scripture ... let us now enter
upon Theological questions, setting at the head
thereof the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, of Whom we are to treat ; that the
Father may be well pleased, and the Son may
help us, and the Holy Ghost may* inspire us;
or rather that one illumination may come
upon us from the One God, One in diversity,
diverse in Unity, wherein is a marvel.

imgn or "ftanting? which is a better sense.

a A marginal reading noted by the Fenedictmes gives "
fi Jerem. iv 3.

S Isa. xxviii. 7$.

y Matt. xiii. 7.

THE SECOND THEOLOGICAL ORATION.

II. Now when I go up eagerly into the
Mount"-or, to use a truer expression, when I
both eagerly long, and at the same time am
afraid (the one through my hope and the other
through my weakness) to enter within the
Cloud, and hold converse with God, for so
God commands ; if any be an Aaron, let him
go up with me, and let him stand near,
being ready, if it must be so, to remain out
side the Cloud.
But if any be a Nadad or an
Abihu, or of the Order of the Elders, let him
go up indeed, but let him stand afar off, ac
cording to the value of his purification. But
if any be of the multitude, who are unworthy
of this height of contemplation, if he be al
together impure let him not approach at all,0
for it would be dangerous to him ; but if he
be at least temporarily purified, let him re
main below and listen to the Voice alone, and
the trumpet,y the bare words of piety, and
let him seethe Mountain smoking and lighten
ing, a terror at once and a marvel to those
who cannot get up.
But if any is an evil
and savage beast, and altogether incapable of
taking in the subject matter of Contempla
tion and Theology, let him not hurtfully and
malignantly lurk in his den among the woods,
to catch hold of some dogma or saying by a
sudden spring, and to tear sound doctrine to
pieces by his misrepresentations, but let him
stand yet afar off and withdraw from the
Mount, or he shall be stoned and crushed, and
shall perish miserably in his wickedness.
For
to those who are like wild beasts true and
If he be a leopard
sound discourses are stones.
let him die with his spots.4
If a ravening and
roaring lion, seeking what he may devour1 of
our souls or of our words ; or a wild boar,
trampling under foot the precious and trans
lucent pearls of the Truth ; S or an Arabian *
and alien wolf, or one keener even than these
in tricks of argument; or a fox, that is a
treacherous and faithless
soul, changing its
shape according to circumstances or neces
sities, feeding on dead or putrid bodies, or on
little vineyards 9 when the large ones have
escaped them ; or any other carnivorous beast,
rejected by the Law as unclean for food or
enjoyment ; our discourse irlust withdraw from
such and be engraved on
tables of
stone, and that on both sides because the Law
is partly visible, and partly hidden ; the one
part belonging to the mass who remain below,
0 lb. xix. 14.
a Exod. xxtv. 1.
I Jer. xiii. 13.
t 1 Pet. v. 8.
ij Arabian : So the I.XX. renders the word which in A. V. Jer.
y. 6, is Cransla'ed 11 ofthe evening* and in the Vu!g. ''at even
ing." R. V. gives as an alternative, " ofthe deserts."
0 The I.XX. in Cant xi. 15, admits of this translation as well as
of that followed by A. V.

y lb. xix. 16-18.
£ Matt. vii. 6.

solid

the other to the few who press upward into
the Mount.

III. What is this that has happened to me,
O friends, and initiates, and fellow-lovers of the
truth ?
I was running to lay hold on God,
and thus I went up into the Mount, and drew
aside the curtain of the Cloud, and entered
away from matter and material things, and as
far as I could I withdrew within myself. And
then when I looked up, I scarce saw the back
parts of God ; ■ although I was sheltered by
the Rock, the Word that was made flesh for
us.
And when I looked a little closer, I saw,
not the First and unmingled Nature, known
to Itself-to the Trinity, I mean ; not That
which abideth within the first0 veil, and is
hidden by the Cherubim ; but only that Nat
ure, which at last even reaches to us.
And
that is, as far as I can learn, the Majesty, or
as holy David calls it, the Glory » which is
manifested among the creatures, which It has
produced and governs.
For these are the
Back Parts of God, which He leaves behind
Him, as tokens of Himself 8 like the shadows
and reflection of the sun in the water, which
shew the sun to our weak eyes, because we
cannot look at the sun himself, for by his un
mixed light he is too strong for our power of
In this way then shalt thou dis
perception.
course of God ; even wert thou a Moses and
a god to Pharaoh ; « even wert thou caught up
like Paul to the Thii'd Heaven, i and hadst
heard unspeakable words ; even wert thou
raised above them both, and exalted to Angelic
or Archangelic place and dignity.
For though
a thing be all heavenly, or above heaven,
and far higher in nature and nearer to God
than we, yet it
is farther distant from God,
and from the complete comprehension of His
Nature, than it
is lifted above our complex
and lowly and earthward-sinking composition.
IV. Therefore we must begin again thus.
It is difficult to conceive God but to define
Him in words is an impossibility, as one of the
Greek teachers of Divinity i taught, not unskil
fully, as it appears to me ; with the intention
that he might lie thought to have apprehended
Him ; in that he says it is a hard thing to do ;
and yet may escape being convicted of ignor
ance because of the impossibility of giving
expression to the apprehension.
But in my
is impossible to express Him, and
opinion it

a F.xod. xxxiii. 23.
0This veil of the Mercy Seat, spoken of in Exod. xxvi. 31,
signifies in Gregory's sense the denial of contemplation of that
Highest Nature.
5 The Kace of God signifies His Essence and Dcitv. which were
before all worlds : His back parts are Creation and Providence, by
which He reveals Himself.

y Ps. viii. 1.

fa Cor. xii. a.

n Plato, Tim., 28 E.

t Exod. iv. a.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

yet more impossible to conceive Him.
For
that which may be conceived may perhaps be
made clear by language, if not fairly well, at
any rate imperfectly, to any one who is not
quite deprived of his hearing, or slothful of
understanding.
But to comprehend the whole
of so great a Subject as this is quite impossible
and impracticable, not merely to the utterly
careless and ignorant, but even to those who
are highly exalted, and who love God, and in
like manner to every created nature ; seeing
that the darkness of this world and the thick
covering of the flesh is an obstacle to the full
I do not know
understanding of the truth.
whether it is the same with the higher natures
and purer Intelligences'* which because of their
nearness to God, and because they are illum
ined with all His Light, may possibly see, if
not the whole, at any rate more perfectly and
distinctly than we do ; some perhaps more,
some less than others, in proportion to their
rank.

V. But enough has been said on this point.
As to what concerns us, it is not only the Peace
of God f which passeth all understanding and
knowledge, nor only the things which God
hath stored up in promise for the righteous,
which " eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor
mind conceived " 1 except in a very small de
gree, nor the accurate knowledge of the Crea
tion.
For even of this I would have you
know that you have only a shadow when you
hear the words, " I will consider the heavens,
the work of Thy fingers, the moon and the
stars," a and the settled order therein ; not as
if he were considering them now, but as des
tined to do so hereafter.
But far before them
is That nature Which is above them, and out
of which they spring, the Incomprehensible
and Illimitable-not, I mean, as to the fact of
His being, but as to Its nature.
For our
preaching is not empty, nor our Faith vain,'
nor is this the doctrine we proclaim ; for we
would not have you take our candid statement
as a starting point for a quibbling denial of
God, or of arrogance on account of our con
fession of ignorance.
For it is one thing to
be persuaded of the existence of a thing, and
quite another to know what it is.

VI. Now our very eyes and the Law of Nat-

a No one doubts, say the Benedictine Editors that the Angels
do see God, and tliut men, too, will see Him, when they attain to
Eternal Bliss.
S. Thomas (Summa I. qu. xii. 4) argues that the
Angels have cognition of God's Essence not by nature but by
grace : but yet (lb. qu. lvi. 3) that they have by nature a certain
cognition of Him, as represented and as it were mirrored in
their own essence ; though not the actual vision of His Essence.
'Hie Angel, he says again (lb. qu. lxiv. 1) has a higher cognition of
God than man has, on account of the perfection of his intellect;
and this cognition remains even in the fallen Angels.
« 1 Cor. xv. 19.

y Isa. lxiv. 4 ;

0 Phil. iv. 7.

6 Ps. viii. 3.

1 Cor. ii. 9.

ure teach us that God exists and that He is the
Efficient and Maintaining Cause of all things :
our eyes, because they fall on visible objects,
and see them in beautiful stability and pro
gress, immovably moving and revolving if I
may so say ; natural Law, because through
these visible things and their order, it reasons
back to their Author. For how could this Uni
verse have come into being or been put to
gether, unless God had called it into existence,
and held it together ?
For every one who sees
a beautifully made lute, and considers the skill
with which it has been fitted together and ar
ranged, or who hears its melody, would think
of none but the lutemaker, or the luteplayer,
and would recur to him in mind, though he
might not know him by sight.
And thus to us
also is manifested That which made and moves
and preserves all created things, even though
He be not comprehended by the mind.
And
very wanting in sense is he who will not will
ingly go thus far in following natural proofs;
but not even this which we have fancied or
formed, or which reason has sketched for us,
proves the existence of a God.
But if any
one has got even to some extent a comprehen
sion of this, how is God's Being to bedemonstrated ? Who ever reached this extremity of
wisdom ? Who was ever deemed worthy of
so great a gift? Who has opened the mouth
of his mind and drawn in the Spirit," so as by
Him that searcheth all things, yea the deep
things of God,P to take in God, and no
longer to need progress, since he already ]>ossesses the Extreme Object of desire, and That
to which all the social life and all the intelli
gence of the best men press forward ?

VII. For what will you conceive the Deity
to be, if you rely upon all the approximations
Or to what will reason carry you,
of reason ?
O most philosophic of men and best of Theolo
gians, who boast of your familiarity with the
Unlimited?
How then is
Is He a body?
He the Infinite and Limitless, and formless,
and intangible, and invisible ? or are these
What arrogance for
attributes of a body?
such is not the nature of a body !
Or will
you say that He has a body, but not these at
tributes?
O stupidity, that a Deity should
For how
possess nothing more than we do.
is He an object of worship if He be circum
scribed?
Or how shall He escape being made
of elements, and therefore subject to be re
solved into them again, or even altogether dis
For every compound is a starting
solved?
point of strife, and strife of separation, and

a Ps. cjcuc. 21.

0 1 Cor. ii. 10.

THE SECOND THEOLOGICAL ORATION.

29 r

separation of dissolution.
But dissolution is
altogether foreign to God and to the First Nat
ure.
Therefore there can be no separation,
that there may be no dissolution, and no strife
that there may be no separation, and no com
position that there may be no strife.
Thus
also there must be no body, that there maybe
no composition, and so the argument is estab
lished by going back from last to first.

VIII. And how shall we preserve the truth
that God pervades all things and fills all, as it
is written " Do not I fill heaven and earth?
sai th the Lord, ' ' a and ' ' The Spirit of the Lord
filleth the world," P if God partly contains and
For either He will
partly is contained ?
occupy an empty Universe, and so all things
will have vanished for us, with this result,
that we shall have insulted God by making
Him a body, and by robbing Him of all
things which He has made ; or else He will
be a body contained in other bodies, which is
impossible; or He will be enfolded in them,
or contrasted with them, as liquids are mixed,
and one divides and is divided by another ;-
a view which is more absurd and anile than
even the atoms of Epicurus v and so this argu
ment concerning the body will fall through,
and have no body and no solid basis at all.
But if we are to assert that He is immaterial (as
for example that Fifth Element which some {
have imagined), and that Fie is carried round
in the circular movement .
let us assume
that He is immaterial, and that He is the Fifth
Element ; and, if they please, let Him be also
bodiless in accordance with the independent
drift and arrangement of their argument j for
I will not at present differ with them on this
point ; in what respect then will He be one of
those things which are in movement and agi
tation, to say nothing of the insult involved in
making the Creator subject to the same move
ment as the creatures, and Him That carries
(if they will allow even this) one with
all
those whom He carries.
Again, what is the
force that moves your Fifdi Element, and
what is
it that moves all things, and what
moves that, and what is the force that moves
that ? And so on ad infinitum. And how can
He help being altogether contained in space
But if they as
if He be subject to motion ?
sert that He is something other than this Fifth
Element ; suppose it is an angelic nature that

.

.

0 Wisd. i. 7.

a Jer. xxiii. 24.
y Epicurus taught that Matter is ercrnal. and consists of an in
definite number of Atoms or indivisible units, floating about in
space, and mutually attracting and repelling each other ; and
that all that exists is due to some chance meeting and coalition of
these atoms.
6 This is a speculation of Aristotle, who imagined a Fifth Ele
ment, consisting of formless matter.

they attribute to Him, how will they shew
that Angels are corporeal, or what sort of
bodies they have ? And how far in that case
could God, to Whom the Angels minister, be
superior to the Angels ? And if He is above
them, there is again brought in an irrational
swarm of bodies, and a depth of nonsense, that
has no possible basis to stand upon.

IX. And thus we see that God is not a body.
For no inspired teacher has yet asserted or
admitted such a notion, nor has the sentence
of our own Court allowed it.
Nothing then
remains but to conceive of Him as incorporeal.
But this term Incorporeal, though granted,
does not yet set before us-or contain within
itself His Essence, any more than Unbegotten, or Unoriginate, or Unchanging, or Incor
ruptible, or any other predicate which is used
concerning God or in reference to Him.
For
what effect is produced upon His Being or
Substance a by His having no beginning, and
being incapable of change or limitation ? Nay,
the whole question of His Being is still left
for the further consideration and exposition of
him who truly has the mind of God and is
advanced in contemplation. For just as to say
" It is a body," or " It was begotten," is not
sufficient to present clearly to the mind the
various objects of which these predicates are
used, but you must also express the subject of
which you use them, if you would present the
object of your thought clearly and adequately
(for every one of these predicates, corporeal,
begotten, mortal, may be used of a man, or a
Just so he who is eagerly
cow, or a horse).
pursuing the nature of the Self-existent will
not stop at saying what He is not, but must
go on beyond what He is not, and say what
He is ; inasmuch as it is easier to take in some
single point than to go on disowning point
after point in endless detail, in order, both by
the elimination of negatives and the assertion
of positives to arrive at a comprehension of
this subject.

But a man who states what God is not with
out going on to say what He is, acts much in
the same way as one would who when asked
how many twice five make, should answer,
" Not two, nor three, nor four, nor five, nor
twenty, nor thirty, nor in short any number
below ten, nor any multiple of ten;" but
would not answer •' ten," nor settle the mind
of his questioner upon the firm ground of the
answer.
For it is much easier, and more con
cise to shew what a thing is not from what it

a Pctavius (Dc Trin. IV. ii. 7) notes that UTroaraa-i? seems used
here of the Essence and Nature common to the Three Persons of
the Blessed Trinity.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

is, than to demonstrate what it is by stripping
it of what it is not. And this surely is evi
dent to every one.

X. Now since we have ascertained that God
is incorporeal, let us proceed a little further
with our examination.
Is He Nowhere or
Somewhere. For if He is Nowhere," then some
person of a very inquiring turn of mind might
ask, How is it then that He can even exist ?
For if the non-existent is nowhere, then that
which is nowhere is also perhaps non-existent.
But if He is Somewhere, He must be either
in the
Universe, or above the Universe.
And if He is in the Universe, then He must
If in
be either in some part or in the whole.
some part, then He' will be circumscribed by
that part which is less than Himself ; but if
everywhere, then by one which is further and
greater-I mean the Universal, which con
tains the Particular; if the Universe is to be
contained by the Universe, and no place is to
be free from circumscription.
This follows if
He is contained in the Universe. And be
sides, where was He before the Universe was
diffi
created, for this is a point of no little
But if He is above the Universe, is
culty.
there nothing to distinguish this from
the
Universe, and where is this above situated ?
And how could this Transcendence and that
transcended be distinguished in
which is
thought, if there is not a limit to divide and
define them ?
Is it not necessary that there
shall be some mean to mark off the Universe
from that which is above the Universe ? And
what could this be but Place, which we have
already rejected ?
For I have not yet brought
forward the point that God would be alto
gether circumscript, if He were even compre
hensible in thought: for comprehension is
one form of circumscription.

XI. Now, why have I gone into all this, per
haps too minutely for most people to listen to,
and in accordance with the present manner of
discourse, which despises noble simplicity, and
has introduced a crooked and intricate 0 style ?
That the tree may be known by its fruits ; i I
mean, that the darkness which is at work in
such teaching may be known by the obscu
rity of the arguments.
For my purpose in do
ing so was, not to get credit for myself for
astonishing utterances, or excessive wisdom,
difficulties
through tying knots and solving
a Nowhere is in this passage used in an ambiguous sense. As
asserted of God. it means that His Keing is in no way limited by
place : not that He his no existence in place, for He is everywhere,
liefore the creation of the Universe
and He transcends all place,
He existed, and He created Place, which therefore cannot be the
seat of His Heine.
AJftcted. The allusion is especially to the ostentatious
dialectics and tedious arguments of Aetius and his followers, Eunomms and others.

y Luke vi. 44.

0 v. I.

•

(this was the great miraculous gift of Daniel),"
but to make clear the point at which my argu
ment has aimed from the first. And what
was this?
That the Divine Nature cannot be
apprehended by human reason, and that we
cannot even represent to ourselves all its great
ness. And this not out of envy, for envy is
far from the Divine Nature, which is passion
less, and only good and Lord of all ; 0 espe
cially envy of that which is the most honoura
ble')' of all Hjs creatures.
For what does
the Word prefer to the rational and speaking
creatures ? Why, even their very existence is
a proof of His supreme goodness.
Nor yet is
this incomprehensibility for the sake of His
own glory and honour, Who is full,4 as if His
possession of His glory and majesty depended
upon the impossibility of approaching Him.
For it is utterly sophistical and foreign to the
character, I will not say of God, but of any
moderately good man, who has any right
ideas about himself, to seek his own suprem
acy by throwing a hindrance in the way of
another.

XII. But whether there be other causes for
it also, let them see who are nearer God, and
are eyewitnesses and spectators of His unsearch
able judgments ; « if there are any who are so
eminent in virtue, and who walk in the paths
As far, how
of the Infinite, as the saying is.
ever, as we have attained, who measure with
our little measure things hard to be under
stood, ])erhaps one reason is to prevent us from
too readily throwing away the possession be
cause it was so easily come by. For people
cling tightly to that which they acquire with
labour ; but that which they acquire easily
they quickly throw away, because it can be
easily recovered. And so it is turned into a
blessing, at least to all men who are sensible,
that this blessing is not too easy.
Or perhaps
it is in order that we may not share the fate
of Lucifer, who fell, and in consequence of
receiving the full light make our necks stiff
against the Lord Almighty, and suffer a fall,
of all things most pitiable, from the height we
had attained.
Or perhaps it may be to give a
greater reward hereafter for their labour and
glorious life to those who have here been puri
fied, and have exercised long patience in re
spect of that which they desired.

Therefore this darkness of the body has been
placed between us and God, like the cloud ot
old between the Egyptians and the Hebrews ; f
and this is perhaps what is meant by " He

a cf. Pan. v. 12.

yv. I. Most Akin to Himself,

c Rom. xi. 33.

{ Isa. l 11.

0 Plato, Tim., 10.
t'ombefis.
{ Exod. xiv. so.

THE SECOND THEOLOGICAL ORATION.

made darkness His secret place," a namely our
d ulness, through which few can see even a
little.
But as to this point, let those discuss
it whose business it is ; and let them ascend
To us
as far as possible in the examination.
who are (as Jeremiah saith), " prisoners of the
earth," 0 and covered with the denseness of
carnal nature, this at all events is known, that
as it is impossible for a man to step over his
own shadow, however fast he may move (for
the shadow will always move on as fast as it is
being overtaken) or, as it is impossible for the
eye to draw near to visible objects apart from
the intervening air and light, or for a fish to
is
glide about outside of the waters ; so it
quite impracticable for those who are in the
body to be conversant with objects of pure |
thought apart altogether from bodily objects.
For something in our own environment is
ever creeping in, even when the mind has
most fully detached itself from the' visible,
and collected itself, and is attempting to apply
itself to those invisible things which are akin
to itself.

.

What then?

XIII. This will be made clear to you as fol
lows : -Are not Spirit, and Fire, and Light,
Love, and Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Mind and Reason, and the like, the names of
the First Nature?
Can you
conceive of Spirit apart from motion and diffu
sion ; or of Fire without its fuel and its up
ward motion, and its proper colour and form ?
Or of Light unmingled with air, and loosed
from that which is as it were its father and
source? And how* do you conceive of a
mind ? Is it not that which is inherent in some
person not itself, and are not its movements
thoughts, silent or uttered ? And Reason
what else can you think it than that
which is either silent within ourselves, or else
outpoured (for I shrink from saying loosed)?
And if you conceive of Wisdom, what is
it
but the habit of mind which you know as such,
and which is concerned with contemplations
either divine or human? And Justice and
Love, are they not praiseworthy dispositions,
the one opposed to injustice, the other to hate,
and at one time intensifying themselves, at
another relaxed, now taking possession of us,
now leaving us alone, and in a word, making
us what we are, and changing us as colours do
bodies ?
Or are we rather to leave all these
things, and to look at the Deity absolutely, as
best we can, collecting a fragmentary percep
What then is this
tion of It from Its images?
subtile thing, which is of these, and yet is not

a. Ps. xviii. 11.

p Lam- iii. 34.

these, or how can that Unity which is in its
Nature uncomposite and incomparable, still be
all of these, and each one of them perfectly ?
Thus our mind faints to transcend corporeal
things, and to consort with the Incorporeal,
stripped of all clothing of corporeal ideas, as
long as it has to look with its inherent weak
ness at things above its strength.
For every
rational nature longs for God and for the First
Cause, but is unable to grasp Him, for the
reasons I have mentioned.
Faint therefore
with the desire, and as it were restive and
impatient of the disability, it tries a second
course, either to look at visible things, and
out of some of them to make a god
(a poor contrivance, for in what respect and to
what extent can that which is seen be higher
and more godlike than that which sees, that
this should worship that ?) or else through the
beauty and order of visible things to attain to
that which is alwve sight ; but not to suffer
the loss of Cod through the magnificence of
visible things.

X IV. From this cause some have made a god
of the Sun, others of the Moon, others of the
host of Stars, others of heaven itself with all its
hosts, to which they have attributed the guid
ing of the Universe, according to the quality
or quantity of their movement. Others again
of the Elements, earth, air, water, fire, be
cause of their
useful nature, since without
them human life cannot possibly exist. Others
again have worshipped any chance visible ob
jects, setting up the most beautiful of what
And there are those
they saw as their gods.
who worship pictures and images, at first in
deed of their own ancestors-at least, this is
the case with the more affectionate and sen
sual-and honour the departed with memo
rials ; and afterwards even those of strangers
are worshipped by men of a later genera
tion separated from them by^a long interval;
through ignorance of the First Nature, and
following the traditional honour as lawful and
necessary ; for usage when confirmed by time
was held to be Law.
And I think that some
who were courtiers of arbitrary power and
extolled bodily strength and admired beauty,
made a god in time out of him whom they
honoured, perhaps getting hold of some fable
to help on their imposture.

XV. And those of them who were most sub
ject to passion deified their passions, or honj oured them among their gods ; Anger and
Blood-thirstiness. Lust and Drunkenness, and
1 every similar wickedness ; and made out of this
an ignoble and unjust excuse for their own sins.
And some they left on earth, and some they

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

hid beneath the earth (this being the only
sign of wisdom about them), and some they
raised to heaven.11 O ridiculous distribution
of inheritance !
Then they gave to each of
these concepts the name of some god or de
mon, by the authority and private judgment of
their error, and set up statues whose costliness
is a snare, and thought to honour them with
blood and the steam of sacrifices, and some
times even by most shameful actions, frenzies
For such honours were the
and manslaughter.
fitting due of such gods.
And before now
men have insulted themselves by worshipping
monsters, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping
things, 0 and of the very vilest and most absurd,
and have made an offering to them of the
glory of God ; so that it is not easy to decide
whether we ought most to despise the worship
pers or the objects of their worship.
Prob
ably the worshippers are far the most con
temptible, for though they are of a rational
nature, and have received grace from God,
they have set up the worse as the better. And
this was the trick of the Evil One, who abused
good to an evil purpose, as in most of his evil
deeds.
For he laid hold of their desire in its
wandering in search of God, in order to dis
tort to himself v the power, and steal the de
sire, leading it by the hand, like a blind man
asking a road ; and he hurled down and scat
tered some in one direction and some in an
other, into one pit of death and destruction.
But reason re
ceiving us in our desire for God, and in our
sense of the impossibility of being without a
leader and guide, and then making us apply
ourselves to things visible and meeting with the
things which have been since the beginning,
doth not stay its course even here.
For it
was not the part of Wisdom to grant the sov
ereignty to things which are, as observation
tells us, of equal rank. By these then it leads
to that which is above these, and by which
For what is it which
being is given to these.
ordered things in heaven and things in earth,
and those which pass through air, and those
which live
or rather the things
which were before these, heaven and earth,
air and water? Who mingled these, and who
it that each has
distributed them ?
in common with the other, and their mutual
dependence and agreement ?
For I commend
the man, though he was a heathen, who said,

XVI. This was their course.

in water;

What is

a Referring to the mythical partition of the Universe, which
gave heaven to Zeus, the sea to Poseidon, and the infernal regions
to Aidoncus.
y It was a very ceneral belief in the early Church that the cods
wlmin the heathen worshipped were in reality actual evil spirits ;
and this belief is certainly supported by S. Paul's argument about
fi&wAoth/Toi' in I Cor. x. 19-21.

0 Rnm. i 23.

What gave movement to these, and drives
their ceaseless and unhindered motion ?
Is it
not the Artificer of them Who implanted
reason in them all, in accordance with which
Is it
the Universe is moved and controlled ?
not He who made them and brought them
For we cannot attribute such a
into being?
power to the Accidental.
For, suppose that
its existence is accidental, to what will you
let us ascribe its order ? And if you like we
will grant you this: to what then will you
ascribe its preservation and protection in ac
cordance with the terms of its first creation.
Do these belong to the Accidental, or to some
Surely not to the Accidental.
thing else?
And what can this Something Else be but
God ?
Thus reason that proceeds from God,
that is implanted in all from the beginning
and is the first law in us, and is bound up in
all, leads us up to God through visible things.
Let us begin again, and reason this out.

XVII. What God is in nature and essence,
no man ever yet has discovered or can discover.
Whether it will ever be discovered is a ques
tion which he who will may examine and de
cide.
In my opinion it will be discovered
when that within us which is godlike and
divine, I mean our mind and reason, shall
have mingled with its Like, and the image
shall have ascended to the Archetype, of which
it has now the desire.
And this I think is
the solution of that vexed problem as to " We
shall know even as we are known." °
But in
our present life all that comes to us is but a
little effluence, and as it 'were a small efful
gence from a great Light.
So that if anyone
has known God, or has had the testimony of
Scripture to his knowledge of God, we are to
understand such an one to have possessed a
degree of knowledge which gave him the ap
pearance of being more fully enlightened than
another who did not enjoy the same degree of
illumination ; and this relative superiority is
spoken of as if it were absolute knowledge,
not because it is really such, but by compari
son with the power of that other.

XVIII. Thus Enos " hoped to call upon the
Name of the Lord."'3
Hope was that for
which he is commended ; and that, not that
he should know God, but that he should call
upon him.
And Enoch was translated,!' but it
is not yet clear whether it was because he al
ready comprehended the Divine Nature, or in
And
order that he might comprehend it.

a r Cor. xiii. 12. but with a reading ixtyyu>tr«a6ty which is not in
the New Testament.
The verb has by some been taken as passive,
0 Gen. iv. 26.
and not middle, " hoped that the Name of the Ixird would be
called upon."

y lb. v. 24, Ecclus. xlix. 14.

THE SECOND THEOLOGICAL ORATION.

Noah's "glory was that he was pleasing to God ;
he who was entrusted with the saving of the
whole world from the waters, or rather of the
Seeds of the world, escaped the Deluge in
a small Ark. And Abraham, great Patriarch
though he was, was justified by faith,0 and
offered a strange victim,* the type of the Great
Sacrifice.
Yet he saw not God as God, but
gave Him food as a man.4 He was approved
because he worshipped as far as he compre
hended." And Jacob dreamed of a lofty lad
der and stair of Angels, and in a mystery
anointed a pillar S-perha]>s to signify the Rock
that was anointed for our sake-and gave to a
place the name of The House of God* in
honour of Him whom he saw ; and wrestled
with God in human form ;
whatever this
wrestling of God with man may mean .
possibly it refers to the comparison of man's
virtue with God's ; and he bore on his body
the marks of the wrestling, setting forth the
defeat of the created nature ; and for a reward
of his reverence he received a change of his
name; being named, instead of Jacob, Israel
-that
Yet
great and honourable name.
neither he nor any one on his behalf, unto this
day, of all the Twelve Tril)es who where his
children, could boast that he comprehended
the whole nature or the pure sight of God.

XIX. To Elias neither the strong wind, nor
the fire, nor the earthquake, as you learn from
the story,9 but a light breeze adumbrated the
Presence of God, and not even this His Nature.
The man whom a
And who was this Elias ?
chariot of fire took up to heaven, signifying
the superhuman excellency of the righteous
man. And are you not amazed at Manoah
the Judge of yore, and at Peter the disciple in
later days; the one being unable to endure
the sight even of one in whom was a repres
entation of God ; and saying, " We are un
done, O wife, we have seen God ; " ■ speaking
as though even a vision of God could not be
grasped by human beings, let alone the Nature
of God ; and the other unable to endure the
Presence of Christ in his l>oat and therefore
bidding Him depart ; A and this though Peter

was more zealous than the others
for the
knowledge of Christ, and received a blessing
for this," and was entrusted with the great
What would you say of Isaiah or
est gifts.
eyewitness of very
Ezekiel, who was an
great mysteries, and of the other Prophets ;
for one of these saw the Lord of Sabaoth sit
ting on the Throne of glory/ and encircled
and praised and hidden by the six winged
Seraphim, and was himself purged by the live
coal, and equipped for his prophetic office.
And the other describes the Cherubic Chariot *
of God, and the Throne upon them, and the
Firmament over it, and Him that shewed
Himself in the Firmament, and Voices, and
Forces, and Deeds.4 And whether this was
an appearance by day, only visible to Saints,
or an unerring vision of the night, or an im
pression on the mind holding converse with
the future as if it were the present ; or some
other ineffable form of prophecy, I cannot
say ; the God of the Prophets knoweth, and
they know who are
But
neither these of whom I am speaking, nor any
of their fellows ever stood before the Council*
and Essence of God, as it is written, or saw,
or proclaimed the Nature of God.

inspired.

thus

XX. If it had been permitted to Paul, to
utter what the Third Heaven ( contained, and
his own advance, or ascension, or assumption
thither, perhaps we should know something
more about God's Nature, if this was the
mystery of the rapture.
But since it was in
effable, we too will honour it by silence.
Thus much we will hear Paul say about it,
that we know in part and we prophesy in
part.''
This and the like to this are the con
fessions of one who is not rude in knowledge, *
who threatens to give proof of Christ speaking
in him, the great doctor and champion of the
truth.
Wherefore he estimates all knowledge
on earth only as through a glass darkly," as
taking its stand upon little images of the
truth.
Now, unless I appear to anyone too
careful, and over anxious about the examina
tion of this matter, perhaps it was of this and
nothing else that the Word Himself intimated

a Gen. vi. 8.
5 Gen. xviii. 2.

0 lb, xviii. 18.

y lb. xxviii. 2.

£ lb. ver. 28.

* Gen. xxxii. 28.

Elias L'retensis sees in this occurrence a fore
shadowing of the Incarnation : and also with many others, a rev
elation of the Trinity, in that Abraham saw Three and conversed
with One.
ij v. I. The Form of Cod, which would refer to the occasion cited
below. The reading is grammatically easier, as an accusative is
required : but in that case we might have expected the wrestling
with the Angel to have been mentioned first, as the name Penucl
was given by Jacob on the day following the night in which he
wrestled, and received his own change of name.
The Benedic
tines, while retaining House in text and version, express a prefer
ence for Form, because the subject of the argument is the Vision of
God.
8 r Kgs. xix. it, 12. LXX. has a Sound of a Light breeze.
k Judg. xiii. 22.

A Luke v. 8.

y Ezek. i. 4-28.

0 Isa. vi. t sqq.
a Matt. xvi. 16. 17.
3 v. I. Orders, i.e. of angels.
« This is .1 quotation from the LXX. of Jer. xxiii. 18, where
for viroim/jiaTi Aquila has anoppyrip, and Symmachus 6utAia,
(according to Trommius). Jrrdtmjua properly means a Station of
troops, and such is the meaning in the other two places where the
word occurs in the LXX.. viz. :-2 Sam. xxiii. 14, and 1 Chron. xi.
16. The Hebrew word which it represents in this passage is one
of frequent use, and means " a Council." or, in a sense derived
In Job xv. 8 it is rendered in A.
from this, Familiar Intercourse.
V. The Secret of God, where the LXX. has vvvrayfia. The
Vulgate in both cases has Concilium Dei ; the
Renedictines
A. V. has Counsel, and in marg.
however render it Substance.
Secret : while R. V. reads Council, with no marginal alternative.

f 2 Cor. xii. 2.
Q 2 Cor. xi. 6.

Tf 1 Cor. xiii. 9.
xi Cor. xiii. 12.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

that there were things which could not now be
borne, but which should be borne and cleared
up hereafter," and which John the Forerunner
of the Word and great Voice of the Truth de
clared even the whole world could not contain. P
XXI. The truth then, and the whole Word
is full of difficulty and obscurity ; and as it were
with a small instrument we are undertaking a
great work, when with merely human wisdom
we pursue the knowledge of the Self-existent,
and in company with, or not apart from, the
senses, by which we are borne hither and
thither, and led into error, we apply ourselves
to the search after things which are only to
be grasped by the mind, and we are unable
by meeting bare realities with bare intellect
to approximate somewhat more closely to the
truth, and to mould the mind by its concepts.
Now the subject of God is more hard to
come at,* in proportion as it is more perfect
than any other, and is open to more objections,
and the solutions of them are more laborious.
For every objection, however small, stops and
hinders the course of our argument, and cuts
off its further advance, just like men who sud
denly check with the rein the horses in full
career, and turn them right round by the un
expected shock.
Thus Solomon, who was the
wisest of all men,5 whether before him or in
his own time, to whom God gave breadth of
heart, and a flood of contemplation, more
abundant than the sand, even he, the more
he entered into the depth, the more dizzy he
became, and declared the furthest point of
wisdom to be the discovery of how very far off
she was from him.'
Paul also tries to arrive
at, I will not say the nature of God, for this
he knew was utterly impossible, but only the
judgments of God ; and since he finds no way
out, and no halting place in the ascent, and
moreover, since the earnest searching of his
mind after knowledge does not end in any
definite conclusion, l«cause some fresh unattained point is l>eing continually disclosed to
him CO marvel, that I have a like experience),
he closes his discourse with astonishment, and
calls this, the riches of God,f and the depth,
and confesses the unsearchablencss of the judg
ments of God, in almost the very words of
David, who at one time calls God's judg
ments the great deep whose foundations can
not l>e reached by measure or sense ; 1 and at
another says that His knowledge of him and of
his own constitution was marvellous,* and had

attained greater strength than was in his own
power or grasp.

XXII. For if, he says, I leave everything else
alone, and consider myself and the whole nat
ure and constitution of man, and how we are
mingled, and what is our movement, and how
the mortal was compounded with the immortal,
and how it is that I flow downwards, and yet
am borne upwards, and how the soul is circum
scribed ; * and how it gives life and shares in
feelings ; and how the mind is at once circum
scribed and unlimited, f abiding in us and yet
travelling over the Universe in swift motion
and flow ; how it is both received and imparted
by word, and passes through air, and enters
with all things ; how it shares in sense, and en
shrouds itself away from sense. And even before
these questions-what was our first moulding
and composition in the workshop of nature,
and what is our last formation and completion ?
What is the desire for and imparting of nour
ishment, and who brought us spontaneously
to those first springs and sources of life ? How
is the body nourished by food, and the soul
What is the drawing of nature,
by reason?
and the mutual relation between parents and
children, that it should be hield together by a
spell of love ? • How is it that species are per
manent, and are different in thfiir characteris
tics, although there are so many that their indi
vidual marks cannot be described ? How is it
that the same animal is both mortal and im
mortal,')' the one by decease, the other by
coming into being ?
For one departs, and
another takes its place, just like the flow of a
river, which is never still, yet evei" constant.
And you might discuss many more points con
cerning men's members and parts, *and their
mutual adaptation both for use and beauty,
and how some are connected and others dis
joined, some are more excellent and others
less comely, some are
united and others
divided, some contain and others are con
tained, according to the law and re;json of
Nature. Much too might be said about voices
and ears. How is it that the voice is carried
by the vocal organs, and received by the ears,
and both are joined by the smiting and re
sounding of the medium of the air? Much
too of the eyes, which have an indescribable
communion with visible objects, and which
are moved by the will alone, and that to
gether, and are affected exactly as is the nund.
For with equal speed the mind is joined to

here attributes to the Baptist words of the Kvangclist.

a folin xvi. 12.
0 S. Jnhn xxi. 25. By » curious slip of the tonpue S. Gregory
yrf. Pctav. ile Deo, iii.,c. 7.
« Eccl. vii. 23.
(Rom, xi. 23.

9 lb. exxxix. 6.

6 1 Kgs. iii. t?.

ijPs. xxxvi. 7.

Invisible

1. And how the soul is carried round.

a v.
0 v. I.
y Gregory is not here speaking of the immortality of the in
dividual soul, but of that of the Race, which it shares with other
animals, and which is effected by continual succession.

THE SECOND THEOLOGICAL ORATION.

the objects of thought, the eye to those of
Much too concerning the other senses,
sight.
not objects of the research of reason.
And
much concerning our rest in sleep, and the
figments of dreams, and of memory and re
membrance ; of calculation, and anger, and
desire ; and in a word, all by which this little
world called Man is swayed.

XXIII. Shall I reckon up for you the differ
ences of the other animals, both from us and
from each other,-differences of nature, and of
production, and of nourishment, and of region,
and of temper, and as it were of social life?
How is it that some are gregarious and others
solitary, some herbivorous and others carnivor
ous, some fierce and others tame, some fond of
man and domesticated, others untamable and
free? And some we might call bordering on
reason and power of learning, while others are
altogether destitute of reason, and incapable of
being taught.
Some with fuller senses, others
with less ; some immovable, and some with the
power of walking, and some very swift, and
some very slow;. some surpassing in size or
beauty, or in one or other of these respects ;
others very small or very ugly, or both ; some
strong, others weak, some apt at self-defence,
others timid and crafty ■ and others again are
Some are laborious and thrifty,
unguarded.
others altogether idle and improvident.
And
before we come to such points as these, how is
it that some are crawling things, and others
upright ; some attached to one spot, some
amphibious ; some delight in beauty and others
are unadorned ; some are married and some
single; some temperate and others intemper
ate ; some have numerous offspring and others
not ; some are long-lived and others have but
It would be a weary discourse to
short lives ?
go through all the details.

XXIV. Look also at the fishy tribe gliding
through the waters, and as
it were flying
through the liquid element, and breathing its
own air, but in danger when in contact with
ours, as we are in the waters ; and mark their
habits and dispositions, their intercourse and
their births, their size and their beauty, and
their affection for places, and their wanderings,
and their assemblings and departings, and their
properties which so nearly resemble those of the
animals that dwell on land ; in some cases com
munity, in others contrast of properties, both
in name and shape.
And consider the tribes
of birds, and their varieties of form and colour,
both of those which are voiceless and of song
birds. What is the reason of their melody, and

a The Benedictines here insert Some well protected: but it is

their own conjecture, and is not found in the Manuscripts.

from whom came it ? Who gave to the grass
hopper the lute in his breast, and the songs and
chirruping on the branches, when they are
moved by the sun to make their midday music,
and sing among the groves, and escort the way
farer with their voices? Who wove the song
for the swan when he spreads his wings to the
breezes, and makes melody of their rustling?
For I will not speak of the forced voices, and
all the rest that art contrives against the truth.
Whence does the peacock, that boastful bird
of Media, get his love of beauty and of praise
j' (for he is fully conscious of his own beauty),
I so that when he sees any one approaching, or
when, as they say, he would make a show be
fore his hens, raising his neck and spreading
his tail in circle around him, glittering like
gold and studded with stars, he makes a spec
tacle of his beauty to his lovers with pompous
strides? Now Holy Scripture admires the
cleverness in weaving even of women, saying,
Who gave to woman skill in weaving and
cleverness in the art of embroidery ? 0 Thisbelongeth to a living creature that hath reason,
and exceedeth in wisdom and maketh way even
as far as the things of heaven.

XXV. But I would have you marvel at the
natural knowledge even of irrational creatures,
and if you can, explain its cause. How is it
that birds have for nests rocks and trees and
roofs, and adapt them both for safety and
1 beauty, and suitably for the comfort of their
nurslings?
Whence do bees and spiders get
their love of work and art, by which the for
mer plan their honeycomls, and join them to
gether by hexagonal and co-ordinate tubes, and
construct the foundation by means of a parti
tion and an alternation of the angles with
straight lines ; and this, as is the case, in such
dusky hives and dark combs; and the latter
weave their intricate webs by such light and
almost airy threads stretched in divers ways,
and this from almost invisible beginnings, to be
at once a precious dwelling, and a trap for
weaker creatures with a view to enjoyment of
food? What Euclid ever imitated these, while
pursuing philosophical enquiries with lines that
have no real existence, and wearying himself
with demonstrations? From what Palamedes
came the tactics, and, as the saying is; the
movements and configurations of cranes, and
the systems of their movement in ranks and
their complicated flight ? Who were their
Phidiae and Zeuxides, and who were the Parrhasii and Aglaophons who knew how to draw
and mould excessively beautiful things ? What

a Job xxxvtii. 36. LXX.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

harmonious Gnossian
chorus of Daedalus,
wrought for a girl" to the highest pitch of
beauty? What Cretan Labyrinth, hard to
get through, hard to unravel, as the poets say,
and continually crossing itself through the
tricks of its construction?
I will not speak
of the ants' storehouses and storekeepers, and
of their treasurings of wood in quantities cor
responding to the time for which it is wanted,
and all the other details which we know are
told of their marches and leaders and their
good order in their works.

XXVI. If this knowledge has come within
your reach and you are familiar with these
branches of science, look at the differences of
plants also, up to the artistic fashion of the
leaves, which is adapted both to give the utmost
pleasure to the eye, and to be of the greatest
advantage to the fruit. Look too at the variety
and lavish abundance of fruits, and most of all
at the wondrous beauty of such as are most
necessary.
And consider the power of roots,
and juices, and flowers, and odours, not only
so very sweet, but also serviceable as medi
cines ; and the graces and qualities of colours ;
and again the costly value, and the brilliant
transparency of precious stones.
Since nature
has set before you all things' as in an abundant
banquet free to all, both the necessaries and
the luxuries of life, in order that, if nothing
else, you may at any rate know God by His
benefits, and by your own sense of want be
made wiser than you were.
Next, I pray you,
traverse the length and breadth of earth, the
common mother of all, and the gulfs of the
sea bound together with one another and with
the land, and the beautiful forests, and the
rivers and springs abundant and perennial, not
only of waters cold and fit for drinking, and
on the surface of the earth ; but also such as
running beneath the earth, and flowing under
caverns, are then forced out by a violent blast,
and repelled, and then filled with heat by this
violence of strife and repulsion, burst out by
little and little wherever they get a chance,
and hence supply, our need of hot baths in
many parts of the earth, and in conjunction
with the cold give us a healing which is with
Tell me how and
out cost and spontaneous.
whence are these things ? What is this great
web unwrought by art?
These things are
no. less worthy of admiration, in respect of
their mutual relations than when considered
separately.

How is it that the earth stands solid and
a The allusion is to a group made by Dardalus for Ariadne, repre
senting a chorus of youths and maidens, which seemed to he mov
It is described by Humer (II., xviti., 59a
ing in musical rhythm.
sqq.).

unswerving ? On what is it supported ? What
. is it that props it up, and on what does that
rest ?
For indeed even reason has nothing to
lean upon, but only the Will of God. And
how is it that part of it is drawn up into moun
tain summits, and part laid down in plains,
5 and this in various and differing ways? And
, because the variations are individually small, it
both supplies our needs more liberally, and is
more beautiful by its variety; part being dis
tributed into habitations, and part left unin
habited, namely all the great height of Moun
tains, and the various clefts of its coast line
Is not this the clearest proof

, cut off from it.

of the majestic working of God ?

XXVII. And with respect to the Sea even
if I did not marvel at its greatness, yet I should
have marvelled at its gentleness, in that al
though loose it stands within its boundaries ;
and if not at its gentleness, yet surely at its
greatness ; but since I marvel at both, I will
What colpraise the Power that is in both.
llectedit? What bounded it ? How is it raised
and lulled to rest, as though respecting its neigh
bour earth? How, moreover, does it receive
all the rivers, and yet remain the same, through
the very superabundance of its immensity, if
that term be permissible ? How is the boun-
! dary of it, though it be an element of such
magnitude, only sand ?
Have your natural
philosophers with their knowledge of useless
details anything to tell us, those men I mean
who are really endeavouring to measure the
sea with a wineglass, and such mighty works
by their own conceptions ?
Or shall I give
the really scientific explanation of it from
Scripture concisely, and yet more satisfactorily
and truly than by the longest arguments ?
" He hath fenced the face of the water with
His command."11. This is the chain of fluid
nature.
And how doth He bring upon it the
Nautilus that inhabits the dry land (i.e., man)
in a little vessel, and with a little breeze (dost
thou not marvel at the sight of this,-is not
thy mind astonished ?), that earth and sea may
be bound together by needs and commerce,
and that things so widely separated by nature
should be thus brought together into one for
man? What are the first fountains of springs?
Seek, O man, if you can trace out or find any
of these things.
And who was it who cleft
the plains and the mountains for the rivers,
and gave them an unhindered course? And
how comes the marvel on the other side, that
the Sea never overflows, nor the Rivers cease
to flow ? And what is the nourishing power

1 Job >

LXX.

THE SECOND THEOLOGICAL ORATION.

of water, and what the difference therein ; for
some things are irrigated from above, and
others drink from their roots, if I may luxuri
ate a little in my language when speaking of
the luxuriant gifts of God.

'.

XXVIII. And now, leaving the earth and
the things of earth, soar into the air on the wings
of thought, that our argument may advance in
due path ; and thence I will take you up to
heavenly things, and to heaven itself, and
things which are above heaven ;
for to that
which is beyond my discourse hesitates to
ascend, but still it shall ascend as far as may
be. Who poured forth the air, that great and
abundant wealth, not measured to men by
their rank or fortunes ; not restrained by
boundaries ; not divided out according to
people's ages ; but like the distribution of the
Manna, ■ received in sufficiency, and valued
for its equality of distribution ; the chariot of
the winged creation ;
the seat of the winds;
the moderator of the seasons ; the quickencr
of living things, or rather the preserver of
natural life in the body ; in which bodies
have their being, and by which we speak ; in
which is the light and all that it shines upon,
and the sight which flows through it ? And
mark, if you please, what follows.
I cannot
give to the air the whole empire of all that is
thought to belong to the air.
What are the
storehouses of the winds ? ' What are the
treasuries of the snow? Who, as Scripture
hath said, hath begotten the drops of dew?
Out of Whose womb came the ice ? and Who
bindeth the waters in the clouds, and, fixing
part in the clouds (O marvel !) held by His
Word though its nature is to flow, poureth
out the rest upon the face of the whole earth,
and scattereth it abroad in due season, and in
just proportions, and neither
suffereth the
whole substance of moisture to go out free and
uncontrolled (for sufficient was the cleansing
in the days of Noah ; and He who cannot lie
.
is not forgetful of His own covenant) ;
nor yet restraineth it entirely that we should
not again stand in need of an Elias? to bring
If He shall shut up
the drought to an end.
heaven, it saith, who shall open it?
If He
open the floodgates, who shall shut them up ? s
Who can bring an excess or withhold a suffi
ciency of rain, unless he govern the Universe
by his own measures and balances ? What sci
entific laws, pray, can you lay down concern
ing thunder and lightning, O you who thun
der from the earth, and cannot shine with even
little sparks of truth ? To what vapours from

.

.

earth will you attribute the creation of cloud,
or is
it due to some thickening of the air, or
pressure or crash of clouds of excessive rarity,
so as to make you think the pressure the cause
of the lightning, and the crash that which
makes the thunder ?
Or what compression of
wind having no outlet will account to you
for the lightning by its compression, and for
the thunder by its bursting out ?

Now if you have in your thought passed
through the air and all the things of air, reach
with me to heaven and the things of heaven.
And let faitli lead us rather than reason, if at
least you have learnt the feebleness of the
latter in matters nearer to you, and have
known reason by knowing the things that are
beyond reason, so as not to be altogether on the
earth or of the earth, because you are ignorant
even of your ignorance.

XXIX. Who spread the sky around us, and
set the stars in order ? Or rather, first, can you
tell me, of your own knowledge of the things in
heaven, what are the sky and the stars; you
who know not what lies at your very feet, and
cannot even take the measure of yourself, and
yet must busy yourself about what is above
your nature, and gape at the illimitable ?
For, granted that you understand orbits and
periods, and waxings and wanings, and set
tings and risings, and some degrees and min
utes, and all the other things which make you
so proud of your wonderful knowledge ; you
have not arrived at comprehension of the
' realities themselves, but only at an observaI tion of some movement, which, when con
firmed by longer practice, and drawing the
observations of many individuals into one
generalization, and thence deducing a law,
has acquired the name of Science (just as
the lunar phenomena have become generally
known to our sight), being the basis of this
knowledge.
I!ut if you are very scientific on
this subject, and have a just claim to admira
tion, tell me what is the cause of this order
and this movement. How came the sun to
lie a beacon-fire to the whole world, and to
all eyes like the leader of some chorus, con
cealing all the rest of the stars by his bright
ness, more completely than some of them
conceal others.
is that
they shine against him, but he outshines
them and does not even allow it to be per
that they rose simultaneously with
ceived
as a bridegroom, swift and great
him, fair
as a giant *-for I will not let his praises be
I sung from any other source than my own

The proof of this

a Exod. xvi. 18.
y 1 Kgs. xviii. 44.

P Job xxxvii. 9, 10.
0 Job. xii. 14

a Ps. xix. 5.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

Scriptures-so mighty in strength that from
one end to the other of the .world he embraces
all things in his heat, and there is nothing hid
from the feeling thereof, but it fills both every
eye with light, and every embodied creature
with heat ; warming, yet not burning, by the
gentleness of its temper, and the order of its
movement, present to all, and equally embrac
ing all.

the sun ?

XXX. Have you considered the importance
of the fact that a heathen writer a speaks of the
sun as holding the same posi tion among mate*ial
objects as God does among objects of thought ?
For the one gives light to the eyes, as the
Other does to the mind ; and is the most beau
tiful of the objects of sight, as God is of those
of thought.
But who gave hirr. motion at
first?
And what is it which ever moves him
in his circuit, though in his nature stable and
immovable, truly unwearied, and the giver
and sustainer of life, and all the rest of the titles
which the poets justly sing of him, and never
resting in his course or his benefits? How
comes he to l)e the creator of day when above
the earth, and of night when below it ? or
whatever may be the right expression when
one contemplates
What are the
mutual aggressions and concessions of day and
night, and their regular irregularities-to use a
somewhat strange expression ? How comes he
to be the maker and divider of the seasons, that
come and depart in regular order, and as in a
dance interweave with each other, or stand
apart by a law of love on the one hand, and of
order on the other, and mingle little by little,
and steal on their neighbour, just as nights and
days do, so as not to give us pain by their sud
This will be enough about the sun.
denness.
Do you know the nature and phenomena of
the Moon, and the measures and courses of
light, and how it is that the sun bears rule over
the day, and the moon presides over the night ;
and while She gives confidence to wild beasts,
He stirs Man up to work, raising or lowering
himself as may be most serviceable ? Know you
the bond of Pleiades, or the fence of Orion,P as
He who counteth the number of the stars and
calleth them all by their names ?* Know yoji
the differences of the glory* of each, and the
order of their movement, that I should trust
you, when by them you weave the web of hu
man concerns, and arm the creature against the
Creator ?

XXXI. What say you ? Shall we pause here,
after discussing nothing further than matter and
visible things, or, since the Word knows the

a Plato.
y Ps. cxlvii. 4.

0 Job xxxviii. v.
41.
A 1 Cor. xv.

.

.

.

Tabernacle of Moses to be a figure of the whole
creation-I mean the entire system of things
visible and invisible-shall we pass the first veil,
and stepping beyond the realm of sense, shall
we look.' into the Holy Place, the Intellectual
and Celestial creation ? But not even this can we
see in an incorporeal way, though it is incorpo
real, since it is called-oris-Fire and Spirit.
For He is said to make His Angels spirits, and
His Ministers a flame of fire 0
though
perhajs this "making" means preserving by
that Word by which they came into existence.
The Angel then is called spirit and fire ; Spirit,
as being a creature of the intellectual sphere;
Fire, as being of a purifying nature ; for 1 know
that the same names belong to the First Nature.
But, relatively to us at least, we must reckon
the Angelic Nature incorporeal, or at any rate
Do you see how we
as nearly so as possible.
get dizzy over this subject, and cannot ad
vance to any point, unless it be as far as this,
that we know there are Angels and Archan
gels, Thrones, Dominions, Princedoms, Pow
ers, Splendours, Ascents, Intelligent Powers
or Intelligencies, pure natures and unalloyed,
immovable to evil, or scarcely movable ; ever
circling in chorus round the First Cause (or
how should we sing their praises ?) illuminated
thence with the purest Illumination, or one in
one degree and one in another, proportionally
to their nature and rank .
. so conformed to
beauty and moulded that they become second
ary Lights, and can enlighten others by the
overflowings and largesses of the First Fight ?
Ministrants of God's Will, strong with both
inborn and imparted strength, traversing all
space, readily present to all at any place through
their zeal for ministry and the agility of their
different individuals of them
nature
embracing different parts of the world, or ap
pointed over different districts of the Universe,
as He knoweth who ordered and distributed it
all.
Combining all things in one, solely with
a view to the consent of the Creator of all
things; Hymners of the Majesty of the Godhead,
eternally contemplating the Eternal Glory, not
that God may thereby gain an increase ofglory,
for nothing can be added to that which is full
-to Him, who supplies good to all outside
Himself-but that there may never be a ces
sation of blessings to these first natures after
God.
If we have told these things as they
deserve, it is by the grace of the Trinity, and
of the one Godhead in Three Persons ; but if
less perfectly than we have desired, yet even
For
so our discourse has gained its purpose.

.

.

.

.

,

a Ps. civ. 4.

ON THE SON.

3d

this is what we were labouring to shew, that
even the secondary natures surpass the power
of our intellect ; much more then the First and
(for I fear to say merely That which is above
all), the only Nature.

XXIX. THE THIRD THEOLOGICAL
ORATION.

On the Son.

I. This then is what might be said to cut
short our opponents' readiness to argue and
their hastiness with its consequent insecurity in
all matters, but above all in those discussions
which relate to God.
But since to rebuke
others is a matter of no difficulty whatever,
but a very easy thing, which any one who
likes can do ; whereas to substitute one's own
belief for theirs is the part of a pious and intel
ligent man ; let us, relying on the Holy Ghost,
Who among them is dishonoured, but among
us is adored, bring forth to the light our own
conceptions about the Godhead, whatever
these may be,
like some noble and timely
birth.
Not that I have at other times been
silent ; for on this subject alone I am full of
youthful strength and daring ; but the fact is
that under present circumstances I am even
more bold to declare the truth, that I may not
(to use the words of Scripture) by drawing
back fall into the condemnation of being dis
pleasing to God." And since every discourse
is of a twofold nature, the one part establish
ing one's own, and the other overthrowing
one's opponents' position ; let us first of all state
our own position, and then try to controvert
that of our opponents ;-and both as briefly as
possible, so that our arguments may be taken
in at a glance (like those of the elementary
treatises which they have devised to deceive
simple or
our
thoughts may not be scattered by reason of the
length of the discourse, like water which is not
contained in a channel, but flows to waste
over the open land.

foolish persons), and that

II. The three most ancient opinions con
cerning God are Anarchia, Polyarchia, and
The first two are the sport of the
Monarchia.
children of Hellas, and may they continue to
be so.
For Anarchy is a thing without order ;
and the Rule of Many is factious, and thus
anarchical, and thus disorderly.
For both,
these tend to the same thing, namely disorder ;
and this to dissolution, for disorder is the first
step to dissolution.

a Heb. u. 4 ; x. 38.

nature-so

to the created

But Monarchy is that which we hold in
honour.
It is, however, a Monarchy that is
not limited to one Person, for it is possible for
Unity if at variance with itself to come into a
condition of plurality ; B but one which is made
of an equality of Nature and a Union of mind,
and an identity of motion, and a convergence
of its elements to unity-a thing which is
that
impossible
though numerically distinct there is no sever
ance of Essence.
Therefore Unity 2 having
from all eternity arrived by motion at Duality,
found its rest in Trinity.
This is what we
mean by Father and Son and Holy Ghost.
The Father is the Begetter and the Emitter ; 1
without passion, of course, and without ref
erence to time, and not in a corporeal man
ner.
The Son is the Begotten, and the Holy
Ghost the Emission; for I know not how
this could be expressed in terms altogether ex
cluding visible things.
For we shall not ven
ture to speak of "an overflow of goodness,"
as one of the Greek Philosophers dared to say,
as if it were a bowl overflowing, and this in
plain words in his Discourse on the First and
Second Causes.4 Let us not ever look on this
Generation as involuntary, like some natural
overflow, hard to be retained, and by no
of Deity.
means befitting
Therefore let us confine ourselves within our
limits, and speak of the Unbegotten and the
Begotten and That which proceeds from the
Father, as somewhere God the Word Himself
saith.

our conception

III. When did these come into being? They
areabove all " When."
But, if I am to speak
with something more of boldness,-when the
And when did the Father come
Father did.
There never was a time when He
into being.
And the same thing is true of the
was not.
Son and the Holy Ghost.
Ask me again, and
again I will answer you, When was the Son

a Billius and others here read Authority, which 13 not supported
by the best MSS., or by the context.
0 Elias explain* this to mean that of old men knew only One
Person in the Godhead : and until the Incarnation this knowledge
was sufficient : but from that lime forward they acknowledged a
Second Person, and through Him a Third also, the Holy Ghost.
But this explanation falls Tar short of Gregory's meaning, which
certainly is that the movement of selfconsciousness in God from all
F.ternity made the Generation of the Son, and the Procession of
All is objective in God. cf. Petav.
the Holy Ghost, a necessity.
dc Deo. II., viii., 16: also, Greg. Naz., Or. xxiii. 5.
y >rpo0oAeuc-irpo0oA>j was a term used by the Gnostics to describe
the Kmanation.s by which the distance between the Finite and the
Infinite was according to them bridged over : and on this account
it fell under suspicion, and was rejected by both Anus and Alhanasius. Tertullian used it with an explanation which is satisfactory
as regards the wpo^oXij of the Son ; but when he comes to apply it
to the Procession of the Holy Ghost he uses an illustration which is
in almost the very words rejected by Gregory (c. Prax., 7, 8.
See Swete. p. 56/.
Later when this
Origen did not admit it.
danger was past, the word came into use again as the equivalent
of ixiropeviro, at first with reserve and explanations in the text, but
See Swetc " On The Doctrine Of
later on as an accepted term.
The Holy Spirit," p. 36.

8 The expression is from Plato.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

begotten ? When the Father was not begotten.
And when did the Holy Ghost proceed ? When
the Son was, not proceeding but, begottenbeyond the sphere of time, and above the
grasp of reason ; although we cannot set forth
that which is above time, if we avoid as we
desire any expression which conveys the idea
of time.
For such expressions as "when"
and " before " and " after " and " from the
beginning" are not timeless, however much
we may force them ; unless indeed we were to
take the Aeon, that interval which is coex
tensive with the eternal things, and is not
divided or measured by any motion, or by
the revolution of the sun, as time is measured.
How then are They not alike unoriginate,
if They are coeternal ? Because They are from
Him, though not after Him.
For that which
is unoriginate is eternal, but that which is
eternal is not necessarily unoriginate, so long
as it may be referred to the Father as its origin.
Therefore in respect of Cause They are not
unoriginate; but it is evident that the Cause
is not necessarily prior to its effects, for the
And yet They
sun is not prior to its light.
are in some sense unoriginate, in resjject of
time, even though you would scare simple
minds with your quibbles, for the Sources of
Time are not subject to time.

IV. But how can this generation be passion
less? In that it is incorporeal. For if corporeal
generation involves passion, incorporeal gen
And I will ask of you in
eration excludes it.
turn, How is He God if He is created ?
For
I refrain
that which is created is not God.
from reminding you that here too is passion if
we take the creation in a bodily sense, as time,
desire, imagination, thought, hope, pain, risk,
failure, success, all of which and more than
all find a place in the creature, as is evident
to every one.
Nay, I marvel that you do not
venture so far as to conceive of marriages and
times of pregnancy, and dangers of miscar
riage, as if the Father could not have begotten
at all if He had not begotten thus ; or again,
that you did not count up the modes of gen
eration of birds and beasts and fishes, and
bring under some one of them the Divine and
Ineffable Generation, or even eliminate the
And you
Son out of your new hypothesis.
cannot even see this, that as His Generation
according to the flesh differs from all others
(for where among men do you know of a
Virgin Mother ?), so does He differ also in His
spiritual Generation ; or rather He, Whose
Existence is not the same as ours, differs from
us also in His Generation.

V. Who then is that Father Who had no be

ginning ? One Whose very Existence had no
beginning ; for one whose existence had a be
ginning must also have begun to be a Father.
He did not then become a Father after He
began to be, for His being had no beginning.
And He is Father in the absolute sense, for
He is not also Son ; just as the Son is Son in
the absolute sense, because He is not also
Father.
These names do not belong to us in
the absolute sense, because we are both, and
not one more than the other ; and we are of
both, and not of one only ; and so we are
divided, and by degrees become men, and per
haps not even men, and such as we did not
desire, leaving and being left, so that only the
relations
underlying
without
facts."

remain,

the

But, the objector says, the very form of the
expression " He begat " and " He was begot
ten," brings in the idea of a beginning of gen
eration.
But what if you do not use this ex
pression, but say, " He had been begotten
from the beginning" so as readily to evade
your far-fetched and time-loving objections ?
Will you bring Scripture against us, as if we
were forging something contrary to Scripture
and to the truth ? Why, every one knows that
in practice we very often find tenses inter
changed when time is spoken of ; and especially
is this the custom of Holy Scripture, not only
in respect of the past tense, and of the present ;
but even of the future, as for instance " Why
did the heathen rage? "P when they had not
yet raged; and " they shall cross over the
river on foot," i where the meaning is they did
cross over.
It would be a long task to reckon
up all the expressions of this kind which stu
dents have noticed.

VI. So much for this point.

What is their
next objection, how full of contentiousness and
He, they say, either voluntarily
impudence ?
begat the Son, or else involuntarily.
Next,
as they think, they bind us on both sides with
cords ;
these however are not strong, but
For, they say, if it was involun
very weak.
tarily He was under the sway of some one, and
who exercised this sway ? And how is He, over
whom it is exercised, God ? But if voluntarily,
the Son is a Son of Will ; how then is He of
the Father?-and they thus invent a new sort
of Mother for him,-the Will,-in place of the
Father.
There is one good point which they
may allege about this argument of theirs ;
namely, that they desert Passion, and take re
fuge in Will.

For Will is not Passion.

a Ellas explains this to refer to the fact that children leave and
are left by parents ; or else to the death of either one or the other.

0 Ps. ii. i.

y Ps. lavi. 6.

Secondly, let us look at the strength of their
And it were best to wrestle with
argument.
them at first at close quarters.
You yourself,
who so recklessly assert whatever takes your
fancy ; were you begotten voluntarily or in
voluntarily by your father ?
If involuntarily,
then he was under some tyrant's sway (O ter
rible violence ! ) and who was the tyrant ? You
will hardly say it was nature,-for nature is
tolerant of chastity.
If it was voluntarily,
then by a few syllables your father is done
away with, for you are shewn to be the son of
Will, and not of your father.
But I pass to
the relation between God and the creature,
and I put your own question to your own wis
Did God create all things voluntarily
dom.
or under compulsion ?
If under compulsion,
here also is the tyranny, and one who played
if voluntarily, the creatures also
the tyrant ;
are deprived of their God, and you before
the rest, who invent such arguments and tricks
of logic.
For a partition is set up between
the Creator and the creatures in the shape of
Will. And yet I think that the Person who
wills is distinct from the Act of willing; He
who begets from the Act of begetting ; the
Speaker from the speech, or else we are all
very stupid.
On the one side we have the
mover, and on the other that which is, so to
speak, the motion.
Thus the thing willed is
not the child of will, for it does not always
result therefrom ; nor is that which is begot
ten the child of generation, nor that which is
heard the child of speech, but of the Person
who willed, or begat, or spoke.
But the
things of God are beyond all
this, for with
Him perhaps the Will to beget is generation,
and there is no intermediate action (if we
may accept this altogether, and not rather con
sider generation superior to will).

VII. Will you then let me play a little upon
this word Father, for your example encourages
me to be so bold ?
The Father is God either
willingly or unwillingly ; and how will you es
cape from your own excessive acuteness ?
If
willingly, when did He begin to will ? It could
not have been before He began to be, for there
Or is one part of
was nothing prior to Him.
If
Him Will and another the object of Will ?
so, He is divisible.
So the question arises, as
the result of your argument, whether He
Himself is not the Child of Will.
And if un
willingly, what compelled Him to exist, and
how is He God if He was compelled-and that
to nothing less than to be God ? How then
was He begotten, says my opponent.
How
was He created, if as you say, He was created ?
Per
For this is a part of the same difficulty.

haps you would say, By Will and Word. You
have not yet solved the whole difficulty ; for
it yet remains for you to shew how Will and
For man
Word gained the power of action.
was not created in this way.

VIII. How then was He begotten?

This
Generation would have been no great thing, if
you could have comprehended it who have no
real knowledge even of your own generation,
or at least who comprehend very little of it,
and of that little you are ashamed to speak ;
and then do you think you know the whole ?
You will have to undergo much labour before
you discover the laws of composition, forma
tion, manifestation, and the bond whereby
soul is united to body, -mind to soul, and
reason to mind ; and movement, increase, as
similation of food, sense, memory, recollec
tion, and all the rest of the parts of which you
are compounded ; and which of them belongs
to the soul and body together, and which to
each independently of the other, and which
is received from each other.
For those parts
whose maturity comes later, yet received their
laws at the time of conception.
Tell me
what these laws are ? And do not even then
venture to speculate on the Generation of
God ; for that would be unsafe.
For even if
you knew all about your own, yet you do not
by any means know about God's.
And if you
do not understand your own, how can you
know about God's ?
For in proportion as
God is harder to trace out than man, so is the
heavenly Generation harder to comprehend
than your own.
But if you assert that because
you cannot comprehend it, therefore He can
not have been begotten, it will be time for
you to strike out many existing things which
you cannot comprehend ; and first of all God
Himself.
For you cannot say what He is, even
if you are very reckless, and excessively proud
of your intelligence.
First, cast away your
notions of flow and divisions and sections, and
your conceptions of immaterial as if it were
material birth, and then you may perhaps
worthily conceive of the Divine Generation.
How was He begotten ?-I repeat the question
The Begetting of God must
in indignation.
It is a great thing for
be honoured by silence.
you to learn that He was begotten.
But the
manner of His generation we will not admit
that even Angels can conceive, much less you.
Shall I tell you how it was?
It was in a man
ner known to the Father Who begat, and to
the Son Who was begotten.
Anything more
than this is hidden by a cloud, and escapes
your dim sight.

IX. Well, but the Father begat a Son who

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

What
either was or was not in existence."
utter nonsense !
This is a question which ap
plies to you or me, who on the one hand were
in existence, as for instance Levi in the loins of
Abraham ; P and on the other hand came into
existence ; and so in some sense we are partly
of what existed, and partly of what was non
existent ; whereas the contrary is the case with
the original matter, which was certainly cre
ated out of what was non-existent, notwith
standing that some pretend that it is unbegotten.
But in this case " to be begotten," even
from the beginning, is concurrent with " to
be." On what then will you base this cap
tious question ?
For what is older than that
which is from the beginning, if we may
place there the previous existence or non-exist
In either case we destroy
ence of the Son?
its claim to be the Beginning. Or perhaps you
will say, if we were to ask you whether the
Father was of existent or non-existent sub
stance, that he is twofold, partly pre-existing,
partly existing ; or that His case is the same
with that of the Son ; that is, that He was cre
ated out of non-existing matter, because of
your ridiculous questions and your houses of
sand, which cannot stand against the merest
ripple.

I do not admit either solution, and I declare
that your question contains an absurdity, and
not a difficulty to answer.
If however you
think, in accordance with your dialectic as
sumptions, that one or other of these alterna
tives must necessarily be true in every case, let
Is time in
me ask you one little question :
time, or is it not in time?
If it is contained
in time, then in what time, and what is it but
that time, and how does it contain it ?
But
if it is not contained in time, what is that sur
passing wisdom which can conceive of a time
which is timeless?
Now, in regard to this
expression, "I am now telling a lie," admit
one of these alternatives, either that it is true,
or that it is a falsehood, without qualification
(for we cannot admit that it is both).
But
this cannot be.
For necessarily he either is
lying, and so is telling the truth, or else he is
telling the truth, and so is lying.
What won
it then that, as in this case contraries
der is
are true, so in that case they should both be
untrue, and so your clever puzzle prove mere
foolishness ?
Solve me one more riddle.
Were you present at your own generation, and
are you now present to yourself, or is neither
the case?
If you were and, are present, who
were you, and with whom are you present ?

a This is the Anan dilemma, " Did the Son exist before he was

begotten?"

ft Heb. vii. 10,

And how did your single self become thus
both subject and object ?
But if neither of the
above is the case, how did you get separated
from yourself, and what is the cause of this
disjoining?
But, you will say, it is stupid to
make a fuss about the question whether or no
a single individual is present to himself; for
the expression is not used of oneself but of
Well, you may be certain that it is
others.
even more stupid
to discuss the question
whether That which was begotten from the be
ginning existed before its generation or not.
For such a question arises only as to matter di
visible by time.

X. But they say, The Unbegotten and the
Begotten are not the same; and if this is so,
neither is the Son the same as the Father.
It
is clear, without saying so, that this line of ar
gument manifestly excludes either the Son or
the Father from the Godhead.
For if to be
Unbegotten is the Essence of God, to be be
if the opposite is
gotten is not that Essence ;
the case, the Unbegotten is excluded.
What
Choose then
argument can contradict this?
whichever blasphemy you prefer, my good in
ventor of a new theology, if indeed you are
anxious at all costs to embrace a blasphemy.
In the next place, in what sense do you assert
that the Unbegotten and the Begotten are not
the same ?
If you mean that the Uncreated
and the created are not the same, I agree with
you ; for certainly the Unoriginate and the
created are not of the same nature.
But if
you say that He That l)egat and That which is
begotten are not the same, the statement is in
For it is in fact a necessary truth
accurate.
that they are the same.
For the nature of the
relation of Father to Child is this, that the off
spring is of tne same nature with the parent.
Or we may argue thus again.
What do you
mean by Unbegotten and Begotten, for if you
mean the simple fact of being unbegotten or
begotten, these are not the same; but if you
mean Those to Whom these terms apply, how
are They not the same ?
For example, Wis
dom and Unwisdom are not the same in them
selves, but yet both are attributes of man, who
is the same ; and they mark not a difference
of essence, but one external to the essence."
Are immortality and innocence and immuta
bility also the essence of God ?
If so God has
many essences and not one ; or Deity is a
compound of these.
For He cannot be all
these without composition, if they lie essences.
XI. They do not however assert this, for
these qualities are common also to other beings.

a cf. Petavius De Trin., V. ii., a.

ON THE SON.

By no means.

What of Adam ?

But suppose that it

But God's Essence is that which belongs to
God alone, and is proper to Him.
But they,
who consider matter and form to be unbegotten, would not allow that to be unbegotten is
the property of God alone (for we must cast
away even further the darkness of the Manichxis the property of
ans.a
Was he not
God alone.
Yes, you
alone the direct creature of God ?
Was he then the only human be
will say.
ing ?
And why, but because
humanity does not consist in direct creation?
For that which is begotten is also human.
Just so neither is He Who is Unbegotten
alone God, though He alone is Father.
But
grant that He Who is Begotten is God ; for
He is of God, as you must allow, even though
Then how do
you cling to your Unbegotten.
Not by
you describe the Essence of God ?
declaring what it is, but by rejecting what it is
For your word signifies that He is not
not.
begotten ;
it does not present to you what is
the real nature or condition of that which has no
generation. What then is the Essence of God ?
It is for your infatuation to define this, since
you are so anxious about His Generation too ;
but to us it will be a very great thing, if ever,
even in the future, we learn this, when this
darkness and dulness is done away for us, as
He has promised Who cannot lie.
This then
may be the thought and hope of those who
are purifying themselves with a view to this.
Thus much we for our part will be bold to say,
that if it is a great thing for the Father to be
Unoriginate, it is no less a thing for the Son
to have been Begotten of such a Father.
For
not only would He share the glory of the Un
originate, since he is of the Unoriginate, but
he has the added glory of His Generation, a
thing so great and august in the eyes of all
those who are not altogether grovelling and
material in mind.

XII. But, they say, if the Son is the Same as
the Father in respect of Essence, then if the
Father is unbegotten, the Son must be so like
wise.
Quite so-if the Essence of God con
sists in being unbegotten ; and so He would
be a strange mixture, begottenly unl>egotten.
If, however, the difference is outside the Es
sence, how can you be so certain in speaking
of this ?
Are you also your father's father,
so as in no respect to fall short of your father,
since you are the same with him in essence?
it not evident that our enquiry into the
Is
Nature of the Essence of God, if we make it,

a The Manicharans, who believed in two eternal principles of
good and evil, light and darkness, held that darkness too was un
begotten (Elias}.

.

God of no one.

will leave Personality absolutely unaffected ?
But that Unbegotten is not a synonym of
God is proved thus.
If it were so, it would
be necessary that since God is a relative term,
Unbegotten should be so likewise ; or that
since Unbegotten is an absolute term, so must
God be.
For words
which are absolutely identical are similarly
But the word Unbegotten is not
applied.
used relatively.
For to what is it relative ?
And of what things is God the God ? Why,
of all things. How then can God and Unbe
gotten be identical terms ? And again, since
Begotten and Unbegotten are contradictories,
like possession and deprivation, it would fol
low that contradictory essences would co-ex
ist, which is impossible.11 Or again, since
possessions are prior to deprivations, and the
latter are destructive of the former, not only
must the Essence of the Son be prior to that
of the Father, but it must be destroyed by
the Father, on your hypothesis.

bring

carnal

forward

XIII. What now remains ol their invincible
Perhaps the last they will take
arguments?
refuge in is this.
If God has never ceased to
beget, the Generation is imperfect ; and when
But if He has ceased, then He
will He cease ?
Thus again these carnal
must have begun.
arguments.
minds
Whether He is eternally begotten or not, I
do not yet say, until I have looked into the
statement, "Before all the hills He begetteth
But I cannot see
Me," P more accurately.
For if, as
the necessity of their conclusion.
they say, everything that is to come to an end
had also a beginning, then surely that which
has no end had no beginning.
What then
will they decide concerning the soul, or the
If it had a beginning, it
Angelic nature?
will also have an end ; and if it has no end,
it is evident that according to them it had no
beginning.
But the truth is that it had a be
ginning, and will never have an end. Their as
sertion, then, that that which will have an end
had also a beginning, is untrue. Our position,
however, is, that as in the case of a horse, or an
ox, or a man, the same definition applies to
all the individuals of the same species, and
whatever shares the definition has also a right
to the Name ; so in the very same way there
is One Essence of God, and One Nature, and
One Name; although in accordance with a
distinction in our thoughts we use distinct
Names ; and that whatever is properly called
by this Name really is God ; and what He is
at
in Nature, That He is

truly called-if

a Because "Hon" implies " begotten." But (ex hyp.) "Unbe

gotten" is synonymous with " God."

/3 rVuv. viii. as.

least we are to hold that Truth is a matter not
of names but of realities.
But our opponents,
as if they were afraid of leaving any stone un
turned to subvert the Truth, acknowledge in
deed that the Son is God when they are com
pelled to do so by arguments a and evidences ;
but they only mean that He is God in an
ambiguous sense, and that He only shares the
Name.

XIV. And when we advance this objection
against them, "What do you mean to say
then ?
That the Son is not. properly God,
just as a picture of an animal is not properly an
animal? And if not properly God, in what
sense is He God at all? "
They reply, Why
should not these terms be ambiguous, and in
both cases be used in a proper sense ? And they
will give us such instances as the land-dog
and the dogfish ; where the word Dog is am
biguous, and yet in both cases is properly
used, for there is such a species among the
ambiguously named, or any other case in
which the same appellative is used for two
things of different nature.
But, my good
this case, when you include two j
friend, in
natures under the same name, you do not as- ;
sert that either is better than the other, or
that the one is prior and the other posterior,
in a greater degree and the
or that one is
other in a lesser that which is predicated of
them both, for there is no connecting link
which forces this necessity upon them.
One
is not a dog more than the other, and one less
so ; either the dogfish more than the land-dog,
or the land-dog than the dogfish. Why should
they be, or on what principle ? But the com
munity of name is here between things of
equal value, though of different nature.
But
in the case of which we are speaking, you
couple the Name of God with adorable Ma
jesty, and make It surpass every essence and
nature (an attribute of God alone), and then
you ascribe this Name to the Father, while
you deprive the Son of it, and make Him sub
ject to the Father, and give Him only a sec
ondary honour and worship ; and even if in
words you bestow on Him one which is
Equal, yet in practice you cut off His Deity,
and pass malignantly from a use of the same
Name implying an exact equality, to one
which connects things which are not equal.
And so the pictured and the living man are
in your mouth an apter illustration of the re
lations of Deity than the dogs which I in
Or else you must concede to both
stanced.

a The Hcncdictines here translate Aoyy by " Scripture.*' on
the ground that Reason is not competent tu assert the Divinity of
the Word.

an equal dignity of nature as well as a common
name-even though you introduced these nat
ures into your argument as different; and
thus you destroy the analogy of your dogs,
which you invented as an instance of inequal
ity.
For what is the force of your instance
of ambiguity, if those whom you distinguish
are not equal in honour ?
For it was not to
prove an equality but an inequality that you
took refuge in your dogs. How could any
body be more clearly convicted of fighting
both against his own arguments, and against
the Deity?

XV. And if, when we admit that in respect
of being the Cause the Father is greater than the
Son, they should assume the premiss that He
is the Cause by Nature, and then deduce the
conclusion that He is greater by Nature also,
it is difficult to say whether they mislead most
themselves or those with whom they are argu
ing.
For it does not absolutely follow that
all that is predicated of a class can also be
predicated of all the individuals composing it ;
for the different particulars may belong to dif
For what hinders me, if
ferent individuals.
I assume the same premiss, namely, that the
Father is greater by Nature, and then add this
other, Yet not by nature in every respect
greater nor yet Father - from concluding,
Therefore the Greater is not in every respect
greater, nor the Father in every respect Father?
Or, if you prefer it, let us put it in this way :
God is an Essence : But an Essence is not in
every case God ; and draw the conclusion for
yourself - Therefore God is not in every case
God.
I think the fallacy here is the arguing
from a conditioned to an unconditioned use
of a term,0 to use the technical expression of
the logicians. * For while we assign this word
Greater to His Nature vieweil as a Cause, they
infer it of His Nature viewed in itself.
It is
just as if when we said that such a one was a
dead man they were to infer simply that he
was a Man.

XVI. How shall we pass over the following
point, which is no less amazing than the rest?
Father, they say, is a name either of an essence
or of an Action, thinking to bind us down on
If we say that it is a name of
both sides.
an essence, they will say that we agree with
them that the Son is of another Essence,
since there is but one Essence of God, and
this, according to them, is preoccupied by
the Father.
On the other hand, if we say
that it is the name of an Action, we shall be
a Or as the schoolmen say the fallacy is, A dicto secundum quid
ad dictum simpliriter, one of the many forms of Undistributed
v., is), pro
Petavius, however (De Trin., II.,
Middle Term.
nounces the argument of this section unsatisfactory.

ON THE SON.

it had been necessary j

supposed to acknowledge plainly that the Son
is created and not begotten.
For where there
is an Agent there must also be an Effect. And
they will say they wonder how that which is
made can be identical with That which made
it.
I should myself have been frightened with
your distinction, if
to accept one or other of the alternatives,
and not rather put both aside, and state a
third and truer one, namely, that Fajther is
not a name either of an essence or of an action,
most clever sirs.
But it is the name of the
Relation in which the Father stands to the
For as with
Son, and the Son to the Father.
us these names make known a genuine and
intimate relation, so, in the case before us too,
they denote an identity of nature between
Him That is begotten and Him That begets.
But let us concede to you that Father is a
name of essence, it will still bring in the idea
of Son, and will not make it of a different
nature, according to common ideas and the
force of these names.
Let it be, if it so please
you, the name of an action ; you will not de
feat us in this way either.
The Homoousion
would be indeed the result of this action, or
otherwise the conception of an action in this
matter would be absurd.
You see then how,
even though you try to fight unfairly, we
avoid your sophistries.
But now, since we
have ascertained how invincible you are in
your arguments and sophistries, let us look at
your strength in the Oracles of God, if per
chance you may choose to persuade us out of
them.

these?

XVII. For we have learnt to believe in and
to teach the Deity of the Son from their great
And what utterances
and lofty utterances.
These: God-The Word -He
are
That Was In The Beginning and With The
Beginning, and The Beginning.
"In the
Beginning was The Word, and the Word was
with God, and the Word was God," 0 and
"With Thee is the Beginning," 0 and " He
who calleth her The Beginning from genera
tions." y
Then the Son is Only-begotten:
The only "begotten Son which is in the
bosom of the Father, it says, He hath de
clared Him. ' ' 8 The Way, the Truth, the Life,
"I am the Way, the Truth, and
the Light.
the Life;"
and "I am the Light of the
World." *
Wisdom and Power, " Christ, the
Wisdom of God, and the Power of God." i
The Effulgence, the Impress, the Image, the
Seal; "Who being the Effulgence of His

• John i. I.

0Ps. ex. 3.

c John vii. 12 ; ix. 5 ; xiv. 6.

ylsa. xli. 4.

4 John i. 18.

{ 1 Cor. i. 34.

glory and the Impress of His Essence," " and
" the Image of His Goodness," 0 and " Him
Lord, King,
hath God the Father sealed." *
"The Lord
He That Is, The Almighty.
rained down fire from the Lord ; " 4 and " A
sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of Thy
Kingdom ;" * and " Which is and was and is
to come, the Almighty " ( - all which are
clearly spoken of the Son, with all the other
passages of the same force, none of which is
an afterthought, or added later to the Son or
the Spirit, any more than to the Father Him
For Their Perfection is not affected by
self.
There never was a time when He
additions.
was without the Word, or when He was not
the Father, or when He was not true, or not
wise, or not powerful, or devoid of Jife, or of
splendour, or of goodness.

But in opposition to all

these, do you
reckon up for me the expressions which make
for your ignorant arrogance, such as " My
God and your God," ' or greater, or created,
or made, or sanctified ; 9 Acid, if you like, Ser
vant" and Obedient* and Gave'* and Learnt, »
and was commanded. f was sent," can do noth
ing of Himself, either say, or judge, or give,
or will." And further these,-His ignorance,''
subjection," prayer,T asking," increase,* being,
made perfect.* And if you like even more
humble than these ; such as sj.eak of His sleep
ing,* hungering," being in an agony,** and
fearing ; W or perhaps you would make even
His Cross and Death a matter of reproach to
Him. His Resurrection and Ascension I fancy
you will leave to me, for in these is found some
thing to support our position. A good many
other things too you might pick up, if you
desire to put together that equivocal and in
truded god of yours. Who to us is True God,
and equal to the Father.
For every one of
these points, taken separately, may very easily,
if we go through them one by one, be ex
plained to you in the most reverent sense, and
the stumbling-block of the letter be cleansed
away-that is, if your stumbling at it be honest,
To give you the
and not wilfully malicious.
explanation in one sentence.
What is lofty
you are to apply to the Godhead, and to that
Nature in Him which is superior to sufferings
and incorporeal ; but all that is lowly to the
composite condition ft of Him who for your

a Heb. i. 3 R. V.
6 Gen. xix. 24.
t) John xx. 17, 28.
xPhil. ii. 7.
pHeb. v. 8.
it lb. v. 19, 30.
rLukcvi. 12.
X Heb. v. 9, etc.
33 Heb. t. 7.
» Matt. iv. 2 : I.uke iv. 2.
yy S. Gregory often speaks of Human Nature as our com/osite

3 Wisd. vii. 26.
yjohnvi 27.
« Ps. xlv. 6
f Rev. i. 8.
$ Prov. viii. 22 ; John x. 36 : Acts ii. 36.
/»johni. n.
A Phil. ii. 8.
0 lb. iv. 34 ; v. 33, sq.
f John x. 18 ; xiv. 31.
p Mark xiii. 32.
a 1 Cor. xv. 28.
^ Luke ii. 52.
v John xiv. i*.
</f Matt. viii. 24 ; Mark iv. 38.
oa Luke xxii. 44.

3o8

sakes made Himself of no reputation and was
Incarnate-yes, for it is no worse thing to say,
was made Man, and afterwards was also exalted.
The result will be that you will abandon these
carnal and grovelling doctrines, and learn to be
more sublime, and to ascend with His God
head, and you will not remain permanently
among the things of sight, but will rise up
with Him into the world of thought, and
come to know which passages refer to His
Nature, and which to His assumption of Hu
man Nature."

.

XIX. For He Whom you now treat with
lie Who is
contempt was once above you.
now Man was once the Uncompounded. What
He was He continued to be ; what He was
not He took to Himself. P
In the beginning
He was, uncaused ;
for what is the Cause of
God ? But afterwards for a cause He was born.
And that cause was that you might be saved,
who insult Him and despise His Godhead,
because of this, that He took upon Him your
denser nature, having converse with Flesh by
means of Mind. » While His inferior Nature,
the Humanity, became God, because it was
united to God, and became One Person 8 be
cause the Higher Nature prevailed
.in order that I too might be made God so far
He was born-but He
as He is made Man.'
trifrg; and here he means the Sacred Humanity exclusively :
there is no shadow of suspicion of Nestorianism or Eutychianism
attaching to his name.
a The word otftovo^ia is used in four principal senses : (a) The
ministry of the Gospel, cf. Ephes. iii. 2.
Col. i. 25. etc., and S.
Cyril Micros., has the expression '* Economy of the Mystery"
It is also used absolutely by S. Chrysostom and
(Cat., xxv.l.
(b) The Providence of God, as by Epiphanius, Greg.
others,
(r) The Incarnation, as in the text, without
Nyss., and others,
anv epithet-in which use it is opposed to ii fleornc.
Sometimes
I he whole Mystery of Redemp
however epithets are added.
tion, including the Passion.
" Remaining
what He was, and putting on what He was not. 1 1c united the true
form of a servant to that form in which He was euual to God the
Father, and combined both natures in a union so close tliat the
lower ,vas not consumed by receiving glory, nor the higher lessened
by assuming lowliness.
R. T. Aq., Summa,
Forbes, On Nicene
Crce<l, p. 188.
The passage is one of
great difficulty.
FJias Cretensis renders the words as follows;-
" liccominn Man, the inferior God, because humanity was" etc. :
but his rendering is rejected as impossible by Pctavius (de Incarn.,
(1.) Itis grammatically possilile (Madvig, (Ik. Syn
IV.. ix., 2. 3).
tax, 9 a. rem. 3 ) for 6 koto*, standing as it does, to qualify a^Spwrroy.
(ii ) Hut the Kal ytvotxtvo?
feoc may be taken as a noin.
.
.
absolute, which would have been expressed by a gen. if aeOponros
had not been the same Person as o/iiAijcas.
c As by the Incarnation He who was God was made perfect
Man, so Man was made perfect God, and each nature retained its
own qualities. Or it may mean that God Incarnate was made
M;in 111 respect of body, soul, and mind ; that is, in all poinis: and
the Humanity which He assumed was in all these points Deified ;
and therefore they who are His kindred and imitators share to that
extent the Deification (Klias).
In the First Fpistle to Cledonius
(v. infra) the Priest, against Apollinarius. which is sometimes
reckoned as the 51st Oration, S. Gregory says. "The Godhead
and the Manhood are two natures just as soul and body are.
But there are not two Sons or two Gods ; although Paid did thus
entitle the outward man and the inward.' And, to speak succinctly,
the Natures which make our Saviour are distinct, lor the Invisible
is not the same as the visible, nor the Timeless as lhat which it
subject to time ; but He is not two Persons, God forbid, for both
these arc one in the union. God being made Man, and Man b-ing
made God, or however else you may express it." And upon this

T" Mcdiante anuria." cf. Orat. xxxviii., 13.
., vi. Jlingmann. de Vcrbo Incarn., c. 68,
Pctav. de Incarn., IV., xiii., 2.
6 yevonevos ai-Opoiiros 6 Kariu 8e6$.

^ cf. S. Leo, Serin, xxi.. De Nativ. Dei, c. ii.

(<i)

.

had been begotten : He was born of a woman
-but she was a Virgin.
The first is human
the second Divine.
In His Human nature
He had no Father, but also in His Divine Nat
Both these P belong to
ure no Mother. a
Godhead. He dwelt in the womb-but He
was recognized by the Prophet,> himself still
in the womb, leaping before the Word, for
Whose sake He came into being. He was
wrapped in swaddling clothes* -but He took
off the swathing bands of the grave by His
rising again. He was laid in a manger-but
He was glorified by Angels, and proclaimed
by a star, and worshipped by the Magi. Why
are you offended by that which is presented
to your sight, because you will not look at
that which is presented to your mind? He
was driven into exile into Egypt-but He
drove away the Egyptian idols.* He had no
form nor comeliness in the eyes of the Jews £-
but to David He is, fairer than the children of
men.1* And on the Mountain He was bright
as the lightning, and became more luminous
than the sun,6 initiating us into the mystery
of the future.

XX. He was baptized as Man-but He re
mitted sins as God1 -not because He needed
purificatory rites Himself, but that He might
sanctify the element of water. He was tempted
as Man, but He conquered as God ; yea, He
bids us be of good cheer, for He has overcome
the world.* He hungered-but He fed thou
sands ; A yea; He is the Bread that giveth life,
and That is of heaven. He thirsted-but He
cried, If any man thirst, let him come unto
Yea, He promised that founMe and drink.'1

I laws of testation), he is in like manner atheistic.

S. Thomas Aquinas remarks that it is true, if by Man you under
stand simply Human Nature, and not a Human Person ; in this
sense it was brought to pass that Man was God ; or in other
words Human Nature was made that of the Son ofGod. (Summa,
III., xvi., 7-)
a '* If any does not admit Mary to be the Mother of God
(QeoTOKOv) . he is separated from God.
If any say that He passed
through the Virgin as through a conduit, and that He was not
firmed in her both divinely and humanly (divinely, because with
out a human father ; humanly, because in accordance with the
If any assert
that the Humanity was thus formed, and the Deity subsequently
added, he is condemned ; for this is not a generation of God, but
an evasion of generation " (S. G. N. ad Cled., Kp. i.)
S. Thomas
Aquinas explains the fitness of the title thus: The Hles-ed Virgin
■ could be denied to be the Mother of G"d only if either His Hu1 nuni'y had been conceived and lorn bcfoie That Man was the
Son of God ;-which was the position taken up by Photinus : or
else if the Humanity Mad not been assumed into the unity of the
J Person (or Hypostasis) of the Son of God :-which was the posiTherefore
tinn of Nestorius.
;
to deny that (he Hlessed Virgin is th<j Mother of God is heretical
( Summa, III., xxxv.. 4 >. In the text S. Gregory merely means that
the Godncad of our I^ord was not derived fmm His Messed
Mother, just as his Manhood was not derived from any man : but,
as the extract at the beginning of this Note shews, he would be
I the last 10 take up the Ncstorian notion, which was afterwards
condemned at the Council of Kphesus.
0 Both These, i c„ the being without Father, and without Mother
is a condition which belongs only to the Godhead.
y S. John the Hapust I.S. I.uke i).
e Referring, perhaps, to the tradition that at the coming of
Christ into Egypt all the Idols in the land fell down and were
ft lb. vii. 37.

1} Ps. xlv. 2.
x John xvi. 33. A Ib.vi. 10.

Itoth these positions are erroneous.

i Matt. iii. 13 ; ix. 6.

I broken.

0MatL xvii. 2.

6 I .nke ii. 4T.

5 Isa. lui. a.

j

tains should flow from them that believe. He
was wearied, but He is the Rest of them that are
weary and heavy laden."
He was heavy with
sleep, but He walked lightly over thesea.0 He
rebuked the winds, He made Peter light as he
began to sink.? He pays tribute, but it is out
of a fish ; 4 yea, He is the King of those -who
demanded it.'

He is called a Samaritan and a demoniac ; £-
but He saves him that came down from Jeru
salem and fell among thieves ; i the demons
acknowledge Him, and He drives out demons,
and sinks in the sea legions of foul spirits,9
and sees the Prince of the demons falling* like
He is stoned, but is not taken.
lightning.'
He weeps,
He prays, but He hears prayer.
but He causes tears to cease.
He asks where
Lazarus was laid, for He was Man ; but He
raises Lazarus, for He was God." He is sold,
and very cheap, for it is only for thirty pieces
of silver ; A but He redeems the world, and that
at a great price, for the Price was His own
blood." As a sheep He is led to the slaughter,"
but He is the Shepherd of Israel, and now of
the whole world also. As a Lamb He is silent,
yet He is the Word, and is proclaimed by the
Voice of one crying in the wilderness. * He is
bruised and wounded, but He healeth every
disease and every infirmity.0 He is lifted up
and nailed to the Tree, but by the Tree of
Life He restoreth us; yea, He saveth even
the Robber crucified with Him ; * yea, He
wrapped the visible world in darkness.
He is
given vinegar to drink mingled with gall.
Who? He who turned the water into wine,0
who is the destroyer of the bitter taste, who
is Sweetness and altogether desire.0' He lays
down His life, but He has power to take
it again ; T and the veil is rent, for the mysteri
ous doors of Heaven are opened ; the rocks are
cleft, the dead arise." He dies, but He gives
life, and by His death destroys death.
He is
buried, but He rises again ; He goes down
into Hell, but He brings up the souls; He
ascends to Heaven, and shall come again to
judge the quick and the dead, and to put to
the test such words as yours.
If the one give
you a starting point for your error, let the
others put an end to it.

XXI. This, then, is our reply to those who
would puzzle us ; not given willingly indeed (for
light talk and contradictions of words are not
agreeable to the faithful, and one Adversary is

a Malt. xf. 38.
5 lb. xvii. 24.
ij Luke x. 30, etc.
* John xi. 43.
v isa. liii. 7.
it Luke xxiii.
t John x. 18.

43.

8 lb. viii. 94.
€ John xix. 19.
9 Luke viii. 28-33.
A Matt. xxvi. 15.
f John i. 23.
p John ii. 1-11.
v Matt, xxvii. 51.

y lb. xiv. 25, 30.
5 lb. viii. 4*.
I lb x. 18.
p 1 Pet. i. 19.
o Isa. liii. 23.
a Cant. v. 16.

enough for us), but of necessity, for the sake
of our assailants (for medicines exist because
of diseases), that they may be led to see that
they are not all-wise nor invincible in those
superfluous arguments which make void the
Gospel.
For when we leave off believing,
and protect ourselves by mere strength of
argument, and destroy the claim which the
Spirit has upon our faith by questionings, and
then our argument is not strong enough for
the importance of the subject (and this must
necessarily be the case, since it is put in
motion by an organ of so little power as is our
mind), what is the result? The weakness of
the argument appears to belong to the mystery,
and thus elegance of language makes void the
For faith is that
Cross, as Paul also thought.0
which completes our argument.
But may He
who proclaimeth unions and looseth those that
are bound, and who putteth into our minds to
solve the knots of their unnatural dogmas, if
it may be, change these men and make them
faithful instead of rhetoricians, Christians in
stead of that which they now are called.
This indeed we entreat and beg for Christ's
sake.
Be ye reconciled to God,0 and quench
not the Spirit ; » or rather, may Christ be rec
onciled to you, and may the Spirit enlighten
But if you are too fond
you, though so late.
of your quarrel, we at any rate will hold
fast to the Trinity, and by the Trinity may
we be saved, remaining pure and without
offence, until the more perfect shewing forth
of that which we desire, in Him, Christ our
Lord, to Whom be the glory for ever.

Amen.

THE FOURTH THEOLOGICAL ORA
TION, WHICH IS THE SECOND
CONCERNING THE SON.

I. Since I have by the power of the Spirit
sufficiently overthrown the subtleties and intri
cacies of the arguments, and already solved in
the mass the objections and opi>ositions drawn
from Holy Scripture, with which these sacri
legious robbers of the Bible and thieves of the
sense of its contents draw over the multitude
to their side, and confuse the way of truth ;
and that not without clearness, as I believe all
candid persons will say; attributing to the
Deity the higher and diviner expressions, and
the lower and more human to Him Who for
us men was the Second Adam, and was God
made capable of suffering to strive against sin ;

a z Cor. i. 17.

£ 2 Cor. v. 20.

y 1 Thess. v. 19.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

yet we have not yet gone through the passages
in detail, because of the haste of our argu
ment.
But since you demand of us a brief
explanation of each of them, that you may not
be carried away by the plausibilities of their
arguments, we will therefore state the explana
tions summarily, dividing them into numl>ers
for the sake of carrying them more easily in
mind.

things were made?

II. In their eyes the following is only too
ready to hand " The Lord created me at the
beginning of His ways with a view to His
works." a How shall we meet this?
Shall
we bring an accusation against Solomon, or
reject his former words because of his fall in
after-life?
Shall we say that the words are
those of Wisdom herself, as it were of Knowl
edge and the Creator-word, in accordance
For
with which all
Scripture often personifies many even lifeless
objects ; as for instance, " The Sea said " P so
and so ; and, " The Depth saith, It is not in
me ;" f and " The Heavens declare the glory
of God ;" * and again a command is given to
the Sword ; * and the Mountains and Hills are
asked the reason of their skipping. f We do
not allege any of these, though some of our
predecessors used them as powerful arguments.
But let us grant that the expression is used of
Let
our Saviour Himself, the true Wisdom.
us consider one small point together.
What
among all things that exist is unoriginate?
The Godhead.
For no one can tell the origin
of God, that otherwise would lie older than
But what is the cause of the Manhood,
God.
which for our sake God assumed ?
It was
surely our Salvation.
What else could it be?
Since then we find here clearly both the
Created and the Begetteth Me, the argument
is simple.
Whatever we find joined with a
cause we are to refer to the Manhood, but all
that is alsolute and unoriginate we are to
reckon to the account of His Godhead.
Well,
then, is not this " Created " said in connection
with a cause? He created Me, it so says,

It

a Prov. viii. 22. The A. V. has in this place Possessed, and this
has very high authority : but the Hebrew word in almost every case
is used, says lip. Wordsworth (ail h. I.).
signifies to Acquire.
a!x>ut eighty times in the O. T., and in only five places is it ren
dered in our Translation by Possess : -in two of which (Gen. xiv.
io. 22, and Ps. exxxix. 13) it might well have the sense of Creatine,
and in two (Jcr. xxxii. 15. and Zech. xi. 5) of Getting.
In some an
S. Je
cient Versions (I.XX. and Syr.) it is rcntlcrcd by Create.
rome in bis Kp. ad Cypr. (ii. 697) says that the word may here be
understood of possession, but in his Comm. on Kphes. ii.
( p. 342)
he adopts the rendering Create, which he applies to the Incarna
Hut Wordsworth
tion, as in several places does S. Athanasius.
thinks it better to apply the words to the Ktcrnal Generation, as
S. Hilary expounds it (c. Arianos, who argued from it that Christ
was a creature): "quia Films Dei nnn corporalis parturittonis est
genitus cxemplo, scd ex perfecto Deo pcrfectus Dcus natus ; et
ideo ail creatam f-c esse Sapientia ; ornnem in generatione sua
notionern passionts corporalis exctudens."
£ Ps. cxiv. 6.

y Job xxviii. 14.

c Zech. xiii. 7.

£ Is. xxiii. 4.

d Ps. xix. 1.

i

as the beginning of His ways, with a view
' to his works.
Now, the Works of His Hands
are verity and judgment;" for whose sake
for this
He was anointed with Godhead ; P
anointing is of the Manhood; but the " He
begetteth Me " is not connected with a cause ;
or it is for you to shew the adjunct.
What
argument then will disprove that Wisdom is
called a creature, in connection with the lower
generation, but Begotten in respect of the first
I and more incomprehensible?

III. Next is the fact of His being called
Servant t and serving many well, and that it is
a great thing for Him to be called the Child of
God.
For in truth He was in servitude to flesh
and to birth and to the conditions of our life
with a view to our liberation, and to that of all
i those whom He has saved, who were in bond
What greater destiny can be
age under sin.
fall man's humility than that he should be inter
mingled with God, and by this intermingling
should be deified,4 and that we should be so
visited by the Dayspring from on high,* that
even that Holy Thing that should be born
should be called the Son of the Highest,f and
that there should be bestowed upon Him a
Name which is above every name? And what
else can this be than God ?-and that every
knee should bow to Him That was made of no
reputation for us, and That mingled the Form
of God with the form of a servant, and that
all the House of Israel should know that God
hath made Him both Lord and Christ ? '
For
all this was done by the action of the Begot
ten, and by the good pleasure of Him That
begat Him.

.

IV. Well, what is the second of their great
irresistible passages ?• " He must reign," ' till
. and " be received
such and such a time .
by heaven until the time of restitution," 1 and
" have the scat at the Right Hand until the
overthrow of His enemies." *
But after this?
Must He cease to be King, or be removed
Why, who shall make Him
from Heaven?
cease, or for what cause ? What a liold and
very anarchical interpreter you are ; and yet
you have heard that Of His Kingdom there
shall be no eti(/.K Your mistake arises from not
understanding that Until is not always exclu
sive of that which comes after, but asserts up
to that time, without denying what comes

3 Ps. xlv. 7.

a Ps. cxi. 7.
y Isa. xlix. 6 : liii. ii. The I.XX. here mistranslates: the Hebrew
and the I.atin have the same word in ail the passages quoted bejow,
while the I.XX. varies, as follows : Isa. xlii. i. rate,
to- walUt,
xlix. 3. iovA«.
21. rate,
xliv. a. wait.
fiotiAM.
liii. 11. oovAevoira.
7. oovAof. hi. 13. TraiT.
5. AotiAov. 6. ircu£a.
• Luke i. 78.
1 Acts iii. 21.

5 See Prolegomena, sec. ii. and 2 Pet. i. 41 «
17 Acts ii. 36.
e Phil. ii. 9

xlviii. 29. fioCAof.

0 1 Cor. xv. $5.

k Ps. ex. i.

A l.uke i. 33. Cf. Nic Creed.

THE FOURTH THEOLOGICAL ORATION.

after it.
To take a single instance-how else
would you understand, " Lo, I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world?""
Does it mean that He will no longer be so
afterwards. And for what reason ?
But this is
not the only cause of your error ; you also fail
to distinguish between the things that are signi
fied.
He is said to reign in one sense as the
Almighty King, both of the willing and the
unwilling ; but in another as producing in us
submission, and placing us under His Kingship
as willingly acknowledging His Sovereignty.
Of His Kingdom, considered in the former
But in the second
sense, there shall be no end.
sense, what end will there be?
His taking us
as His servants, on our entrance into a state
of salvation.
For what need is there- to Work
Submission in us when we have already sub
After which He arises to judge the
mitted ?
earth, and to separate the saved from the lost.
After that He is to stand as God in the midst
of gods,0 that is, of the saved, distinguishing
and deciding of what honour and of what
mansion each is worthy.

V. Take, in the next place, the subjection by
which you subject the Son to the Father. What,
you say, is He not now subject, or must He, if
He is God, be subject to God ? v You are fash
ioning your argument as if it concerned some
robber, or some hostile deity.
But look at it
in this manner : that as for my sake He was
called a curse,* Who destroyed my curse ; and
sin,« who taketh away the sin of the world ;
and became a new Adam f to take the place of
the old, just so He makes my disobedience
His own as Head of the whole body. As long
then as I am disobedient and rebellious, both
by denial of God and by my passions, so long
Christ also is called disobedient on my ac
count.
But when all things shall be subdued
unto Him oh the one hand by acknowledg
ment of Him, and on the other by a reforma
tion, then He Himself also will have fulfilled
His submission, bringing me whom He has
saved to God.
For this, according to my
view, is the subjection of Christ ; namely, the
fulfilling of the Father's Will.
But as the
Son subjects all to the Father, so does the
Father to the Son ; the One by His Work,
the Other by His good pleasure, as we have
already said.
And thus He Who subjects
presents to God that which he has subjected,
Of the same
making our condition His own.

kind, it appears to me, is the expression, " My
God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?" a
It was not He who was forsaken either by the
Father, or by His own Godhead, as some have
thought, as if It were afraid of the Passion,
and therefore withdrew Itself from Him in
His Sufferings (for who compelled Him either
to be born on earth at all, or to be lifted up
But as I said, He was in His
on the Cross ?)
own Person representing us.
For we were
the forsaken and despised before, but now by
the Sufferings of Him Who could not suffer,
we were taken up and saved.
Similarly, He
makes His own our folly and our transgres
sions ; and says what follows in the Psalm,
for it is very evident that the Twenty-first '
Psalm refers to Christ.

VI. The same consideration applies to an
other passage, " He learnt obedience by the
things which He suffered," » and to His
" strong crying and tears," and His " Entrea
ties," and His " being heard," and His " Re
verence," all of which He wonderfully wrought
out, like a drama whose plot was devised on
our behalf.
For in His character of the Word
He was neither obedient nor disobedient. For
such expressions belong to servants, and in
feriors, and the one applies to the better sort
of them, while the other belongs to those who
deserve punishment.
But, in the character of
the Form of a Servant, He condescends to
His fellow servants, nay, to His servants, and
takes upon Him a strange form, bearing all
me and mine in Himself, that in Himself He
may exhaust the bad, as fire does wax, or as
the sun does the mists of earth ; and that I
may partake of His nature by the blending.
Thus He honours obedience by His action,
and proves it experimentally by His Passion.
For to possess the disposition is not enough,
just as it would not be enough for us, unless
we also proved it by our acts ; for action is
the proof of disposition.

And perhaps it would not be wrong to
assume this also, that by the art8 of His love
for man He gauges our obedience, and measures
all by comparison with His own Sufferings, so
that He may know our condition by His own,
and how much is demanded of us, and how
much we yield, taking into the account, along
with our environment, our weakness also. For
if the Light shining through the veil • upon
the darkness, that is upon this life, was perse
cuted by the other darkness (I mean, the Evil

a Matt, xxviii. 20.
y S. Gregory would here shew that the subjection of Christ of
which S. Paul speaks in the passage quoted, is that of (lie Head
of the Church, representing the members of His body. Cf. S. Am
brose, de Kide V. vi., quoted by Petavius, dc Trin. III. v. 3.
• 1 Cor. xv. 45.
fa Cor. v. 31.

0 Ps. lxxxii. I.

S Gal. iii. 13.

0 I.e. Ps. xxii. A. V.

11 Ps. xxii. 1.
fi I-euvenclavius translates "The art of this lovingkindness
gautres,'' etc.
c The Henedicitnes render. " In darkness that is, in this life,
because of the veil of the body.*'

y Heb. v. 8, etc.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

.

One and the Tempter), how much more will the
darkness be persecuted, as being weaker than it ?
And what marvel is it, that though He entirely
escaped, we have been, at any rate in part,
For it is a more wonderful thing
overtaken ?
that He should have been chased than that we
should have been captured ;-at least to the
minds of all who reason aright on the subject.
I will add yet another passage to those I have
mentioned, because I think that it
clearly
tends to the same sense.
I mean "In that
He hath suffered being tempted, He is able
to succour them that are tempted.""
But
God will be all in all in the time of restitution ;
not in the sense that the Father alone will Be ;
and the Son be wholly resolved into Him, like
a torch into a great pyre, from which it was
reft away for a little space, and then put back
(for I would not have even the Sabellians in
jured P by such an expression) ; but the entire
Godhead .
. when we shall be no longer
divided (as we now are by movements and
passions), and containing nothing at
all of
God, or very little, but shall be entirely like.
VII. As your third point you count the Word
Greater ; » and as your fourth, To My God and
And indeed, if He had been
your God.4
called greater, and the word equal had not
occurred, this might perhaps have been a
point in their favour.
But if we find both
words clearly used what will these gentlemen
have to say? How will it strengthen their
argument ? How will
reconcile the
For that the same thing
irreconcilable?
should be at once greater than and equal
to the same thing is an impossibility; and
the evident solution is that the Greater refers
to origination, while the Equal belongs to the
Nature ; and this we acknowledge with much
good will.
But perhaps some one else will
back up our attack on your argument, and
assert, that That which is from such a Cause is
not inferior to that which has no Cause ; for it
would share the glory of the Unoriginate,
because it
And
there is, besides, the Generation, which is to
all men a matter so marvellous and of such
Majesty.
For to say that he is greater than
the Son considered as man, is true indeed, but
is no great thing.
it if
God is greater than man ?
Surely that is
enough to say in answer to their talk about
Greater.

is from the Unoriginate.

For what marvel is

they

VIII. As to the other passages, My God
would lie used in respect, not of the Word, but

a Heb. ii. 18.
£ The Benedictines take irapa p9tipt{rQ*Mrav in an active sense :
y John xrv. 28

" I would not let even the Sabellians wrest such an expression.

6 lb., xx. 17.

For how could there be
of the Visible Word.
a God of Him Who is properly God ?
In the
same way He is Father, not of the Visible,
but of the Word ; for our Lord was of two
Natures ; so that one expression is used pro
perly, the other improperly in each of the
two cases ; but exactly the opposite way to
their use in respect of us.
For with respect
to us God is properly our God, but not pro
perly our Father.
And this is the cause of
the error of the Heretics, namely the joining
of these two Names, which are interchanged
because of the Union of the Natures. And an
indication of this is found in the fact that
wherever the Natures are distinguished in our
thoughts from one another, the Names are also
distinguished ; as you hear in Paul's words,
" The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of Glory." a The God of Christ, but the Father
of glory.
For although these two terms express
but one Person, yet this is not by a Unity of
Nature, but by a Union of the two.
What
could be clearer ?

IX. Fifthly, let it be alleged that it is said of
Him that He receives life.P judgment,')' inheri
tance of the Gentiles,* or power over all flesh,*
or glory, f or disciples, or whatever else is men
tioned.
This also belongs to the Manhood ;
and yet if you were to ascribe it to the God
head, it would be no absurdity.
For you
would not so ascribe it as if it were newly ac
quired, but as belonging to Him from the
beginning by reason of nature, and not as an
act of favour.

X. Sixthly, let it be asserted that it is writ
ten, The Son can do nothing of Himself, but
what He seeth the Father do.1"
The solu
tion of this is as follows : -Can and Cannot are
I not words with only one meaning, but have
I many meanings. On the one hand they are
J used sometimes in respect of deficiency of
I strength, sometimes in respect of time, and
sometimes relatively to a certain object; as
for instance, A Child cannot be an Athlete, •
or, A Puppy cannot see, or fight with so and
so.
Perhaps some day the child will be an
athlete, the puppy will see. will fight with that
other, though it may still be unable to fight
Or again, they may be used
For instance,
of that which is Generally true.
-A city that is
set on a hill cannot be
hid;9 while yet it might possibly be hidden
by another higher hill being in a line with it.
Or in another sense they are used of a thing
which is not reasonable ; as, Can the Childwhile the

of the Bridechamber fast

I with Any other.

J ren

o Kphes. i. 17.
c John xvii. 2.

0 John viit. 54.
£ 2 Pet. i. 17, etc.

y John v. 22.
1} John v. 19.

8 Ps. ii. 8.
$ Matt v. I4>

THE FOURTH THEOLOGICAL ORATION.

3'3

receive them.

Bridegroom is with them ; c whether He be
considered as visible in bodily form (for the
time of His sojourning among us was not one
of mourning, but of gladness), or, as the
For why should they keep a bodily
Word.
fast who are cleansed by the Word?3
Or,
again, they are used of that which is contrary
to the will ; as in, He could do no mighty
works there because of their unbelief,')'-i.e.
of those who should
For
since in order to healing there is need of both
faith in the patient and power in the Healer,4
when one of the two failed the other was im
But probably this sense also is to
possible.
be referred to the head of the unreasonable.
For healing is not reasonable in the case of
those who would afterwards be injured by
unbelief.
The sentence The world cannot
hate you,' comes under the same head, as
does also How can ye, being evil, speak
good things ?£
For in what sense is either
impossible, except that it is contrary to the
will?
There is a somewhat similar meaning
in the expressions which imply that a thing
impossible by nature is possible to God if He
so wills ; 1 as that a man cannot be born a sec
ond time,* or that a needle will not let a camel
through it.*
For what could prevent either of
these things happening, if God so willed?

XI. And besides all this, there is the abso
lutely impossible and inadmissible, as that
which we are now examining.
For as we as
sert that it is impossible for God to be evil, or
not to exist-for this would be indicative of
weakness in God rather than of strength-or for
the non-existent to exist, or for two and two
to make both four and ten,A so it is impossi
ble and inconceivable that the Son should do
For all
anything that the Father doeth not.'*
things that the Father hath are the Son's ; 9
and on the other hand, all that belongs to the
Nothing then is peculiar,
Son is the Father's.
because all things are in common.
For Their
Being itself is common and equal, even though
the Son receive it from the Father.
It is in
respect of this that it
is said I live by the
Father ; f not as though His Life and Being
were kept together by the Father, but because
He has His Being from Him beyond all time,
But how does He see
and beyond all cause.
the Father doing, and do likewise?
Is it like
those who copy pictures and letters, because
they cannot attain the truth unless by looking

a Mark ii. 19.
0 John xv. 3.
6 Note with the Benedictines that S. Gregory is here speaking
of onr Lord alone, not of ordinary Physicians : hence he uses the
fjohnvii. 7.
singular.
6 John iii. 4.
fourteen."
) be foui
v lb. xvi. is-

n Matt. xix. 26.
k One MS. reads '
fi John v. 19.

K Matt. xix. 34.
{ lb. vi. 57.

fMatt.xu.34.

y Mark vi. 5.

at the original, and being led by the hand by
it?
But how shall Wisdom stand in need of
a teacher, or be incapable of acting unless
taught? And in what sense does the Father
"Do" in the present or in the past?
Did
He make another world before this one, or is
He going to make a world to come? And did
the Son look at that and make this?
Or will
He look at the other, and make one like it?
According to this argument there must be
Four worlds, two made by the Father, and
two by the Son.
What an absurdity ! He
cleanses lepers, and delivers men from evil
spirits, and diseases, and quickens the dead,
and walks upon the sea, and does all His
other works ; but in what case, or when did
the Father do these acts before Him? Is it
not clear that the Father impressed the ideas
of these same actions, and the Word brings
them to pass, yet not in slavish or unskilful
fashion, but with full knowledge and in a
masterly way, or, to speak more properly, like
the Father?
For in this sense I understand
the words that whatsoever is done by the
Father, these things doeth the Son likewise;
not, that is, because of the likeness of the
things clone, but in respect of the Authority.
This might well also be the meaning of the
passage which says that the Father worketh
hitherto and the Son also ; ■ and not only so but
it refers also to the government and preserva
tion of the things which He has made ; as is
shewn by the passage which says that He
maketh His Angels Spirits,3 and that the
earth is founded upon its steadfastness (though
once for all these things were fixed and made)
and that the thunder is made firm and the
wind created.*
Of all these things the Word
was given once, but the Action is continuous
even now.

XII. Let them quote in the seventh place
that The Son came down from Heaven, not
to do His own Will, but the Will of Him
Well, if this had not been
That sent Him.8
said by Himself Who came down, we should
say that the phrase was modelled as issuing
from the Human Nature, not from Him who
is conceived of in His character as the Saviour,
for His Human Will cannot be opposed to
God, seeing it is altogether taken into God ;
but conceived of simply as in our nature,
inasmuch as the human will does not com
pletely follow the Divine, but for the most part
struggles against and resists it. For we under
stand in the same way the words, Father, if

a John v. 17.
y cf. Amos iv. 13, where A. V. reads, He That formed the
fi John vi. 38.

mountains and created the wind,

0 Ps, civ. 4, 5, I.XX.

it be possible, let this cup pass from Me;
Nevertheless let not what I will but Thy
Will prevail." For it is not likely that He
did not know whether it was possible or not,
or that He would oppose will to will.
But
since, as this is the language of Him Who
assumed our Nature (for He it was Who came
down), and not of the Nature which He
assumed, we must meet the objection in this
way, that the passage does not mean that the
Son has a special will of His own, besides that
of the Father, but that He has not ; so that
the meaning would be, " not to do Mine own
Will, for there is none of Mine apart from,
but that which is common to, Me and Thee ;
for as We have one Godhead, so We have one
Will." P
For many such expressions are used
in relation to this Community, and are ex
pressed not positively but negatively; as, e.g. ,
God giveth not the Spirit by measure, * for
as a matter of fact He does not give the Spirit
to the Son, nor does He measure It, for God
is not measured by God ; or again, Not my
The words are
transgression nor my sin.4
not used because He has these things, but
because He has them not.
And again, Not
for our righteousness which we have done,"
for we have not done any.
And this mean
ing is evident also in the clauses which fol
For what, says He, is the Will of
low.
My Father ?
That everyone that believeth
on the Son should be saved, f and obtain the
final Resurrection. i Now is this the Will of
Or does He
the Father, but not of the Son ?
preach the Gospel, and receive men's faith
against His will? Who could believe that?
Moreover, that passage, too, which says that
the Word which is heard is not the Son's* but
For I cannot
the Father's has the same force.
see how that which is common to two can be
said to belong to one alone, however much I
consider it, and I do not think any one else
can.
If then you hold this opinion con
cerning the Will, you will be right and rev
erent in your opinion, as I think, and as every
right-minded person thinks.

XIII. The eighth passage is, That they may
know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus
Christ Whom Thou hast sent ; « and There is
The
none good save one, that is, God.A
For
solution of this appears to me very easy.

a Matt. xxvi. 39.
0 Observe that S. Ciregory expressly limits this paraphrase to
the Divine Nature of our Lord, and is not in any way denying
to Him a Human Will also;-indeed in the preceding sentence
he distinctly asserts it. The whole passage makes very strongly
against the heresy of ADollinarius, which adopted the Arian tenet
that in our Ixjrd the Divine I-o?os supplied the place of the human
soul.

y John iii. 34.

• Dan. ix. 18.
6 John xiv. 24.

fjohnvi. 40.
* lb. xvii. 3.

8 Ps. lix. 3.
x*V. L Restoration.
A Luke xviii. 19.

if you attribute this only to the Father, where
will you place the Very Truth ? For if you
conceive in this manner of the meaning of
To the only wise God," or Who only hath
Immortality, Dwelling in the light which
no man can approach unto,0 or of to the
king of the Ages, immortal, invisible, and
only wise God,? then the Son has vanished
under sentence of death, or of darkness, or at
any rate condemned to be neither wise nor
king, nor invisible, nor God at all, which sums
up all these points. And how will you prevent
l)elongs to
His Goodness, which especially
I,
God alone, from perishing with the rest?
however, think that the passage That they
may know Thee the only true God, was
said to overthrow those gods which are falsely
so called, for He would not have added and
if The
Jesus Christ Whom Thou hast sent,
Only True God were contrasted with Him,
and the sentence did not proceed upon the
basis of a common Godhead.
The " None is
Good" meets the tempting Lawyer, who was
testifying to His Goodness viewed as Man.
For perfect goodness, He says, is God's alone,
even if a man is called perfectly good.
As
for instance, A good man out of the good
treasure of his heart bringeth forth good
And, I will give the kingdom to
things.8
one who is good above Thee.'*
. Words
of God, speaking to Saul about David. Or
again, Do good, O Lord, unto the gooclf
■
. and all other like expressions concern
ing those of us who are praised, upon whom
it is a kind of effluence from the Supreme
Good, and has come to them in a secondary
It will be best of all if we can per
degree.
suade you of this.
But if not, what will you
say to the suggestion on the other side, that on
your hypothesis the Son has been called the
only God.
In what passage ? Why, in this :
-This is your God ; no other shall be ac
counted of in comparison with Him, and a
this did He shew
on, after
little further
Himself upon earth, and conversed
with
men.i This addition proves clearly that the
words are not used of the Father, but of the
Son ; for it was He Who in bodily form companied with us, and was in this lower world.
Now, if we should determine to take these
words as said in contrast with the Father, and
not with the imaginary gods, we lose the
Father by the very terms which we were press
And what could be more
ing against the Son.
disastrous than such a victory ?

.

.

.

XIV. Ninthly, they allege, seeing He ever

a 1 Tim. i. 17.
c 1 Sam. xv. a8.

0 lb. vi. 16.

f Ps. exxv. 4.

y lb. i. 17.

8 Mat. xii. 35.

^ Baruch iii. 35, 37.

O, how
liveth to make intercession for us."
beautiful and mystical and kind.
For to
intercede does not imply to seek for ven
geance, as is most men's way (for in that there
would be something of humiliation), but it is
to plead for us by reason of His Mediatorship,
just as the Spirit also is said to make interces
sion for us.3
For there is One God, and One
Mediator between God and Man, the Man
Christ Jesus.?
For He still pleads even now
as Man for my salvation ; for He continues
to wear the Body which He assumed, until He
make me God by the power of His Incarna
tion ; although He is no longer known after
the flesh 4-I mean, the passions of the flesh,
the same, except sin, as ours.
Thus too, we
have an Advocate,* Jesus Christ, not indeed
prostrating Himself for us before the Father,
and falling down before Him in slavish fash
. Away with a suspicion so truly
ion
slavish and unworthy of the Spirit !
For
neither is it seemly for the Father to require
this, nor for the Son to submit to it : nor is it
But by what He suf
just to think it of God.
fered as Man, He as the Word and the Coun
sellor persuades Him to be patient.
I think
this is the meaning of His Advocacy.

.

.

XV. Their tenth objection is the ignorance,
and the statement that Of the last day and hour
knoweth no man, not even the Son Himself,
but the Father, f And yet how can Wisdom be
ignorant of anything - that is, Wisdom Who
made the worlds, Who perfects them, Who re
models them, Who is the Limit of all things
that were made, Who knoweth the things of
God as the spirit of a man knows the things
that are in him ? i
For what can be more per
fect than this knowledge ? How then can
you say that all things before that hour He
knows accurately, and all things that are to
happen about the time of the end, but of the
hour itself He is ignorant?
For such a thing
would be like a riddle ; as if one were to say
that he knew accurately all that was in front
of the wall, but did not know the wall itself;
or that, knowing the end of the day, he did
not know the beginning of the night - where
knowledge of the one necessarily brings in the
Thus everyone must see that He
other.
knows as God, and knows not as Man ; - if
one may separate the visible from that which
is discerned by thought alone.
For the ab
solute and unconditioned use of the Name
" The Son " in this passage, without the addi
tion of whose Son, gives us this thought, that

* Heb. vii. 25.

8 2 Cor. v. 16.
i Marie xiii. 32.

0 Rom. viii. 26.

y t Tim. ii. 5.

€ 1 John ii. 1.
if 1 Cor. ii. n.

3i5

we are to understand the ignorance in the most
reverent sense, by attributing it to the Man
hood, and not to the Godhead.

XVI. If then this argument is sufficient, let
us stop here, and not enquire further.
But if
not, our second argument is as follows : -Just as
we do in all other instances, so let us refer His
knowledge of the greatest events, in honour
And 1 think
of the Father, to The Cause.
that anyone, even if he did not read it in the
way that one of our own Students" did,
would soon perceive that not even the Son
knows the day or hour otherwise than as the
For what do we conclude from
Father does.
this? That since the Father knows, therefore
also does the Son, as it
is evident that this
cannot be known or comprehended by any
but the First Nature.
There remains for us to
interpret the passage about His receiving com
mandment,3 and having kept His Command
ments, and done always those things that
please Him ; and further concerning His being
made perfect,* and His exaltation,8 and His
learning obedience by the things which He
suffered ; and also His High Priesthood, and
His Oblation, and His Betrayal, and His
prayer to Him That was able to save Him
from death, and His Agony and Bloody Sweat
and 1'rayer,* and such like things; if it were
not evident to every one that such words are
•concerned, not with That Nature Which is
unchangeable and above all capacity of suffer
ing, but with the passible Humanity.
This,
then, is the argument concerning these objec
tions, so far as to be a sort of foundation and
memorandum for the use of those who are
better able to conduct the enquiry to a more
It may, however, be
| complete working out.
worth while, and will be consistent with what
has been already said, instead of passing over
without remark the actual Titles of the Son
(there are many of them, and they are con
cerned with many of His Attributes), to set
before you the meaning of each of them, and
to point out the mystical meaning of the
names.

XVII. We will begin thus.

The Deity can
not be expressed in words.
And this is proved
to us, not only by argument, but by the wisest
and most ancient of the Hebrews, so far as
they have given us reason for conjecture.
For they appropriated certain characters to
the honour of the Deity, and would not even
allow the name of anything inferior to God to
be written with the same letters as that of

thinks the rirsl argument of c. xvi. forced and unsatisfactory.

a Klias thinks that the great S. Basil is here referred to. Petavius
■ Luke xiL 44.
0 John xii. 49.

y Hcb. v. 7, etc.

i Phil. ii. 9.

3i6

God, because to their minds it was improper
that the Deity should even to that extent ad
mit any of His creatures to a share with Him
self. How then could they have admitted
that the invisible and separate Nature can be
explained by divisible words?
For neither
has any one yet breathed the whole air, nor
has any mind entirely comprehended, or
speech exhaustively contained the Being of
God.
But we sketch Him by His Attributes,
and so obtain a certain faint and feeble and
partial idea concerning Him, and our best
Theologian is he who has, not indeed discov
ered the whole, for our present chain does not
allow of our seeing the whole, but conceived
of Him to a greater extent than another, and
gathered in himself more of the Likeness or
adumbration of the Truth, or whatever we
may call it.

XVIII. As far then as we can reach, He
Who Is, and God, are the special names of His
Essence ; and of these especially He Who Is,
not only because when He spake to Moses in
the mount, and Moses asked what His Name
was, this was what He called Himself, bidding
him say to the people " I Am hath sent me," a
but also because we find that this Name is the
more strictly appropriate.
For the Name 0«os
(God), even if, as those who are skilful in these
matters say, it were derived from 0cW P (to
run) or from Alfep (to blaze), from continual
motion, and because He consumes evil condi
tions of things (from which fact He is also
called A Consuming Fire),'*' would still be one
of the Relative Names, and not an Absolute
one; as again is the case with Lord,4, which
also is called a name of God.
I am the
Lord Thy God, He says, that is My name ; '
But we are en
and, The Lord is His name.f
quiring into a Nature Whose Being is absolute
and not into Being bound up with something
else.
But Being is in its proper sense pecu
liar to God, and belongs to Him entirely, and
is not limited or cut short by any Before or
After, for indeed in him there is no past or
future.

XIX. Of the other titles, some are evidently

a Exod. iii. t4.
3 The derivation of ©eiic from ©ecif (to run)

is given by
Plato (Crat.. 397c). That from Aldetv (to blaze) is found also in
S.John Damascene (He Fide Orth.. I., 12), who however may
have borrowed it from S. Gregory, or from the source whence the
latter took it. S. Athanasius also admits it (I>e Detin., 11). Other
definitions are, according to Suiccr, (1) &fa<r9at (to sec), c. g.
(2) ©ecupftr (to contemplate),
Greg. Nyss. in Cant. Horn., V.
Athan. Ouaest Misc. . On. \ I..©eoc AfyeTai awb to Qtaipch- rd navra,
(t) TifleVal (to
olorct flewpos" Kat faov, r/yovv OeaTrj*
place). Clem., Al. Strom.. 1. s. fin., 0«cc irapd Tj|y 6iaiv eipijrai.

v Dent, iv. 24.
o I^ird (KiJpioc) is simply the LXX. rendering of the word
which in reading Hebrew is substituted for the Ineffable Name.
Thus in the passages quoted, had the original language been
used, the Four-Lettered Name would have appeared.

ittivruv.

c Isa. xlii. 8.

£ Amos. ix. 6.

names of His Authority, others of His Gov
ernment of the world, and of this viewed un
der a twofold aspect, the one before the other
For instance the Al
in the Incarnation.
mighty, the King»of Glory, or of The Ages, or
of The Powers, or of The Beloved, or of
Kings.
Or again the Lord of Sabaoth, that
is of Hosts, or of Powers, or of Lords ; these
are clearly titles belonging to His Author
ity.
But the God either of Salvation or of
Vengeance, or of Peace, or of Righteousness ;
or of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of all the
spiritual Israel that seeth God,-these belong
For since we are gov
to His Government.
erned by these three things, the fear of pun
ishment, the hope of salvation and of glory
besides, and the practice of the virtues by
which these are attained, the Name of the God
of Vengeance governs fear, and that of the
God of Salvation our hope, and that of the
God of Virtues our practice ; that whoever at
tains to any of these may, as carrying God in
himself, press on yet more unto perfection,
and to that affinity which arises out of virtues.
Now these are Names common to the God
head, but the Proper Name of the Unoriginate
is Father, and that of the unoriginately Be
gotten is Son, and that of the unbegottenly
Proceeding or going forth is The Holy Ghost.
Let us proceed then to the Names of the Son ,
which were our starting point in this part of
our argument.

XX. In my opinion He is called Son because
He is identical with the Father in Essence ; and
not only for this reason, but also because He
is Of Him. And He is called Only-Begotten,
not because He is the only Son and of the
Father alone, and only a Son ; but also be
cause the manner of His Sonship is peculiar to
Himself and not shared by bodies.
And He
is called the Word, because He is related to
the Father as Word to Mind ; not only on
account of His passionless Generation, but al
so because of the Union, and of His declara
tory function.
relation
might be compared to that between the Defini
tion and the Thing defined Q since this also is
called Adyos.S For, itsays, he that hath mental
perception of the Son (for this is the meaning
of Hath Seen) hath also perceived the Father ; y
and the Son is a concise demonstration and
easy setting forth of the Father's Nature. For
every thing that is begotten is a silent word
And if any one should
of him that begat it.
say that this Name was given Him because
a Of the oration on Christmas Day, where He is called o tow
0 Ratio (relation ; sometimes reason) Sermo (discourse) and

narpoc opos Kat Adyoc, and see Note there. .
Vcrbutn (Word) are all renderings of A6voc.

Perhaps too

y John xiv. 9.

this

He exists in all things that are, he would not
be wrong.
For what is there that consists
but by the word ? He is also called Wisdom,
as the Knowledge of things divine and human.
For how is it possible that He Who made all
things should be ignorant of the reasons of
what He has made ? And Power, as the Sustainer of all created things, and the Furnisher
to them of power to keep themselves together.
And Truth, as being in nature One and not
many (for truth is one and falsehood is mani
fold), and as the pure Seal of the Father and
His most unerring Impress. And the Image
as of one substance with Him, and because He
is of the Father, and not the Father of Him.
For this is of the Nature of an Image, to be
the reproduction of its Archetype, and of that
whose name it bears ; only that there is more
For in ordinary language an image is
here.
a motionless representation of that which has
motion ; but in this case it is the living repro
duction of the Living One, and is more exact
ly like than was Seth to Adam,a or any son to
For such is the nature of simple
his father.
Existences, that it is not correct to say of them
that they are Like in one particular and Unlike
in another ; but they are a complete resem
blance, and should rather be called Identical
than Like. Moreover he is called Light as being
the Brightness of souls cleansed by word and
life.
For if ignorance and sin be darkness,
knowledge and a godly life will be Light.
. And He is called Life, because He is
Light, and is the constituting and creating Pow
er of every reasonable soul.
For in Him we
live and move and have our being,^ according
to the double power of that Breathing into us ;
for we were all inspired by Him with breath,*
and as many of us as were capable of it, and
in so far as we open the mouth of our mind,
with God the Holy Ghost.
He is Righteous
ness, because He distributes according to that
which we deserve, and is a righteous Arbiter
both for those who are under the Law and for
those who are under Grace, for soul and body,
so that the former should rule, and the latter
obey, and the higher have supremacy over the
lower ; that the worse may not rise in rebel
He is Sanctification,
lion against the better.
as l>eing Purity, that the Pure may be con
tained by Purity.
And Redemption, because
He sets us free, who were held captive under
sin, giving Himself a Ransom for us, the Sacri
fice to make expiation for the world. And Re
surrection, because He raises up from hence,
and brings to life again us, who wereslain by sin.

XXI. These names however are still com
mon to Him Who is above us, and to Him Who
came for our sake.
But others are peculiarly
our own, and belong to that nature which He
assumed.
So He is called Man, not only that
through His Body He may be apprehended
by embodied creatures, whereas otherwise this
would be impossible because of His incom
prehensible nature; but also that by Himself
He may sanctify humanity, and be as it were
a leaven to the whole lump; and by uniting
to Himself that which was condemned may
release it from all condemnation, becoming
for all men all things that we are, except sin ;
-body, soul, mind and all through which
death reaches-and thus He became Man,
who is the combination of all these ; God in
visible form, because He retained that which
He is Son of
is perceived by mind alone.
Man, both on account of Adam, and of the
Virgin from .Whom He came ; from the one
as a forefather, from the other as His Mother,
both in accordance with the law of generation,
and apart from it. He is Christ, because of
His Godhead.
For this is the Anointing of
His Manhood, and does not, as is the case
with all other Anointed Ones, sanctify by its
action, but by the Presence in His Fulness of
the effect of which is
the Anointing One ;
that That which anoints is called Man, and
makes that which is anointed God.
He is
The Way, because He leads us through Him
self ; The Door, as letting us in ; the Shepherd,
as making us dwell in a place of green pas
tures," and bringing us up by waters of rest,
and leading us there, and protecting us from
wild beasts, converting the erring, bringing
back that which was lost, binding up that
which was broken, guarding the strong, and
bringing them together in the Fold beyond,
with words of pastoral knowledge. The Sheep,
as the Victim : The Lamb, as being perfect :
the Highpriest, as the Offerer ; Melchisedec,
as without Mother in that Nature which is
above us, and without Father in ours ; and
without genealogy above (for who, it says,
shall declare His generation ?) and moreover,
as King of Salem, which means Peace, and
King of Righteousness, and as receiving tithes
from Patriarchs, when they
over
They are the titles of the
powers of evil.
Son.
are
Walk through them, those that
lofty in a godlike manner ; those that belong
to the body in a manner suitable to them ; or
rather, altogether in a godlike manner, that
thou mayest become a god, ascending from

prevail

a Gen. v, 3.

a Ps. xxiii. 3.

3i8

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

below, for His sake Who came down from on I
high for ours.
In all and above all keep to
this, and thou shalt never err, either in the
loftier or the lowlier names ; Jesus Christ is
the Same yesterday and to-day in the Incar
nation, and in the Spirit for ever and ever.
Amen.

'THE FIFTH THEOLOGICAL ORA
TION.

On The Holy Spirit.

I. Such then is the account of the Son, and
in this manner He has escaped those who would
stone Him, passing through the midst of them."
For the Word is not stoned, but casts stones
when He pleases ; and uses a sling against
wild beasts-that is, words-approaching the
Mounts in an unholy way.
BuC they go on,
what have you to say about the Holy Ghost ?
From whence are you bringing in upon us this
strange God,, of Whom Scripture is silent?
And even they who keep within bounds as to
the Son speak thus.
And just as we find in
the case of roads and rivers, that they split off
from one 'another and join again, so it hap
pens also in this case, through the superabund
ance of impiety, that people who differ in all
other respects have here some points of agree
ment, so that you never can tell for certain
either where they are of one mind, or where
they are in conflict.

II. Now the subject of the Holy Spirit pre
sents a special difficulty, not only because when
these men have become weary in their dispu
tations concerning the Son, they struggle with
greater heat against the Spirit (for it seems to
be absolutely necessary for them to have some
object on which to give expression to their
impiety, or life would appear to them no
longer worth living), but further because we
ourselves also, being worn out by the multi
tude of their questions, are in something of the
same condition with men who have lost their
appetite ; who having taken a dislike to some
particular kind of food, shrink from all food ;
so we in like manner have an aversion from
all discussions.
Yet may the Spirit grant it
to us, and then the discourse will proceed,
and God will be glorified.
Well then, we
will leave to others » who have worked upon
this subject for us as well as for themselves, as
we have worked upon it for them, the task of
examining carefully and distinguishing in how

a Luke iv. »q. 30.

y E.g. S. Basil and S. Gregory of Nyssa.

0 Exod. xix. 13.

many senses the word Spirit or the word Holy
is used and understood in Holy Scripture,
with the evidence suitable to such an enquiry ;
and of shewing how besides these the com
bination of the two words-I mean, Holy
Spirit-is used in a peculiar sense ; but we
will apply ourselves to the remainder of the
subject.

III. They then who are angry with us on
the ground that we are bringing in a strange
or interpolated God, viz. : -the Holy Ghost,
and who fight so very hard for the letter,
should know that they are afraid where no
fear is ; a and I would have them clearly under
stand that their love for the letter is but a
cloak for their impiety, as shall be shewn later
on, when we refute their objections to the ut
But we have so much
most of our power.
confidence in the Deity of the Spirit Whom
we adore,9 that we will begin our teaching
concerning His Godhead by fitting to Him
the Names which belong to the Trinity, even
though some persons may think us too bold.
The Father was the True Light which lighteneth
world.
every man coming into the
The Son was the True Light which lighteneth every man coming into the world.
The
Other Comforter was the True Light which
lighteneth every man coming into the world. »
Was and Was and Was, but Was One Thing.
Light thrice repeated ; but One Light and
One God.
This was what David represented
to himself long before when he said, In Thy
Light shall we see Light.* And now we have
both seen and proclaim concisely and simply
the doctrine * of God the Trinity, compre
hending out of Light (the Father), Light (the
Son), in Light (the Holy Ghost). He that
rejects it, let him reject it;f and he that
doeth iniquity, let him do iniquity ; we pro
claim that which we have understood. We
will get us up into a high mountain,i and
will shout, if we be not heard, below ; we
will exalt the Spirit ; we will not be afraid ;
or if we are afraid, it shall be of keeping
silence, not of proclaiming.

IV. If ever there was a time when the Father
was not, then there was a time when the Son
If ever there was a time when the
was not.
Son was not, then there was a time when the
If the One was from the be
Spirit was not.
If you
ginning, then the Three were so too.

a Ps. liii. p.
fi nptafitveiv is not commonly used in this sense, but there are
classical instances of it (e.p. /Esch. Choeph., 468; Soph., Trach..
10*15, and it occurs also in Plato), and this is the sense in which
it is here rendered by Hillius ; but a V. L. of some MSS. gives the
meaning, whose cause we arc pleading, which is a more frequent
use of the word.

6 Ps. xvxvi. 9.

y John i. q.

c Al. The Confession.

{ [sa. xxi. a.

1) lb. xl. 9.

ON THE HOLY SPIRIT.

throw down the One, I am bold to assert that
For what
you do not set up the other Two.
profit is there in an imperfect Godhead ?
Or
rather, what Godhead can there be if It is not
perfect ? And how can that be perfect which
lacks something of perfection ? And surely
there is something lacking if it hath not the
Holy, and how would it have this if it were
For either holiness is
without the Spirit?
something different from Him, and if so let
some one tell me what it is conceived to be ;
or if it is the same, how is it not from the be
ginning, as if it were better for God to be at
one time imperfect and apart from the Spirit?
If He is not from the beginning, He is in the
same rank with myself, even though a little
before me ; for we are both parted from God
head by time.
If He is in the same rank
with myself, how can He make me God, or
join me with Godhead ?

V. Or rather, let me reason with you about
Him from a somewhat earlier point, for we
have already discussed the Trinity.
The Sadducees altogether denied the existence of the
Holy Spirit, just as they did that of Angels
and the Resurrection ; rejecting, I know not
upon what ground, the important testimonies
concerning Him in the Old Testament. And
of the Greeks those who are more inclined to
speak of God, and who approach nearest to us,
have formed some conception of Him, as it
seems to me, though they have differed as to
His Name, and have addressed Him as the
Mind of the World, or the External Mind, and
the like.
But of the wise men amongst our
selves, some have conceived of him as an Ac
tivity, some as a Creature, some as God ; and
some have been uncertain which to call Him,
out of reverence for Scripture, they say, as
though it did not make the matter clear either
way.
And therefore they neither worship
Him nor treat Him with dishonour, but take
up a neutral position, or rather a very misera
And of those
ble one, with respect to Him.
who consider Him to be God, some are or
thodox in mind only, while others venture
to be so with the lips
And I have
heard of some who are even more clever, and
measure Deity ; and these agree with us that
there are Three Conceptions ; but they have
separated these from one another so com
pletely as to make one of them infinite both
in essence and power, and the second in
power but not in essence, and the third cir
cumscribed in both : thus imitating in another
way those who call them the Creator, the
Co-operator, and the Minister, and consider
fhat the same order and dignity which be

also.

longs to these names is also a sequence in the
facts.

VI. But we cannot enter into any discussion
with those who do not even believe in His
existence, nor with the Greek babblers (for
we would not be enriched in our argument
With the others,
with the oil of sinners)."
however, we will argue thus.
The Holy
Ghost must certainly be conceived of either
as in the category of the Self-existent, or as in
that of the things which are contemplated in
another ; of which classes those who are
skilled in such matters call the one Substance
and the other Accident. Now if He were an
Accident, He would be an Activity of God,
for what else, or of whom else, could He be,
for surely this is what most avoids composition ?
And if He is an Activity, He will be effected,
but will not effect and will cease to exist
as soon as He has been effected, for this is the
nature of an Activity. How is
it then that
He acts and says such and such things, and
defines, and is grieved, and is angered, and
has all the qualities which belong clearly to
one that moves, and not to movement ?
But
if He is a Substance and not an attribute
of Substance, He will be conceived of
either as a Creature of God, or as God.
For
anything between these two, whether having
nothing in common with either, or a com
pound of both, not even they who invented
the goat-stag could imagine.
Now, if He is
a creature, how do we believe in Him, how
are we made perfect in Him ? For it is not the
same thing to believe in a thing and to be
The one belongs to Deity,
lieve about it.
the other to - any thing.
But if He is
God, then He is neither a creature, nor a
thing made, nor a fellow servant, nor any of
these lowly appellations.

VII. There-the word is with you.

Let the
slings be let go ; let the syllogism be woven.
Either He is altogether Unbegotten, or else He
If He is Unbegotten, there are
is Begotten.
If he is Begotten, you must
two Unoriginates.
make a further subdivision.
He is so either
by the Father or by the Son. And if by the
Father, there are two Sons, and they are
And you may make them twins if
Brothers.
you like, or the one older and the other
younger, since you are so very fond of the
bodily conceptions.
But if by the Son, then
such a one will say, we get a glimpse of a
Grandson God, than which nothing could
be more absurd.
For my part however, if I
saw the necessity of the distinction, I should

a Ps. cxli. 5.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

have acknowledged the facts without fear of
the names.
For it does not follow that be
cause the Son is the Son in some higher rela
tion (inasmuch as we could not in any other
way than this point out that He is of God and
Consubstantial), it would also be necessary to
think that all the names of this lower world
and of our kindred should be transferred to
the Godhead.
Or may be you would con
sider our God to be a male, according to the
same arguments, because he is called God
and Father, and that Deity is feminine, from
the gender of the word, and Spirit neuter, be
cause It has nothing to do with generation ;
But if you would be silly enough to say, with
the old myths and fables, that God begat the
Son by a marriage with His own Will, we
should be introduced" to the Hermaphrodite
god of Marcion and Valentinus* who imag
ined these newfangled ./Eons.

VIII. But since we do not admit your first
division, which declares that there is no mean
between Begotten and Unbegotten, at once,
along with your magnificent division, away
go your Brothers and your Grandsons, as
when the first link of an intricate chain is
broken they are broken with it, and disap
pear from your system of divinity.
For, tell
me, what position will you assign to that
which Proceeds, which has started up between
the two terms of your division, and is intro
duced by a better Theologian than you, our
Saviour Himself? Or perhaps you have taken
that word out of your Gospels for the sake of
your Third Testament, The Holy Ghost,
which proceedeth from the Father ; v Who,
inasmuch as He proceedeth from That Source,
is no Creature ; and inasmuch as He is not Be
gotten is no Son ; and inasmuch as He is be
tween the Unbegotten and the Begotten is God.
And thus escaping the toils of your syllogisms,
He has manifested himself as God, stronger
than your divisions. What then is Procession ?
Do you tell me what is the Unbegottenness of
the Father, and I will explain to you the
physiology of the Generation of the Son and

a Ircnarus. L. 6.
3 It would seem that S. Gregory commonly confused Marcion
with Marcus, one of the leaders of the Gnostic School of Valentinus.
In another place he speaks of the /Eons of Marcion and Valen
tinus, evidently meaning Marcus : for the system of Marcion is
characterized by an enure absence of any theory of Emanations
(.'Eons).
Similarly there is no trace in Marcion of this notion
of a hermaphrodite Deity, but there is something very like it in
the account of Marcus given by S. Irenarus.
y John xv. 26. " It did not fall within this Father's (Greg. Naz.)
province to develop the doctrine of the Procession. He is content
t. > shew that the Spirit was not Generated, seeing that according to
Christ's own teaching He Proceeds from the Father. The question
of His relation to the Son is alien to S. Gregory Nazianzcn's pur
pose ; nor does it seem to have once been raised in the great battle
between Arianism and Catholicity which was fought out at Con
stantinople during Gregory's Episcopate" (Swete on the Proces
sion, p. 107).

the Procession of the Spirit, and we shall both
of us be frenzy-stricken for prying into the
mystery of God." And who are we to do these
things, we who cannot even see what lies at
our feet, or number the sand of the sea, or the
drops of rain, or the days of Eternity, much
less enter into the Depths of God, and supply
an account of that Nature which is so un
speakable and transcending all words ?

IX. What then, say they, is there lacking to
the Spirit which prevents His being a Son, for
if there were not something lacking He would
be a Son ? We assert that there is nothing
lacking-for God has no deficiency.
But the
difference of manifestation, if I may so express
myself, or rather of their mutual relations
one to another, has caused the difference of
their Names.
For indeed it is not some de
ficiency in the Son which prevents His being
Father (for Sonship is not a deficiency), and
yet He is not Father.
According to this line
of argument there must be some deficiency in
the Father, in respect of His not being Son.
For the Father is not Son, and yet this is not
due to either deficiency or subjection of Es
sence ; but the very fact of being Unbegotten
or Begotten, or Proceeding has given the
name of Father to the First, of the Son to the
Second, and of the Third, Him of Whom we
are speaking, of the Holy Ghost that the dis
tinction of the Three Persons may be pre
served in the one nature and dignity of the
Godhead.
For neither is the Son Father, for
the Father is One, but He is what the Father
is ; nor is the Spirit Son because He is of
God, for the Only-begotten is One, but He is
what the Son is. The Three are One in God
head, and the One Three in properties ; so
that neither is the Unity a Sabellian one,3 nor

a Ecclus i. a.
0 Sabellius, who taught at Rome during the Pontiflcate of Callistus, was by far the most important heresiarch of I.is period, and
his opinions by far the most dangerous. While .strongly empha
sizing the fundamental doctrine ol the Divine Unity, he also
admitted in terms a Trinity, but his Trinity was not that of the
Catholic dogma, for he represented it as only a threefold manifes
tation of the one Divine Essence. The Father, Son, and Holv
Ghost ftrc in his view only temporary pha;nomena, wh'ch fulfil
their mission, and then return into the abstract Monad. Dr SchafT
(Hist, of the Church, Anle-Nicenc Period, p. 582) gives the follow
ing concise account of his teaching :
"The unity of God, without distinction in itself, unfolds or
extends itself in the course of the word's development, in three
different forms and periods of icvelation, and after the completion
of redemption returns into Unity. The Father reveals Himself in
the giving of the Law or the Old Testament Economy (not in the
creation also, which in his view precedes the Trinitarian revela
tion) ; the Son in the Incarnation ; the Holy Ghost in inspiration ;
the revelation of the Son ends with the Ascension ; that of the
Spirit goes on in generation and sanctiheation. He illustrates the
Trinitarian revelation by comparing the Father to the disc of the
sun, the Son to its enlightening power, the Spirit to its warming
influence. He is also said to have likened the Father to the bodv,
the Son to the soul, the Holy Ghost to the spirit of man : but th"is
is unworthy of his evident speculative discrimination.
His view
of the Logos too is peculiar.
'1 he Logos is not identical with
the Son. but is the Monnd itself in its transition to Triad ; that is,
God conceived as vital motion and creating principle ; the Speak
Lach Person (or
ing God, as distinguished from the Silent God.

ON THE HOLY SPIRIT.

32i

does the Trinity countenance the present evil
distinction.

X. What then? Is the Spirit God ?

Most
Well then, is He Consubstantial ?
certainly.
Grant me, says my op
Yes, if He is God.
ponent, that
there spring from the same
Source One who is a Son, and One who is
not a Son, and these of One Substance with
the Source, and I admit a God and a God.
Nay, if you will grant me that there is another
God and another nature of God I will give
you the same Trinity with the same name and
facts.
But since God is One and the Supreme
Nature is One, how can I present to you the
Or will you seek it again in lower
Likeness?
regions and in your own surroundings?
It is
very shameful, and not only shameful, but
very foolish, to take from things below a
guess at things above, and from a fluctuat
ing nature at the things that are unchanging,
and as Isaiah says, to seek the Living among
the dead."
But yet I will try, for your sake,
to give you some assistance for your argument,
I think I will pass
even from that source.
over other points, though I might bring for
ward many from animal history, some gener
ally known, others only known to a few, of
what nature has contrived with wonderful
art in connection with the generation of ani
mals.
For not only are likes said to beget
likes, and things diverse to beget things di
verse, but also likes to be begotten by things
diverse, and things diverse by likes.
And if
we may believe the story, there is yet another
mode of generation, when an animal is selfconsumed and self-begotten. 0
There are also
creatures which depart in some sort from their
true natures, and undergo change and trans
formation from one creature into another, by
a magnificence of nature.
And indeed some
times in the same species part may be gener
ated and part not ; and yet all of one sub
stance ; which is more like our present subject.
I will just mention one fact of our own nature
which every one knows, and then I will pass
on to another part of the subject.

XI. What was Adam ? A creature of God.
What then was Eve ? A fragment of the creat
And what was Seth ? The begotten of
ure.
both.
Does it then seem to you that Creature
and Fragment and Begotten are the same
But were not
thing?
Of course they
these persons consubstantial ?

Of course it does not.

Aspect-the word is ambiguous) is another Uttering : and the
Three Persons together arc only
successive evolutions of the
Logos, or world-ward aspect of the Divine Nature. As the Ix>gos
proceeded from God. so He at last returns into Him, and the pro
cess of Trinitarian development closes."

i.e. the Phoenix.

Hdt., ii. 37.

• Isa. viii. 19.

were.
Well then, here it is an acknowledged
fact that different persons may have the same
substance.
I say this, not that I would attri
bute creation or fraction or any property of
body to the Godhead (let none of your con
tenders for a word be down upon me again),
but that I may contemplate in these, as on a
stage, things which are objects of thought
For it is not possible to trace out any
alone.
image exactly to the whole extent of the truth.
But, they say, what is the meaning of all this ?
For is not the one an offspring, and the other
a something else of the One? Did not both
Eve and Seth come from the one Adam ?
And were they both begotten by him ? No ;
but the one was a fragment of him, and the
other was begotten by him.
And yet the two
were one and the same thing ; both were hu
Will you
man beings ; no one will deny that.
then
give up your contention against the
Spirit, that He must be either altogether be
gotten, or else cannot be consubstantial, or be
God; and admit from human examples the
I think it will be
possibility of our position ?
well for you, unless you are determined to be
very quarrelsome, and to fight against what is
proved to demonstration.

XII. But, he says, who in ancient or modern
times ever worshipped the Spirit ? Who ever
prayed to Him ?
Where is it written that we
ought to worship Him, or to pray to Him,
and whence have you derived this tenet of
yours? We will give the more perfect reason
hereafter, when we discuss the question of the
unwritten ; for the present it will suffice to say
that it is the Spirit in Whom we worship, and
in Whom we pray.
For Scripture says, God
is a Spirit, and they that worship Him must
worship Him in Spirit and in truth." And
again,-We know not what we should pray
for as we ought ; but the Spirit Itself maketh
intercession for us with groanings which can
not be uttered ; P and I will pray with the
Spirit and I will pray with the understanding
also ; y-that is, in the mind and in the Spirit.
Therefore to adore or to pray to the Spirit
seems to me to be simply Himself offering
prayer or adoration to Himself.
And what
godly or learned man would disapprove of this,
because in fact the adoration of One is the
adoration of the Three, because of the equality
of honour and Deity between the Three ?
So
I will not be frightened by the argument that
all things are said to have been made by the
Son ; 4 as if the Holy Spirit also were one of
For it says all things that were
these things.

a John iv. 34.
y 1 Cor. xiv. 15.

0 Rom. viii. 36.
8 John i. 2.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

made, and not simply all things.
For the
Father was not, nor were any of the things that
were not made.
Prove that He was made,
and then give Him to the Son, and number Him
among the creatures ; but until you can prove
this you will gain nothing for your impiety from
this comprehensive phrase.
For if He was
made, it was certainly through Christ ; I my
But if He was not
self would not deny that.
made, how can He be either one of the All,
or through Christ ?
Cease then to dishonour
the Father in your opposition to the Only-be
gotten (for it is no real honour, by presenting
to Him a creature to rob Him of what is more
valuable, a Son), and to dishonour the Son in
your opposition to the Spirit.
For He is not
the Maker of a Fellow servant, but He is glori
fied with One of co-equal honour.
Rank no
part of the Trinity with thyself, lest thou fall
away from the Trinity ; cut not off from Either
the One and equally august Nature ; because
if thou overthrow any of the Three thou wilt
have overthrown the whole.
Better to take a
meagre view of the Unity than to venture on
a complete impiety.

XIII. Our argument has now come to its
principal point ; and I am grieved that a prob
lem that was long dead, and that had given way
to faith, is now stirred up afresh ; yet it is neces
sary to stand against these praters, and not to
let judgment go by default, when we have the
Word on our side, and are pleading the cause
If, say they, there is God and
of the Spirit.
it that there are not
God and God, how is
Three Gods, or how is it that what is glori
fied is not a plurality of Principles? Who is
it who say this ?
Those who have reached a
more complete ungodliness, or even those who
I mean who
have taken the secondary part ;
are moderate in a sense in respect of the Son.
For my argument is partly against both in
common, partly against these latter in particu
lar.
What I have to say in answer to these is
as follows : -What right have you who wor
ship the Son, even though you have revolted
from the Spirit, to call us Tritheists? Are not
you Ditheists?
For if you deny also the wor
ship of the Only Begotten, you have clearly
And
ranged yourself among our adversaries.
why should we deal kindly with you as not
quite dead ?
But if you do worship Him,
and are so far in the way of salvation, we will
ask you what reasons you have to give for your
If there
ditheism, if you are charged with it?
is in you a word of wisdom answer, and open
to us also a way to an answer.
For the very
same reason with which you will repel a
charge of Ditheism will prove sufficient for us

against one of Tritheism.
And thus we shall
■win the day by making use of you our accus
ers as our Advocates, than which nothing can
be more generous.

XIV. What is our quarrel and dispute with
both ? To us there is One God, for the Godhead
is One, and all that proceeded: from Him is
referred to One, though we believe in Three
For one is not more and another
Persons.
less God ; nor is One before and another after ;
nor are They divided in will or parted in
power ; nor can you find here any of the qual
ities of divisible things; but the Godhead is,
to speak concisely, undivided in separate Per
sons ; and there is one mingling of Light, as
it were of three suns joined to each other.
When then we look at the Godhead, or the
First Cause, or the Monarchia, that which we
conceive is One ; but when we look at the
Persons in Whom the Godhead dwells, and at
Those Who timelessly and with equal glory
have their Being from the First Cause-there
are Three Whom we worship.

XV. What of that, they will say perhaps ; do
not the Greeks also believe in one Godhead,
as their more advanced philosophers declare ?
And with us Humanity is one, namely the
entire race ; but yet they have many gods,
But in
not One, just as there are many men.
this case the common nature has a unity which
is only conceivable in thought; and the indiI viduals are parted from one another very far
indeed, both by time and by dispositions and
For we are not only compound
) by power.
, beings, but also contrasted beings, both with
! one another and with ourselves ; nor do we
remain entirely the same for a single day, to
say nothing of a whole lifetime, but both in
body and in soul are in a perpetual state of
flow and change. And perhaps the same may
be said of the Angels ° and the whole of that
superior nature which is second to the Trinity
alone ;
although they are simple in some
measure and more fixed in good, owing to
their nearness to the highest Good.

XVI. Nor do those whom the Greeks wor
ship as gods, and (to use their own expression)
daemons, need us in any respect for their accus
ers, but are convicted upon the testimony of
their own theologians, some as subject to pas
sion, some as given to faction, and full of in
numerable evils and changes, and in a state of
opposition, not only to one another, but even
to their first causes, whom they call Oceani

a " Similarly it is ctear concerning the Angels, that they have a
being incapable of change, so far as pertains to their nature, w ith
a capacity of change as to choice, and of intelligence and1 affections
and places, in their own manner " (S. Thomas Aq., Summa, I.,
X., 5).

ON THE HOLY SPIRIT.

divided

things are

and Tethyes and Phanetes, and by several
other names ; and last of all a certain god who
hated his children through his lust of rule, and
swallowed up all the rest through his greedi
ness that he might become the father of all
men and gods whom he miserably devoured,
and then vomited forth again.
And if these
are but myths and fables, as they say in order
to escape the shamefulness of the story, what
will they say in reference to the dictum that
all
parts,"
and that each god presides over a different
part of the Universe, having a distinct pro
vince as well as a distinct rank? But our faith
is not like this, nor is this the portion of
Jacob, says my Theologian. 0
But each of
these Persons possesses Unity, not less with
that which is United to it than with itself, by
reason of the identity of Essence and Power.*
And this is the account of the Unity, so far
as we have apprehended it.
If then this ac
count is the true one, let us thank God for the
glimpse He has granted us ; if it is not let us
seek for a better.

three

into

XVII. As for the arguments with which you
would overthrow the Union which we support,
I know not whether we should say you are jest
ing or in earnest. For what is this argument?
" Things of one essence, you say, are counted
together," and by this " counted together,"
you mean that they are collected into one
number.8
But things which are not of one
essence are not thus counted ... so
that you cannot avoid speaking of three gods,
according to this account, while we do not
run any risk at all of it, inasmuch as we
assert that they are not consubstantial.
And
so by a single word you have freed yourselves
from trouble, and have gained a pernicious
victory, for in fact you have done something
like what men do when they hang themselves
for
For to save yourselves
trouble in your championship of the Monarchia you have denied the Godhead, and
abandoned the question to your opponents.
But for my part, even if labor should be
necessary, I will not abandon the Object of
my adoration.
And yet on this point I can
not see where the difficulty is.

fear of death.

XVIII. You say, Things of one essence are
counted together, but those which are not consubstantial are reckoned one by one.
Where
did you get this from ? From what teachers of

a Homer, II., xiv., 189.
V Petavius praises this dictum, DeTrin.. IV., xiii., 9.
8 ownptdpietTcu, as when you say Three Gods, or Three Men,
and the like, as you do when you reckon up things of the same
sort. On the other hand, you must use the plural number in
reckoning up things which differ in kind.

(3 ler. x. 16.

dogma or mythology ? Do you not know that
every number expresses the quantity of what
is included under it, and not the nature of
But I am so oldfashioned, or
the things?
perhaps I should say so unlearned, as to use
the word Three of that number of things,
even if they are of a different nature, and to
use One and One and One in a different way
of so many units, even if they are united in
essence, looking not so much at the things
themselves as at the quantity of the things in
respect of which the enumeration is made.
But since you hold so very close to the letter
(although you are contending against the let
ter), pray take your demonstrations from this
source.
There are in the Book of Proverbs
three things which go well, a lion, a goat,
and a cock ; and to these is added a fourth ;
-a King making a speech before the people,"
to pass over the other sets of four which are
there counted up, although things of various
natures. And I find in Moses two Cherubim 0
counted singly.
But now, in your techno
logy, could either the former things l)e called
three, when they differ so greatly in their
nature, or the latter be treated as units when
they are so closely connected and of one
nature ?
For if I were to speak of God and
Mammon, as two masters, reckoned under one
head, when they are so very different from
each other, I should probably be still more
laughed at for such a connumeration.

XIX. But to my mind, he says, those things
are said to be connumerated and of the same
essence of which the names also correspond,
as Three Men, or Three gods, but not Three
this and that.
What does this concession
amount to ?
It is suitable to one laying down
the law as to names, not to one who is as
serting the truth.
For I also will assert that
Peter and James and John are not three or
consubstantial, so long as I cannot say Three
Peters, or Three Jameses, or Three Johns ; for
what you have reserved for common names
we demand also for proper names, in accord
ance with your arrangement ; or else you will
lie unfair in not conceding to others what you
assume for yourself.
What about John then,
when in his Catholic Epistle he says that
there are Three that bear witness,* the Spirit

0 Exod. xxxvii. 7.

ta Prov. xxx. 29, 30, 31.
*Y This is the famous passage of the Witnesses in 1 John v. 8.
In some few later codices of th? Vulgate arc found the words which
Hut neither verse 7 nnr these words arc
form verse 7 of our A. V.
to be found in any Greek MS. earlier than the Fifteenth Century :
nor are they quoted by any Greek Father, and by very few and
late I^atin ernes. They have been thought to be cited by S. Cyp
rian in his work on the Unity of the Church ; and this citation, if a
fact, would lie a most important one. as it would throw back their
reception to an early date.
Mut Tischendorf (Gk. Test.. Ed viii.,
ad. loc.) gives reasons for liclieving that the quotation is only ap
parent, and is really of the last clause of verse 8.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

and the Water and the Blood ? Do you think
he is talking nonsense?
First, because he has
ventured to reckon under one numeral things
which are not consubstantial, though you say
this ought to be done only in the case of
things which are consubstantial.
For who
would assert that these are consubstantial?
Secondly, because he has not been consistent*
in the way he has happened upon his terms ;
for after using Three in the masculine gender
he adds three words which are neuter, con
trary to the definitions and laws which you
and your grammarians have laid down.
For
what is the difference between putting a mas
culine Three first, and then adding One and
One and One in the neuter, or after a mascu
line One and One and One to use the Three
not in the masculine but in the neuter, which
you yourself disclaim in the case of Deity?
What have you to say about the Crab, which
may mean either an animal, or an instrument,
or a constellation ?
And what about the
Dog, now terrestrial, now aquatic, now celes
tial ?
Do you not see that three crabs or dogs
are spoken of? Why of course it is so. Well
then, are they therefore of one substance?
None but a fool would say that.
So you see
how completely your argument from connumeration has broken down, and is refuted
For if things that are
by all these instances.
of one substance are not always counted under
one numeral, and things not of one substance
are thus counted, and the pronunciation of
the name" once for all is used in both cases,
what advantage do you gain towards your
doctrine ?

XX. I will look also at this further point,
which is not without its bearing on the subject.
One and One added together make Two ;
and Two resolved again becomes One and
One, as is perfectly evident.
If, however,
elements which are added together must, as
your theory requires, be consubstantial, and
those which are separate be heterogeneous,
then it will follow that the same things must
be both consubstantial and heterogeneous.
No: I laugh at your Counting Before and
your Counting After, of which you are so
proud, as if the facts themselves depended
If this were
upon the order of their names.
so, according to the same law, since the same
things are in consequence of the equality of
their nature counted in Holy Scripture, some
times in an earlier, sometimes in a later place,
what prevents them from being at once more

a i.e. Thoueh the things referred tn may differ essentially, yet
if the name by which they are known is the same, one utterance of
it with one numeral is enough to express a collection of them all.

honourable and less honourable than them
selves ?
I say the same of the names God and
Lord, and of the prepositions Of Whom, and
By Whom, and In Whom, by which you
describe the Deity according to the rules of
art for us, attributing the first to the Father,
the second to the Son, and the third to the
Holy Ghost.
For what would you have
done, if each of these expressions were con
stantly allotted to Each Person, when, the fact
being that they are used of all the Persons,
as is evident to those who have studied the
question, you even so make them the ground
of such inequality both of nature and dignity.
This is sufficient for all who are not altogether
wanting in sense.
But since it is a matter of
difficulty for you after you have once made an
assault upon the Spirit, to check your rush,
and not rather like a furious boar to push
your quarrel to the bitter end, and to thrust
yourself upon the knife until you have received
the whole wound in your own breast ; let us
go on to see what further argument remains
to you.

XXI. Over and over again you turn upon
us the silence of Scripture.
But that it is not
a strange doctrine, nor an afterthought, but
acknowledged and plainly set forth both by
the ancients and many of our own day, is
already demonstrated by many persons who
have treated of this subject, and who have
handled the Holy Scriptures, not with in
difference or as a mere pastime, but have
gone beneath the letter and looked into the
inner meaning, and have been deemed worthy
to see the hidden beauty, and have been
irradiated by the light of knowledge.
We,
however in our turn will briefly prove it as
far as may be, in order not to seem to be overcurious or improperly ambitious, building on
another's foundation. But since the fact, that
Scripture does not very clearly or very often
write Him God in express words (as it does
first the Father and afterwards the Son), be
comes to you an occasion of blasphemy and
of this excessive wordiness and impiety, we
will release you from this inconvenience by a
short discussion of things and names, and
especially of their use in Holy Scripture.

XXII. Some things have no existence, but
are spoken of ; others which do exist are not
spoken of ; some neither exist nor are spoken
of, and some both exist and are spoken of.
Do you ask me for proof of this ?
I am ready
to give it. According to Scripture God sleeps
and is awake, is angry, walks, has the Cheru
bim for His Throne.
And yet when did He
become liable to passion, and have you ever

ON THE HOLY SPIRIT.

heard that God has a body ?
This then is,
though not really fact, a figure of speech.
For we have given names according to our
own comprehension from our own attributes
to those of God.
His remaining silent apart
from us, and as it were not caring for us, for
reasons known to Himself, is what we call His
sleeping ; for our own sleep is such a state of
inactivity. And again, His sudden turning
to do us good is the waking up ; for waking
is the dissolution of sleep, as visitation is of
turning away.
And when He punishes, we
say He is angry ; for so it is with us, punish
And His work
ment is the result of anger.
ing, now here now there, we call walking ; for
walking is change from one place to another.
His resting among the Holy Hosts, and as it
were loving to dwell among them, is His sit
too, from
ting and being enthroned ;
ourselves, for God resteth nowhere as He doth
upon the Saints.
His swiftness of moving is
called flying, and His watchful care is called
His Face, and his giving and bestowing" is
His hand ; and, in a word, every other of the
powers or activities of God has depicted for
us some other corporeal one.

this,

XXIII. Again, where do you get your Unbegotten and Unoriginate, those two citadels of
your position, or we our Immortal ?
Show me
these in so many words, or we shall either set
them aside, or erase them as not contained in
Scripture ; and you are slain by your own
principle, the names you rely on being over
thrown, and therewith the wall of refuge in
Is it not evident that
which you trusted.
they are due to passages which imply them,
though the words do not actually occur?
What are these passages?-I am the first,
and I am the l&st,0 and before Me there
was no God, neither shall there be after
Me." For all that depends on that Am makes
for my side, for it has neither beginning nor
ending; When you accept this, that nothing
is before Him, and that He has not an older
Cause, you have implicitly given Him the
titles Unbegotten and Unoriginate.
And to
say that He has no end of Being is to call Him
Immortal and Indestructible.
The first pairs,
then, that I referred to are accounted for thus.
But what are the things which neither exist in
fact nor are said ?
that a
sphere is square ; that the past is present ; that
man is not a compound being.
Have you
ever known a man of such stupidity as to
venture either to think or to assert any such
It remains to shew what are the
thing?

That God is evil ;

a var. lect., receiving

8 Isa. xli. 4.

y lb. xliii. 10.

things which exist, both in fact and in lan
guage.
God, Man, Angel, Judgment, Vanity
(viz., such arguments as yours), and the sub
version of faith and emptying of the mystery.
XXIV. Since, then, there is so much differ
ence in terms and things, why are you such a
slave to the letter, and a partisan of the Jewish
wisdom, and a follower of syllables at the ex
But if, when you said twice
pense of facts ?
five or twice seven, I concluded from your
words that you meant Ten or Fourteen ; or if,
when you spoke of a rational and mortal animal,
that you meant Man, should you think me to
Surely not, because 1
be talking nonsense ?
should be merely repeating your own mean
ing ; for words do not belong more to the
speaker of them than to him who called them
forth.
As, then, in this case, I, should have
been looking, not so much at the terms used,
as at the thoughts they were meant to convey ;
so neither, if I found something else either not
at all or not clearly expressed in the Words of
Scripture to be included in the meaning,
should I avoid giving it utterance, out of fear
In this
of your sophistical trick about terms.
way, then, we shall hold our own against the
semi -orthodox-among whom I may not count
For since you deny the Titles of the
you.
is
Son, which are so many and so clear, it
quite evident that even if you learnt a great
many more and clearer ones you would not
be moved to reverence.
But now I will take
up the argument again a little way further
back, and shew you, though you are so clever,

| the reason for this entire system of secresy.

XXV. There have been in the whole period
of the duration of the world two conspicuous
changes of men's lives, which are also called
two Testaments, ■ or, on account of the wide
fame of the matter, two Earthquakes ; the one
from idols to the Law, the other from the Law
to the Gospel. And we are taught in the Gospel
of a third earthquake, namely, from this Earth
to that which cannot be shaken or moved, f Now
the two Testaments are alike in this respect,
that the change was not made on a sudden,
nor at the first movement of the endeavour.
Why not (for this is a point on which we
must have information) ?
That no violence
might be done to us, but that we might be
For nothing that is
moved by persuasion.
I involuntary is durable ; like streams or trees
which are kept back by force.
But that
which is voluntary is more durable and safe.

o Hen. xii. 26.
8 Referring to the earthquake at the giving of the Law on Mt.
Sinai (Heb. xiii.). and to the prophesy of Haggai (ii. 6), with
reference to the Incarnation. The third great earthquake is that

1 of the end of the world (Heb. xii. a6).

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

The former is due to one who uses force, the
latter is ours ; the one is due to the gentleness
of God, the other to a tyrannical authority.
Wherefore God did not think it behoved Him
to benefit the unwilling, but to do good to the
willing.
And therefore like a Tutor or Phy
sician He partly removes and partly condones
ancestral habits, conceding some little of what
tended to pleasure, just as medical men do
with their patients, that their medicine may
be taken, being artfully blended with what is
nice.
For it is no very easy matter to change
from those habits which custom and use have
For instance, the first cut
made honourable.
off the idol, but left the sacrifices ; the second,
while it destroyed the sacrifices did not forbid
circumcision."
Then, when once men had
submitted to ,the curtailment, they also yielded
that which had been conceded to them ; 0 in
the first instance the sacrifices, in the second
circumcision; and became instead of Gentiles,
Jews, and instead of Jews, Christians, being
beguiled into the Gosjiel by gradual changes.
Paul is a proof of this ; for having at one time
administered circumcision, and submitted to
legal purification, he advanced till he could
say, and I, brethren, if I yet preach cir
cumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution ?v
His former conduct belonged to the temporary
dispensation, his latter to maturity.

XXVI. To this I may compare the case of
Theology8 except that it proceeds the reverse
way. For in the case by which I have illus
trated it the change is made by successive sub
tractions ; whereas here perfection is reached
by additions. For the matter stands thus. The
Old Testament proclaimed the Father openly,
and the Son more obscurely.
The New mani
fested the Son, and suggested the Deity of the
Spirit. Now the Spirit Himself dwells among
us, and supplies us with a clearer demonstra
tion of Himself.
For it was not safe, when
the Godhead of the Father was not yet ac
knowledged, plainly to proclaim the Son ; nor
when that of the Son was not yet received to
burden us further (if I may use so bold an
expression) with the Holy Ghost ;
lest per
haps people might, like men loaded with food
beyond their strength, and presenting eyes as
yet too weak to bear it to the sun's light, risk
the loss even of that which was within the
reach of their powers ; but that by gradual

0 lb. xxi. 26.

y Oalat. vii. 7-17.

a Acts xvi. 3.
6 Theology is here used in a restricted sense, as denoting sim
ply the doctrine of the Deity of the .Son or Logos.
It is very
frequently used in this limited sense ; examples of which may
readily be found in Gregory of Nyssa, Kasil. Chrysostom, and
others. A similar use occurs in Orat. XXXVIII., c. 8, in which
passage 6eo\oyia is contrasted with oiKOt'Ofju'a, the doctrine of our
Lord's Divinity with that of the Incarnation.

additions, and, as David says, Goings up, and
advances and progress from glory to glory," the
Light of the Trinity might shine upon the
For this reason it was, I
more illuminated.
think, that He gradually came to dwell in the
Disciples, measuring Himself out
to them
according to their capacity to receive Him, at
the beginning of the Gospel, after the Pas
sion, after the Ascension, making perfect their
powers, being breathed upon them, and ap
pearing in fiery tongues. And indeed it is
by little and little that He is declared byJesus, as you will learn for yourself if you will
I will ask the Father, He
read more carefully.
says, and He will send you another Com
forter, even the spirit of Truth. f
This He
said that He might not seem to be a rival
God, or to make His discourses to them by
Again, He shall send
another authority.
Him, but it is in My Name.
He leaves out
the I will ask, but He keeps the Shall send,>
then again, I will send,-His own dignity.
Then shall come,4 the authority of the Spirit.
XXVII. You see lights breaking upon us,
gradually ; and the order of Theology, which
it is better for us to keep, neither proclaiming
things too suddenly, nor yet keeping them hid
den to the end. For the former course would be
unscientific, the latter atheistical ; and the for
mer would be calculated to startle outsiders, the
latter to alienate our own people.
I will add
another point to what I have said ; one which
may readily have come into the mind of some
others, but which I think a fruit of my own
thought.
Our Saviour had some things which,
He said, could not be borne at that time by
His disciples* (though they were filled with
many teachings), perhaps for the reasons I
have mentioned ; and therefore they were
hidden.
And again He said that all things
should be taught us by the Spirit when He
should come to dwell amongst us.f Of these
things one, I take it, was the Deity of the
Spirit Himself, made clear later on when such
knowledge should lie seasonable and capable
of lieing received after our Saviour's restora
tion, when it would no longer be received
with incredulity because of its marvellous
For what greater thing than this
character.
did either He promise, or the Spirit teach.
If
indeed anything is to be considered great and
worthy of the Majesty of God, which was
either promised or taught.

XXVIII. This, then, is my position with re
gard to these things, and I hope it may lx; al
ways my position, and that of whosoever is dear

a Ps. Ixxxiv. 7, and 2 Cor. iii. 18.
v John xvi. 7.

6 lb. xvi. 8

P John xiv. 16. 17.

e lb. xvi. 12.

fib. xiv. 26.

ON THE HOLY SPIRIT.

to me ; to worship God the Father, God the
Son, and God the Holy Ghost, Three Persons,
One Godhead, undivided in honour and glory
and substance and kingdom, as one of our
own inspired philosophers0 not long departed
shewed.
Let him not see the rising of the
Morning Star, as Scripture saith,^ nor the glory
of its brightness, who is otherwise minded, or
who follows the temper of the times, at one
time being of one mind and of another at an
other time, and thinking unsoundly in the
highest matters.
For if He is not to be wor
shipped, how can He deify me by Baptism?
but if He is to be worshipped, surely He is an
Object of adoration, and if an Object of adora
tion He must be God ; the one is linked to the
other, a truly golden and saving chain. And
indeed from the Spirit comes our New Birth,
and from the New Birth our new creation, and
from the new creation our deeper knowledge
of the dignity of Him from Whom it is de
rived.

XXIX. This, then, is what may be said by
But
one who admits the silence of Scripture.
now the swarm of testimonies shall burst upon
you from which the Deity of the Holy Ghost?
shall be shewn to all who are not excessively
stupid, or else altogether enemies to the Spirit,
to be most clearly recognized in Scripture.
Look at these facts : -Christ is born ; the Spirit
is His Forerunner. He is baptized ; the Spir
it bears witness.
He is tempted ; the Spir
it leads Him up.8 He works miracles; the
He ascends ; the
Spirit accompanies them.
Spirit takes His place.
What great things
are there in the idea of God which are not in
His power?' What titles which belong to
God are not applied to Him, except only
For it was need
Unbegotten and Begotten?
ful that the distinctive properties of the Father
and the Son should remain peculiar to Them,
lest there should be confusion in the Godhead
Which brings all things, even disorder ( itself,
Indeed
into due arrangement and good order.
I tremble when I think of the abundance of
the titles, and how many Names they outrage
who fall foul of the Spirit. He is called the
Spirit of God, the Spirit of Christ, the Mind
of Christ, the Spirit of The Lord, and Himself
a Perhaps S. Gregory Thaumaturgus is meant. He was born
about a.d. 210.
The dale of his death is uncertain, but was
probably not before 370. He was rli^hopof Neocaisarca in Pontus.
Amongst his works was an Exposition of the Faith, which he is
said to have received by direct revelation, and in it the words in
S. Gregory in another Oration refers to
the text were contained.
the closing sentences as the substance of the Formula itself:
'* There is nothing created or servile in the Trinity, nor anything
superinduced, as though previously non-existing and introduced
afterwards.
Never, therefore, was the Son wanting to the Father,
nor the Spirit to the Son : but there is ever the same Trinity, un
changeable and unalterable (Reynolds, in Diet. Biog.).
6 Luke iv. 1, 18.

y Luke i. 35 ;

iii. 23 : iv. 1.
£v. i. Yea, even disorder.

0 Job iii. 9.
c Acts ii. 4.

The Lord, the Spirit of Adoption, of Truth, of
Liberty ; the Spirit of Wisdom, of Under
standing, of Counsel, of Might, of Knowledge,
of Godliness, of the Fear of God. For He is the
Maker of all these, filling all with His Essence,
containing all things, filling the world in His
Essence, yet incapable of being comprehended
in His power by the world ; good, upright,
princely, by nature not by adoption ; sanctify
ing, not sanctified ; measuring, not measured';
shared, not sharing ; filling, not filled ; con
taining, not contained ; inherited, glorified,
reckoned with the P'ather and the Son ; held
fire like
out as a threat ;° the Finger'of God ;
God ; to manifest, as I take it, His consubstantiality) ; the Creator-Spirit, Who by Bap
tism and by Resurrection creates anew ; the
Spirit That knoweth all things, That teacheth,
That bloweth where and to what extent He
listeth ; That guideth, talketh, sendeth forth,
separateth, is angry or tempted ; That revealeth, illumineth, quickeneth, or rather is the
very Light and Life ; That maketh Temples ;
That deifieth ; That perfecteth so as even to
anticipate Baptism,P yet after Baptism to be
sought as a separate gift;T That doeth all
things that God doeth; divided into fiery
tongues ;
dividing gifts ; making Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers ;
understanding manifold, clear, piercing, undefiled, unhindered, which is the same thing
as Most wise and varied in His actions ; and
making all things clear and plain ; and of in
dependent power, unchangeable, Almighty,
all-seeing, penetrating all spirits that are intel
ligent, pure, most subtle (the Angel Hosts I
think) ; and also all prophetic spirits and
apostolic in the same manner and not in the
same places ; for they lived in different places ;
thus showing that He is uncircumscript.

XXX. They who say and teach these things,
and moreover call Him another Paraclete in
the sense of another God, vvho know that blas
phemy against Him alone cannot be forgiven,8
and who branded with such fearful infamy An
anias and Sapphira for having lied to the Holy
Ghost, what do you think of these men ?• Do
they proclaim the Spirit God, or something
else? Now really, you must be extraordinarily
dull and far from the Spirit if you have any
doubt about this and need some one to teach
you.
So important then, and so vivid are
His Names. Why is it necessary to lay before
you the testimony contained in the very

never forgiveness.

a Viz. :-where we are told that Blasphemy against Him hath
0 As in the case of the Centurion Cornelius, Acts x. 9.
y t. e. in Confirmation.

c Acts v. 3, etc.

fl Matt. xii. 31.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

words? And whatever in this case also" is
said in more lowly fashion, as that He is
Given, Sent, Divided; that He is the Gift,
the Bounty, the Inspiration, the Promise, the
Intercession for us, and, not to go into any
further detail, any other expressions of the
sort, is to be referred to the First Cause, that it
may be shewn from Whom He is, and that
men may not in heathen fashion admit Three
Principles.
For it is equally impious to con
fuse the Persons with the Sabellians, or to
divide the Natures with the Arians.

XXXI. I have very carefully considered this
matter in my own mind, and have looked at it
in every point of view, in order to find some
illustration of this most important subject,
but I have' been unable to discover any thing
on earth with which to compare the nature of
For even if I did happen upon
the Godhead.
some tiny likeness it escaped me for the most
part, and left me down below with my exam
ple.
I picture to myself an eye,P a fountain,
a river, as others have done before, to see if
the first might be analogous to the Father, the
second to the Son, and the third to the Holy
Ghost.
For in these there is no distinction
in time, nor are they torn away from their
connexion with each other, though they seem
But I
to be parted by three personalities.
was afraid in the first place that I should pre
sent a flow in the Godhead, incapable of
standing still ; and secondly that by this fig
ure a numerical unity would be introduced.
For the eye and the spring and the river are
numerically one, though in different forms.

XXXII. Again I thought of the sun and a ray
and light.
But here again there was a fear lest
people should get an idea of composition in
the Uncompounded Nature, such as there is
in the Sun and the things that are in the Sun.
And in the second place lest we should give
Essence to the Father but deny Personality to
the Others, and make Them only Powers of
For
God, existing in Him and not Personal.
neither the ray nor the light is another sun,
but they are only effulgences from the Sun,
And lest we
and qualities of His essence.
should thus, as far as the illustration goes, at
tribute both Being and Not-being to God,
which is even more monstrous.
I have also
heard that some one has suggested an illustra
tion of the following kind. A ray of the Sun
flashing upon a wall and trembling with the
movement of the moisture which the beam has
taken up in mid air, and then, being checked

a As before in the case of the Son.
)5 Klias Crctensis says that the Eye in this passage is not to be
understood of the member of the body so called, but as ihe Eye or
the centre of a spring, the point from which the water flows.

See above. Theo!., iii. 18.

by the hard body, has set up a strange quiver
ing.
For it quivers with many rapid move
ments, and is not one rather than it is many,
nor yet many rather than one ; because by
the swiftness of its union and separating it escaj)es before the eye can see it.

.

.

.

XXXIII. But it is not possible for me to
make use of even this ; because it is very evident
what gives the ray its motion ; but there is noth
ing prior to God which could set Him in mo
tion ; for He is Himself the Cause of all things,
and He has no prior Cause.
And secondly be
cause in this case also there is a suggestion of
such things as composition, diffusion, and an
none
unsettled and unstable nature
of which we can suppose in the Godhead.
In
a word, there is nothing which presents a
standing point to my mind in these illustra
tions from which to consider the Object
which I am trying to represent to myself, un
less one may indulgently accept one point of
the image while rejecting the rest.
Finally,
then, it seems best to me to let the images
and the shadows go, as being deceitful and
very far short of the truth ; and clinging my
self to the more reverent conception, and rest
ing upon few words, using the guidance of
the Holy Ghost, keeping to the end as my
genuine comrade and companion the enlight
enment which I have received from Him, and
passing through this world to persuade all
others also to the best of my power to worship
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the One God
To Him belongs all glory
head and Power.
and honour and might for ever and ever.
Amen.

ORATION XXXIII.

Against the Arians, and Concerning
Himself.
Delivered at Constantinople about the middle of the
year 380.

I. Where are they who reproach us with
our poverty, and boast themselves of their own
riches ; who define the Church by numbers,"
and scorn the little flock ; and who measure
Godhead,s and weigh the people in the bal
ance, who honour the sand, and despise the
luminaries of heaven ; who treasure pebbles
and overlook pearls ; for they know not that
sand is not in a greater degree more abundant
than stars, and pebbles than lustrous stones-

a Shewing the absurdity of defining the Church by counting
heads.0 This refers to the distinction drawn by the Ar.'ans in degree as
to the Godhead, asserting the Spirit to be great, the Son greater,
and the father greatest (,cf. Or. xlii., 16).

AGAINST THE ARIANS.

Is this a new faith ?

that the former are purer and more precious
than the latter ?
Are you again indignant ?
Do you again arm yourselves? Do you again
Restrain
insult us?a
your threats a little while that I may speak.
We will not insult you, but we will convict
you ; we will not threaten, but we will re
proach you ; we will not strike, but we will
What
This too appears an insult !
heal.
pride ! Do you here also regard your equal
as your slave?
If not, permit me to speak
openly ; for even a brother chides his brother
if he has been defrauded by him.

II. Would you like me to utter to you the
words of God to Israel, stiff-necked and hard
ened ? " O my people what have I done unto
thee, or wherein have I injured thee, or where
in have I wearied thee ? " 0
This language in
fitter from me to you who insult me.
deed is
It is a sad thing that we watch for opportun
ities against each other, and having destroyed
our fellowship of spirit by diversities of opin
ion have become almost more inhuman and
savage to one another than even the barbarians
who are now engaged in war against us, band
ed together against us by the Trinity whom
we have separated ; with this difference that
we are not foreigners making forays and raids
upon foreigners, nor nations of different lan
guage, which is some little consolation in the
calamity, but are making war upon one an
other, and almost upon those of the same
household ; or if you will, we the members
of the same body are consuming and being
consumed by one another.
Nor is this, bad
though it be, the extent of our calamity, for we
even regard our diminution as a gain.
But
since we are in such a condition, and regulate
our faith by the times, let us compare the
times with one another ; you your Emperor, v
and I my Sovereigns ; 5 you Ahab and I Josias.
Tell me of your moderation, and I will pro
claim my violence.
But indeed yours is pro
claimed by many books and tongues, which I
think future ages will accept as an immortal
pillory for your actions and I will declare my
own.

III. What tumultuous mob have I led against
you ? What soldiers have I armed ? What
general boiling with rage, and more savage
than his employers, and not even a Christian,
but one who offers his impiety against us as
his private worship to his own gods ? ■ Whom

hostile demonstrations on the part of Arian hearers.
y Valens.

a The beginning of the Oration was apparently disturbed by
& Mic. vi. 3.
f Dr. Ullmann makes this passage refer to outrages perpetrated
in Constantinople itself on Gregory, by his Arian opponents. On
one occasion, he says, in the night time the meetin^piace of the
a mob of Arians, and in particular
Orthodox was assailed ;

5 Theodosius and Gratian.

have I besieged while engaged in prayer and
lifting up their hands to God ? When have I
put a stop to psalmody with trumpets? or
mingled the Sacramental Blood with blood of
massacre? What spiritual sighs have I put an
end to by cries of death, or tears of penitence
by tears of tragedy ? What House of prayer
have I made a burialplace ? What liturgical
vessels which the multitude may not touch
have I given over to the hands of the wicked,
of a Nebuzaradan, a chief of the cooks, or of
a Belshazzar, who wickedly used the sacred
vessels for his revels/ and then paid' a worthy
penalty for his madness ? " Altars beloved " as
Holy Scripture saith, but " now defiled."* And
what licentious youth has insulted you for our
sake with shameful writhings and contortions?
0 precious Throne, seat and rest of precious
men, which hast been occupied b*y a succes
sion of pious Priests, who from ancient times
have taught the divine Mysteries, what hea
then popular speaker and evil tongue hath
mounted thee to inveigh against the Christian's
faith? O modesty and majesty of Virgins,
that cannot endure the looks of even virtuous
men, which of us hath shamed thee, and out
raged thee by the exposure of what may not
be seen, and showed to the eyes of the impious
a pitiable sight, worthy of the fires of Sodom ?
1 say nothing of deaths, which were more
endurable than this shame.

IV. What wild beasts have we let loose upon
the bodies of Saints,-like some who have
prostituted human nature,-on one single ac
cusation, that of not consenting to their im
piety ; or defiled ourselves by communion
with them, which we avoid like the poison
of a snake, not because it injures the body,
but because it blackens the depths of the soul ?
Against whom have we made it a matter of
criminal accusation that they buried the dead,
whom the very beasts
And
what a charge, worthy of another theatre and
What Bishop's aged flesh
of other beasts !
have we carded with hooks in the presence of
their disciples, impotent to help them save by
tears, hung up with Christ, conquering by
suffering, and sprinkling the people with their

reverenced ?

women of the lowest stamp, set on by monks, armed themselves
with sticks and stones, and forced an entrance into the peaceful
place of holy worship. The champion of orthodoxy well nigh be
came a martyr to his convictions ; the Altar was profaned, the con
secrated wine was mixed with blood ; the house of prayer was made
a scene of outrage and unbridled licentiousness. The Benedictine
Kditors, however, whom Henoit follows, think the reference is to
the disturbances in Alexandria when the Arian Lucius was forcibly
intruded into the Chair of Athanasius by the Prefect Palladius. A
full account of the atrocities by which his installation was marked
is to be found in a letter of Peter, the expelled or orthodox Patri
arch, preserved in TneodoretCH. E. IV. 22).
This Lucius was
living in Constantinople and abetting the Arian party there at the
time when Gregory pronounced this Oration,
y Hot. viii, 11 (LXX.).

a a Kings xxv. 11.

0 Dan. v. 3.

33°

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

precious blood, and at last carried away to
death, to be both crucified and buried and
glorified with Christ ; with Christ Who con
quered the world by such victims and sacri
fices ?
What priests have those contrary
elements fire and water divided, raising a
strange beacon over the sea, and set on fire to
gether with the ship in which they put to
sea?" Who (to cover the more numerous
part of our woes with a veil of silence) have
been accused of inhumanity by the very mag
istrates who conferred such favour on them ?
For even if they did obey the lusts of those
men, yet at any rate they hated the cruelty of
their purpose.
The one was opportunism, the
other calculation ; the one came of the law
lessness of the Emperor, the other of a con
sciousness of the laws by which they had to
judge.

V. And to speak of older things, for they too
belong to the same fraternity ; whose hands liv
ing or dead have I cut off-to bring a lying
accusation against Saints/ and to triumph over
Whose exiles have I
the faith by bluster?
numbered as benefits, and failed to reverence
even the sacred colleges of sacred philosophers,
whence I sought their suppliants ?
Nay the
very contrary is the case ; I have reckoned
as Martyrs those who incurred anger for the
truth.
Upon whom have I, whom you accuse
of licentiousness of language, brought harlots
when they were almost fleshless and bloodless?
Which of the faithful have I 'exiled from their
country and given over to the hands of lawless
men, that they might be kept like wild beasts
in rooms without light, and (for this is the sad
dest part of the tragedy) left separated from
each other to endure the hardships of hunger
and thirst, with food measured out to them,
which they had to receive through narrow
openings, so that they might not be permitted
even to see their companions in misery.
And
what were they who suffered thus? Men of
Is it thus
whom the world was not worthy. v
that you honour faith ?
Is this your kind
treatment of it ? Ye know not the greater part
of these things, and that reasonably, because
of the number of these facts and the pleasure of

a Socrates (H. E. IV. i6t gives an account of the murder of
eighty Priests by order of Valens. The Prefect of Nicomcdia,
lieing afraid to execute the Kmperor's commands by a public ac
tion, put these men on board a ship, as if to send them tnto exile,
but gave orders to the crew to setthc vessel on fire on the high
seas, and leave the prisoners to their fate.
liillius. however, thinks that the reference is to the martyrdom of
a single Priest, whose death in this way is described by S. Gre
gory in hts panegyric on Maximus (Or. xxv 10. p. 461, 462).
0 S. Athauasius was accused by the Arians of having murdered
a Melctian llishop named Arsenius, and cut off his hand to use for
magical purposes ; and at a Synod held at Tyre in 334 they pro
Athauasius. however, was able to
duced the alleged hand in a box.
produce Arsenius alive and unmutilated ; but even so his accusers
y Heb. id. 38.
were not satisfied.

But he who suffers has a better
the action.
memory.
There have been even some more
cruel than the times themselves, like wild boars
I demand your victim
hurled against a fence.
of yesterday* the old man, the Abraham-like
Father, whom on his return from exile you
greeted with stones in the middle of the day
and in the middle of the city.
But we,
is not invidious to say so, begged off
if it
even our murderers from their danger.
God
says somewhere in Scripture, How shall I
pardon thee for this ? P Which of these things
shall I praise ; or rather for which shall I bind
a wreath upon you ?

VI. Now since your antecedents are such, I
should be glad if you too will tell me of my
crimes, that I may either amend my life or be
put to shame. My greatest wish is that I may
be found free from wrong altogether ; but if
this may not be, at least to be converted from
my crime ; for this is the second best portion
of the prudent.
For if like the just man I do
not become my own accuser in the first in
stance,* yet at any rate I gladly receive healing
from another.
" Your City, you say to me, is
a little one, or rather is no city at all, but only '
a village, arid, without beauty, and with few
inhabitants."
But, my good friend, this is
my misfortune, rather than my fault ; -if in
deed it be a misfortune ; and if it is against my
will, I am to be pitied for my bad luck, if I
may put it so ; but if it be willingly, I am a
philosopher.
Which of these is a crime?
Would anyone abuse a dolphin for not being a
land animal, or an ox because it is not aquatic,
or a lamprey because it is amphibious?
But
we, you go on, have walls and theatres and
racecourses and palaces, and beautiful great
Porticoes, and that marvellous work the un
river,8 and the
derground and
overhead
splendid
the
crowded marketplace and a restless people, and
a famous senate of highborn men.

admired column,' and

and

VII. Why do you not also mention the con
venience of the site, and what I may call the
contest between land and sea as to which owns
the City, and which adorns our Royal City
with all their good things ?
This then is our
crime, that while you are great and splendid,
we are small and come from a small place ?
Many others do you this wrong, indeed all
those whom you excel ; and mist we die be-

a The reference is perhaps to Eusebius of Samosata. who was
In dying he
killed by a tile thrown at him by an Arian womanbound his friends by an oath not to allow the murderess to be pun
ished.
0 Jer. v. 7.
6 Valens had constnicted an Aqueduct, partly subterranean,
partly raised on arches, for the supply of water to the Capital.
e A magnificent column on which stood an equestrian statue of
Constantine the Great.

y Prov. xviit. 17.

AGAINST THE ARIANS.

33i

cause we have not reared a city, nor built walls
around it, nor can boast of our racecourse, or
our stadia, and pack of hounds, and all the
follies that are connected with these things;
nor have to boast of the beauty and splendour
of our baths, and the costliness of their mar
bles and pictures and golden embroideries of all
sorts of species, almost rivalling nature ?
Nor
have we yet rounded off the sea for ourselves,
or mingled the seasons, as of course you, the
new Creators, have done, that we may live in
what is at once the pleasantest and the safest
way.
Add if you like other charges, you who
say, The silver is mine and the gold is mine,"
those words of God. We neither think much
of riches, on which, if they increase, our Law
forbids us to set our hearts, nor do we count
up yearly and daily revenues ; nor do we rival
one another in loading our tables with enchant
ments for our senseless belly.
For neither do
we highly esteem those things which after we
have swallowed them are all of the same worth,
or rather I should say worthlessness, and are
But we live so simply and from
rejected.
hand to mouth, as to differ but little from
beasts whose sustenance is without apparatus
and inartificial.

VIII. Do you also find fault with the raggedness of my dress, and the want of elegance
in the disposition of my face ? for these are
the points upon which I see that some persons
who are very insignificant pride themselves.
Will you leave my head alone, and not jeer at
it, as the children did at Elissacus ? What fol
lowed I will not mention.
And will you
leave out of your allegations my want of educa
tion, and what seems to you the roughness
and rusticity of my elocution? And where 1
will you put the fact that I am not full of
small talk, nor a jester popular with company, '
nor great hunter of the
marketplace, nor |
given to chatter and gossip with any chance
people upon all sorts of subjects, so as to make
even conversation grievous; nor a frequenter
of Zeuxippus, that new Jerusalem ; 0 nor one
who strolls from house to house flattering and
stuffing himself ; but for the most part staying
at home, of low spirits and with a melancholy
cast of countenance, quietly associating with
myself, the genuine critic of my actions ; and
perhaps worthy of imprisonment for my uselessness? How is
it that you pardon me for
all this, and do not blame me for it ? How
sweet and kind you are.

a Hagg. ii. 8
0 It is not certain what is the allusion here.

Some think a
jjreat Circus or Hippodrome for chariot races ; others say an in
stitution in which were heretical schools ; others again, the great
baths of Zeuxippus.

IX. But I am so old fashioned and such a
philosopher as to believe that one heaven is
common to all ; and that so is the revolution
of the sun and the moon, and the order and ar
rangement of the stars ; and that all have in
common an equal share and profit in day and
night, and also change of seasons, rains, fruits,
and quickening power of the air ; and that the
flowing rivers are a common and abundant
wealth to all ; and that one and the same is the
Earth, the mother and the tomb, from which
we were taken, and to which we shall return,
none having a greater share than another. And
further, above this, we have in common reason,
the Law, the Prophets, the very Sufferings of
Christ, by which we were all without excep
tion created anew, who partake of the same
Adam, and were led astray by the serpent and
slain by sin, and are saved by the heavenly
Adam and brought back by the tree of shame
to the tree of life from whence we had fallen.

X. I was deceived too by the Ramah of
Samuel, that little fatherland of the great man ;
which was no dishonour to the Prophet, for it
drew its honour not so much from itself as from
him ; nor was he hindered on its account from
being given to God before his birth, or from
uttering oracles, and foreseeing the future ; nor
only so, but also anointing Kings and Priests,
and judging the men of illustrious cities.
heard also of Saul, how while seeking his fath
er's asses he found a kingdom. And even
David himself was taken from the sheepfolds
What of Amos ?
to be the shepherd of Israel.
Was he not, while a goatherd and scraper of
sycamore fruit entrusted with the gifts of pro
phecy ? How is
it that I have passed over
Joseph, who was both a slave and the giver of
corn to Egypt, and the father of many myriads
who were promised before to Abraham ? Aye
and I was deceived by the Carmel of Eli as,
who received the car of fire ; and by the sheep
skin of Elissaeus that had more power than a
silken web or than gold forced into garments.
I was deceived by the desert of John, which
held the greatest among them that are born of
women, with that clothing, that food, that
girdle, which we know.
And I ventured even
beyond these, and found God Himself the
I will range myself
Patron of my rusticity.
with Bethlehem, and will share the ignominy
of the Manger ; for since you refuse on this ac
count honour to God, it is no wonder that on
the same account you despise His herald also.
And I will bring up to you the Fishermen, and
the poor to whom the Gospel is preached, as
preferred before many rich.
Will you ever
leave off priding yourselves upon your cities ?

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

Will you ever revere that wilderness which you
abominate and despise ?
I do not yet say
that gold has its birthplace in sand ; nor that
translucent stones are the product and gifts
of rocks ; for if to these I should oppose all
that is dishonourable in cities perhaps it would
be to no good end that I should use my free
dom of speech.

XI. But perhaps some one who is very cir
cumscribed and carnally minded will say,
' ' But our herald is a stranger and a foreigner. ' 1
What of the Apostles ? Were not they strangers
to the many nations and cities among whom
they were divided, that the Gospel might have
free course everywhere, that nothing might
miss the illumination of the Threefold Light,
or be unenlightened by the Truth ; but that
the night of ignorance might be dissolved for
those who sat in darkness and the shadow of
You have heard the words of Paul,
death ?
" that we might go the Gentiles, and they
to the Circumcision." n
Be it that Judsea is
Peter's home ; what has Paul in common. with
the Gentiles, Luke with Achaia, Andrew with
Epirus, John with Ephesus, Thomas with In
dia, Marc with Italy, or the rest, not to go
into particulars, with those to whom they went ?
So that you must either blame them or excuse
me, or else prove that you, the ambassadors of
the true Gospel, are being insulted by trifling.
But since I have argued with you in a petty
way about these matters, I will now proceed
to take a larger and more philosophic view of
them.

XII. My friend, every one that is of high
mind has one Country, the Heavenly Jerusa
lem, in which we store up our Citizenship. All
have one family-if you look at what is here
below the dust-or if you look higher, that In
breathing of which we are partakers, and which
we were bidden to keep, and with which I must
stand before my Judge to give an account of
my heavenly nobility, and of the Divine Image.
Everyone then is noble who has guarded this
through virtue and consent to his Archetype.
On the other hand, everyone is ignoble who
has mingled with evil, and put upon himself
another form, that of the serpent.
And these
earthly countries and families are the play
things of this our temporary life and scene.
For our country is whatever each may have
first occupied, either as tyrant, or in misfortune ;
and in this we are all alike strangers and pil
grims, however much we may play with names.
And the family is accounted noble which is
either rich from old days, or is recently raised ;

and of ignoble birth that which is of poor par
ents, either owing to misfortune or to want of
ambition.
For how can a nobility be given
from above which is at one time beginning
and at another coming to an end ; and which
is not given to some, but is bestowed on others
by letters patent ?
Such is my mind on this
matter.
Therefore I leave it to you to pride
yourself on tombs or in myths, and I endeav
our as far as I can, to purify myself from de
ceits, that 1 may keep if possible my nobility,
or else may recover it.

lie.

XIII. It is thus then and for these reasons
that I, who am small and of a country without
repute, have come upon' you, and that not of
my own accord, nor self-sent, like many of
those who now seize upon the chief places ;
but because I was invited, and compelled, and
have followed the scruples of my conscience
If it be otherwise,
' and the Call of the Spirit.
! may I continue to fight here to no purpose,
and deliver no one from his error, but may
they obtain their desire who seek the barren
ness of my soul, if I
But since I am
come, and perchance with no contemptible
power (if I may boast myself a little of my
folly), which of those who are insatiable have I
copied, what have I emulated of opportunism,
although I have such examples, even apart
from which it is hard and rare not to be bad ?
Concerning what churches or property have I
disputed with you ; though you have more
than enough of both, and the others too
little ?
edict have we re
jected and emulated ? What rulers have we
fawned upon against you ? Whose boldness
have we denounced ? And what has been
done on the other side against me ?
" Lord,
lay not this sin to their charge," even then I
said, for I remembered in season the words of
Stephen," and so I pray now.
Being reviled,
w-e bless : being blasphemed we retreat.''

What imperial

XIV. And if I am doing wrong in this, that
when tyrannized over I endure it, forgive me
I have borne to be tyrannized
this wrong ;
over by others too ; and I am thankful that
my moderation has brought upon me the
charge of folly.
For I reckon thus, using
considerations altogether higher than any of
yours ; what a mere fraction are these trials of
the spittings and blows which Christ, for Whom
and by Whose aid we encounter these dan
gers, endured.
I do not count them, taken
altogether, worth the one crown of thorns which
robbed our conqueror of his crown, for whose
sake also I learn that I am crowned for the

a Galat it. 9.

a Acts vii, 59.

0 1 Cor. iv. 12.

AGAINST THE ARIANS.

hardness of life.
I do not reckon them worth
the one reed by which the rotten empire was
destroyed ;
the vinegar
of the gall alone,
alone, by which we were cured of the bitter
taste ; of the gentleness alone which He shewed
Was He betrayed with a kiss ?
in His Passion.
He reproves with a kiss, but smites not.
Is
he suddenly arrested ? He reproaches indeed,
but follows ; and if through zeal thou cuttest
off the ear of Malchus with the sword, He will
be angry, and will restore it. And if one flee
in a linen sheet," he will defend him.
And if
you ask for the fire of Sodom upon his cap
tors, he will not pour it forth; and if he take
a thief hanging upon the cross for his crime,
he will bring him into Paradise through His
Goodness.
Let all the acts of one that loves
men be loving, as were all the sufferings of
to which we could add nothing
Christ,
greater than, when God even died for us, to
refuse on our part to forgive even the smallest
wrongs of our fellow-men.

before.

These men have

sacrifices, reasonable

XV. Moreover this also I reckoned and still
reckon with myself ; and do you see if it is
I have often discussed it
not quite correct.
with
the
you
houses, but we the Dweller in the house ; they
the Temples, we the God ; and besides it is
ours to be living temples of the Living God,
lively
burnt-offerings,
perfect sacrifices, yea, gods through the ado
ration of the Trinity.
They have the people,
we the Angels ; they rash boldness, we faith ;
they threaten ings, we prayer ; they smiting,
they gold and silver, we
we endurance ;
the pure word.
"Thou hast built for thyself
a wide house and large chambers (recognize
the words of Scripture), a house ceiled and
But not yet is this
pierced with windows."*
loftier than my faith, and than the heavens to
which I am being borne onwards.
Is mine a
But it is not being carried over
little flock?
a precipice.
But it
Is mine a narrow fold ?
it cannot be en
is unapproachable by wolves ;
tered by a robber, nor climbed by thieves and
strangers.
I know well,
shall yet see it,
wider.
And many of those who are now
wolves, I must reckon among my sheep, and
This is
perhaps even amongst the shepherds.
the glad tidings brought me by the Good Shep
herd, for Whose sake I lay down my life for
I fear not for the little flock, for
the sheep.
I know my sheep and
it is seen at a glance.
Such are they that know
am known of mine.
God and are known of God. My sheep hear
my voice, which I have heard from the ora-

a Mark xiv. 51.

J5 Jer. xxii. 14.

cles of God, which I have been taught by the
Holy Fathers, which I have taught alike on all
occasions, not conforming myself to the op
will never cease to
portune, and which 1
teach ; in which I was born, and in which I
will depart.

XVI. These I call by name (for they are not
nameless like the stars which are numbered
and have names), a and they follow me, for I
rear them up beside the waters of rest ; and
they follow every such shepherd, whose voice
they love to hear, as you see ; but a stranger
they will not follow, but will flee from him,
because they have a habit of distinguishing the
voice of their own from that of strangers.
They will flee from Valentinus^ with his di
vision of one into two, refusing to believe that
the Creator is other than the Good. They will
flee from Depth and Silence, and the mythical
yEons, that are verily worthy of Depth and Si
lence.
They will flee from Marcion's * god,
compounded of elements and numbers ; from
Montanus'8 evil and feminine spirit^ from the
matter and darkness of Manes ; • from Novatus'f boasting
of
purity ; from the analysis and confusion of
Sabellius,i and if I may use the expression,

and wordy assumption

a Ps. cxlvii. 4.
0 Valhntinus. a celebrated Gnostic leader of the Second Cen
tury, was one of the first Gnostics who taught in Home. He was
probaMy of /Egypto-Jewish d-scent, and was educated at Alexandria. He died in Cyprus about rCo.
His system is a very
curious our, giving the reins to the wildest vagaries of the imagin
ation. The original eternal Being, or Absolute Kxistence, he called
Kythos or Depth ; and to this he assigned as a wife Sige or Silence.
From this union there spiang thirty ^Cons or Kmanations, who un
folded the Attributes of the Deity and created the world.
y Marcion was a contempoiary of Valentinus. He was a na
tive of Sinope in Pontus. of which city his father was Hishop. He
supposed Three Principles, the Good God, Who was first revealed
by Christ ; the Just Creator, Who is the " hot tempered and imper
fect " God of the Jews ; and the intrinsically evil Hyle or Matter,
which is ruled by the Devil He also distinguished two Messiahs ;
one a mere warrior prince sent by the Jewish God to restore
Israel ; the other sent by the Good God for the delivery of the
whole human race.
& Montanus, a Phrygian enthusiast of the middle of the Second
Century, imagined himself the inspired Organ of the Paraclete.
C'lnnccted with him were two Prophetesses, Priscdla r.nd Maximilla, who left their husbands to follow him.
His heresy, or
rather his schism, spread to Rome and Northern Africa, and
threw the whole Church into confusion. He was very early an
1 atheiuatized by Uishops and Synods of Asia, but he carried the
[ great Alrican, Te- tullian, away by his frenzy.
e Manrs or Mam, a Persia philosopher, astronomer, and
painter oftheThird Century, who int'oduced into Christianity some
leligion of Zoroaster, especially its
irporroc </i«i>8oc, Dualism, the co-eternity of two contradictory prin
ciples. Light and Darkness, Spirit and Matter. Good and Kvil
This heresy flourished ti'l the Sixth Century, S. Augustine himself
It is bcl cved not to
having l)ccn for nine years led away by it.
be wholly extinct even now in some parts of Eastern Christendom.
£Novati s was a Carthaginian Priest, who at first rebelled
against his Hishop, S. Cyp'ian. on account of his severity in the
treatment of persons who had lapsed in the Dccian persecution.
At Rome, howeve-, this same Novatus, either out of simple antag
onism to constituted authority, or because he had really changed
his views, adopted the extremest rigorism, and became one of
!
' the most violent partisans of the Pr'est Novation, whom his fol
lowers contrived to get consecrated as a rival Hishop of Rome, in
opposition to Cornelius, the reigning Pope. They set up a new
''church," and arrogated to themselves an exclusive claim to the
title of Cathari, the Pure.
17 Sadri-LU'S, a native of the Libyan Pentapolis, rejected the
Catholic Faith of the Trinity of Persons in God, and would only

I elements drawn from the

I allow a Trinity of manifestations.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

his absorption, contracting the Three into One,
instead of defining the One in Three Personal
ities ; from the difference of natures taught by
followers, and their new
Arius" and his
Judaism, confining the Godhead to the Unbegotten ; from Photinus' f earthly Christ, who
took his beginning from Mary.
But they
worship the Father and the Son and the Holy
Ghost, One Godhead ; God the Father, God
the Son and (do not be angry) God the Holy
Ghost, One Nature in Three Personalities, in
tellectual,
perfect, Self-existent, numerically
separate, but not separate in Godhead.

XVII. These words let everyone who threat
ens me to-day concede to me ; the rest let who
ever will claim. The Father will not endure to
l^e deprived of the Son, nor the Son of the Holy
Ghost. Yet that must happen if They are con
.
fined to time, and are created Beings
for that which is created is not God.
Nei
ther will I bear to be deprived of my con
secration ; One Lord, One Faith, One Bap
If this be cancelled, from whom shall I
tism.
What say you, you who des
get a second ?
Can a man be
troy Baptism or repeat it?
spiritual without the Spirit?
Has he a share
in the Spirit who does not honour the Spirit?
Can he honour Him who is baptized into a
It is not so ;
creature and a fellow-servant?
it is not so ; for all your talk.
I will not play
Thee false, O Unoriginate Father, or Thee O
Only-begotten Word, or Thee O Holy Ghost.
I know Whom I have confessed, and whom I
have renounced, and to Whom I have joined
myself.
I will not allow myself, after having
been taught the words of the faithful, to learn
also those of the unfaithful ; to confess the
truth, and then range myself with falsehood ;
to come down for consecration and to go back
even less hallowed ; having been baptised that
I might live, to be killed by the water, like
infants who die in the very birthpangs, and
receive death simultaneously with birth. Why
make me at once blessed and wretched , newly
enlightened and unenlightened, Divine and
godless,
that I may make shipwreck even
of the hope of regeneration ? A few words
will suffice.
In
The Father ?
to what were you baptised ?
.
Good but Jewish still.
.
.
The
.
good

Remember your confession.

but not yet perfect.

The Son ?

.

.

a It is hardly necessary here to dwell on the Arian tenets ; cf.
Pr- legomena to the The-'logical Oration.
6 PnoriNl'S was a Galatian by birth, and flourished in the fourth
cenlury. a little cailier than S. Gregory. He seems t'l have
taught that our I/»rd Jesus Christ was a mere man, and had no
existence previous to His Birth of the Virgirr Mary. He made
Jesus rise on the ba^is of His human nature, by a course r f moral
improvement, to the divine dignity- so that the Pivine in Him is a
thing of growth : cf. Schaff, H. E. Nicenc Period, vol. ii. p. 653.

.

.

.

Very good

Holy Ghost ?
.
this is perfect. Now was it into these simply,
or some common name of Them ? The latter.
And what was the common Name ? Why,
God.
In this common Name believe, and
ride on prosperously and reign," and pass on
from hence into the Bliss of Heaven.
And
that is, as 1 think, the more distinct apprehen
sion of These ; to which may we all come, in
the same Christ our God, to Whom be the
glory and the might, with the Unoriginate
Father, and the Lifegiving Spirit, now and
for ever and to ages of ages.

Amen.

ORATION XXXIV.
On the Arrival of the Egyptians.
This Oration was preached at Constantinople in

380, under tiie following circumstances :

Peter, Patriarch of Alexandria, had sent a mission
of five of his Suffragans to consecrate the impostor
Maximus to the Throne occupied by Gregory.
This
had led to much trouble, but in the end the intruder
had been expelled and banished.
Shortly afterwards
an Egyptian fleet, probably the regular corn ships, had
arrived at Constantinople, apparently on the day be
fore a Festival. The crews of the ships, landing next
I day to go to Church, passed by the numerous Churches
held by the Atians, and betook themselves to the little
Anastasia.
S. Gregory felt himself moved to congrat
ulate them specially on such an act, after what had re
cently passed, and accordingly pronounced the follow
ing discourse.

I.

I will address myself as is right to those
who have come from Egypt; for they have
I come here eagerly, having overcome illwill
by zeal, from that Egypt which is enriched by
the River, raining out of the earth, and like
the sea in its season,-if I too. may follow in my
small measure those who have so eloquently
spoken of these matters ; and which is also
enriched by Christ my Lord, Who once wr.s a
fugitive into Egypt, and now is supplied by
Egypt ; the first, when He fled from Herod's
massacre of the children ; 0 and now by the love
of the fathers for their children, by Christ the
new Food of those who hunger after good ; »
the greatest alms of com of which history
speaks and men believe ;
the Bread which
came down from heaven and giveth life to the
world, that life which is indestructible and in
dissoluble, concerning Whom I now seem to
hear the Father saying, Out of Egypt have I
called My Son.*

II. For from you hath sounded forth the
Word to all men ; healthfully believed and
preached ; and you are the best bringers of fruit
of all men, specially of those who now hold the

a Ps. xlv. 4. 0 Matt. ii. 13.

y John vi. 33.

S Hos. xi. 1.

ON THE ARRIVAL OF THE EGYPTIANS.

*» 9 r

right faith, as far as I know, who am not only
a lover of such food, but also its distributor,
and not at home only but also abroad.
For
you indeed supply bodily food to peoples and
cities so far as your lovingkindness reaches ;
and you supply spiritual food also, not to a
particular people, nor to this or that city, cir
cumscribed by narrow boundaries, though its
but to
people may think it very illustrious,
almost the whole world.
And you bring the
remedy not for famine of bread or thirst of
water," which is no very terrible famine-and
to avoid it is easy ; but to a famine of hearing
the Word of the Lord, which it is most miser
able to suffer, and a most laborious matter to
cure at the present time, because iniquity
hath abounded,3 and scarce anywhere do I
find its genuine healers.

III. Such was Joseph your Superintendent
of corn measures, whom 1 may call ours also ;
who by his surpassing wisdom was able both to
foresee the famine and to cure it by decrees of
government, healing the ill-favoured and starv
ing kine by means of the fair and fat.v And
indeed you may understand by Joseph which
you will, either the great lover and creator
and namesake of immortality or his successor
in throne and word and hoary hair, our new
Peter,4 not inferior in virtue or fame to him
by whom the middle course was destroyed and
crushed, though it still wriggles a little weak
ly, like the tail of a snake after it is cut off ;
the one of whom, after having departed this
life in a good old age after many conflicts
and wrestlings, looks upon us from above, I
well know, and reaches a hand to those who
are labouring for the right : and this the more,
in proportion as he is freed from his bonds ; and
the other is hastening to the same end or dis
solution of life, and is already drawing near
the dwellers in heaven, but is still so far in
the flesh as is needed to give the last aids to
the Word, and to take his journey with richer
provision.

IV. Of these great men and doctors and
soldiers of the truth and victors, you are the
nurslings and offspring ; of these neither times
nor tyrants, reason nor envy, nor fear, nor ac
cuser, nor slanderer, whether waging open war
against them, or plotting secretly ; nor any who
appeared to be of our side, nor any stranger, nor
gold -that hidden tyrant, through which now
almost everything is turned upside down and
made to depend on the hazard of a die ; nor
flatteries nor threats, nor long and distant ex
iles (for they only could not be affected by con

a Amos viii. n.
y Gen. xli. 29 sq.

$ Matt. xxiv. la.
& Athanasius.

fiscation, because of their great riches, which
were-to possess nothing) nor anything else,
whether absent or present or expected, could in
duce to take the worse part, and to be anywise
traitor to the Trinity, or to suffer loss of the
Godhead. On the contrary indeed, they grew
strong by dangers, and became more zealous
for true religion.
For to suffer thus for Christ
adds to one's love, and is as it were an earnest to
high-souled men of further conflicts. These, O
Egypt, are thy present tales and wonders.

and

matter,

V. Once thou didst praise me thy Mendesian
Goats, and thy Memphite Apis, a fatted and
fleshy calf, and the rites of Isis, and the muti
lations of Osiris, and thy venerable Serapis, a
log that was honoured by myths and ages
and the madness of its worshippers, as some
unknown
however
heavenly
it may have been aided by falsehood ; and
things yet more shameful than these, multiform
images of monstrous beasts and creeping things,
all of which Christ and the heralds of Christ
have conquered, both the others who have been
illustrious in their own times, and also the
Fathers whom I have named just now ; by
whom, O admirable country, thou art more
famous today than all others put together,
whether in ancient or modern history.

VI. Wherefore I embrace and salute thee, O
noblest of peoples and most Christian, and of
warmest piety, and worthy of thy leaders ; for
I can find nothing greater to say of thee than
this, nor anything by which better to welcome
And I greet thee, to a small extent with
thee.
my tongue, but very heartily with the move
ments of my affections." O my people, for I call
you mine, as of one mind and one faith, in
structed by the same Fathers, and adoring the
same Trinity. My people, for mine thou art,
though it seem not so to those who envy me.
And that they who are in this case may be the
deeper wounded, see, I give the right hand of
fellowship before so many witnesses, seen and
And I put away the old calumny by
unseen.
this new act of kindness. O my people, for
mine thou art, though in saying so I, who am
least of all men, am claiming for myself that
which is greatest.
For such is the grace of the
Spirit that it makes of equal honour those who
are of one mind. O my people, for mine thou
art, though it be afar, because we are divinely
joined together,3 and in a manner wholly differ
ent to the unions of carnal people ; for bodies
are united in place, but souls are fitted together
by the Spirit. O my people, who didst for
merly study how to suffer for Christ, but now

a Galat. ii. 9.

0 Isa. Ixii. 4.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

if thou wilt hearken unto me, wilt study not
to do aught, but to consider the power of do
ing to be a sufficient gain, and to deem that
thou art offering a sacrifice to Christ, as in
those days of thy endurance so in these of meek
ness. O people to whom the Lord hath pre
pared Himself to do good, as to do evil to thine
enemies. a O people, whom the Lord hath cho
sen to Himself out of all peoples ; O people who
art graven upon the hands of the Lord, to whom
saith the Lord, Thou art My Will ; and, Thy
gates are carved wrork, and all the rest that is
said to them that are being saved. O people ;
-nay, marvel not at my insatiability that I
repeat your name so often ; for I delight in
this continual naming of you, like those who
can never have enough of their enjoyment of
certain spectacles or sounds.

VII. But, O people of God and mine, beau
tiful also was your yesterday's assembly, which
you held upon the sea, and pleasant, if any
sight ever was, to the eyes, when I saw the
sea like a forest, and hidden by a cloud made
with hands, and the beauty and speed of your
ships, as though ordered for a procession, and
the slight breeze astern, as though purposely
escorting you, and wafting to the City your
city of the Sea.
Yet the present assembly
which we now behold is more beautiful and
more magnificent.
For you have not hast
ened to mingle with the larger number, nor
have you reckoned religion by numbers, nor
endured to be a mere unorganized rabble,
rather than a people purified by the Word of
God ; but having, as
is right, rendered to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, ye have
offered besides to God the things that are
God's; to the former Custom, to the latter
Fear; and after feeding the people with your
cargoes, you yourselves have come to be fed by
us.
For we also distribute corn, and our dis
tribution is perhaps not worth less than yours.
Come eat of my Bread and drink of the Wine
I join with
which I have mingled for you.0
Wisdom in bidding you to my table.
For I
commend your good feeling, and I hasten to
meet your ready mind, because ye came to us
as to your own harbour, running to your like ;
and ye valued the kindred Faith, and thought
it monstrous that, while they who insult high
er things are in harmony with each other and
think alike, and think to make good each
man's individual falsehood by their common
strength
conspiracy, like
from being twisted together ; yet you should
not meet nor combine with those who are of the

ropes which get

same mind, with whom it is more reasonable
that you should associate, for we gather in the
Godhead also. And that you may see that
not in vain have you come to us, and that you
have not brought up in a port among stran
gers and foreigners, but amongst your own
people, and have been well guided by the
Holy Ghost ; we will discourse to you briefly
concerning God ; and do you recognize your
own, like those who distinguish their kindred
by the ensigns of their arms.

VIII. I find two highest differences in things
that exist, viz.: -Rule, and Service; not such
as among us either tyranny has cut or poverty
distin
has severed, but which nature has
guished, if any like to use this word.
For
That which is First is also above nature. Of
these the former is creative, and originating,
and unchangeable ; but the other is created,
and subject and changing ; or to speak yet
more plainly, the one is above time, and the
other subject to time.
The Former is called
God, and subsists in Three Greatest, namely,
the Cause, the Creator, and the Perfecter ; I
mean the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, who are neither so separated from one
another as to be divided in nature, nor so
contracted as to be circumscribed by a single
person ; the one alternative being that of the
Arian madness, the other that of the Sabellian
heresy ; but they are on the one hand more
single than what is altogether divided, and on
the other more abundant than what is alto
The other division is with
gether singular.
us, and is called Creation, though one may be
exalted alxne another according to the pro
portion of their nearness to God.

IX. This being so, if any be on the Lord's
side let him come with us,a and let us adore the
One Godhead in the Three ; not ascribing any
name of humiliation to the unapproachable
Glory, but having the exaltations of the Triune
God continually in our mouth. '
For since we
cannot properly describe even the greatness of
Its Nature, on account of Its infinity and undefinableness, how can we assert of It humilia
tion ?
But if any one be estranged from God,
and therefore divideth the One Supreme Sub
stance into an inequality of Natures, it were
marvellous if such an one were not cut in sun
der by the sword, and his portion appointed
with the unbelievers,* reaping any evil fruit of
his evil thought both now and hereafter.

X. What must we say of the Father, Whom
by common consent all who have been preoccu
pied with natural conceptions share, although

a Isai. Ixiv. I a, etc.

$ PrOT. ix. 5.

a Exod. xxxii. 26.

fi Ps. cxlix. 6.

y Luke xii. 46.

ON THE ARRIVAL OF THE EGYPTIANS.

or

He hath endured die beginnings of dishonour,
having been first divided by ancient innova
tion into the Good and the Creator.
And of
the Son and of the Holy Ghost, see how sim
ply and concisely we shall discourse.
If any
one could say of Either that He was mutable
or subject to change ; or that either in time,
or place, or power, or energy He could be
measured ; or that He was not naturally good,
or not Self-moved, or not a free agent, or a
Minister, or
that He
a Hymnsinger ;
feared, or was a recipient of freedom, or was
not counted with God ; let him prove this
and we will acquiesce, and will be glorified
by the Majesty of our Fellow Servants, though
we lose our God.
But if all that the Father
has belongs likewise to the Son, except Caus
ality ; and all that is the Son's belongs also
to the Spirit, except His Sonship, and what
soever is spoken of Him as to Incarnation for
me a man, and for my salvation, that, taking
of mine, He may impart His own by this new
commingling ;
your babbling,
though so late, O ye sophists of vain talk that
falls at once to the ground ; for why will ye
die O House of Israel ? a -if I may mourn for
you in the words of Scripture.

cease

then

XI. For my part I revere also the Titles of
the Word, which are so many, and so high and
great, which even the demons respect.
And
I revere also the Equal Rank of the Holy
fear the threat pronounced
Ghost ; and I
against those who blaspheme Him.
And
blasphemy is not the reckoning Him God, but
the severing Him from the Godhead.
And
here you must remark that That which is blas
phemed is Lord, and That which is avenged is
the Holy Ghost, evidently as Lord.
I cannot
bear to be unenlightened after my Enlighten
ment, by marking with a different stamp any
of the Three into Whom I was baptized ; and
thus to be indeed buried in the water, and in
itiated not into Regeneration, but into death.
XII. I dare to utter something, O Trinity ;
and may pardon be granted to my folly, for
the risk is to my soul.
I too am an Image of
God, of the Heavenly Glory, though I be
I cannot believe that I am
placed on earth.
saved by one who is my equal.
If the Holy
Ghost is not God, let Him first be made God,
and then let Him deify me His equal.
But
now what deceit this is on the part of grace,
or rather of the givers of grace, to believe in
God and to come away godless ; by one set of
questions and confessions leading to another
Alas for this fair fame, if
set of conclusions.

a Ezek. xviii. 31.

after the Laver I am blackened, if I am to see
those who are not yet cleansed brighter than
myself; if I am cheated by the heresy of my
Baptizer ; if I seek for the stronger Spirit and
find Him not.
Give me a second Font before
you think evil of the first. Why do you
grudge me a complete regeneration ? Why
do you make me, who am the Temple of the
Holy Ghost as of God, the habitation of a
creature ? Why do you honour part of what
belongs to me, and dishonour part, judging
falsely of the Godhead, to cut me off from the
Gift, or rather to cut me in two by the gift?
Either honour the Whole, or dishonour the
Whole, O new Theologian, that, if you are wick
ed, you may at any rate be consistent with your
self, and not judge unequally of an equal nature.
XIII. To sum up my discourse: -Glorify
Him with the Cherubim, who unite the Three
Holies into One Lord," and so far indicate the
Primal Substance as their wings open to the
diligent. With David be enlightened, who said
to the Light, In Thy Light shall we see Light,*
that is, in the Spirit we shall see the Son ; and
what can be of further reaching ray ?
With
John thunder, sounding forth nothing that is
low or earthly concerning God, but what is
high and heavenly, Who is in the beginning,
and is with God, and is God the Word,* and
true God of the true Father, and not a good
fellow-servant honoured only with the title of
Son ; and the Other Comforter (other, that is,
from the Speaker, Who was the Word of God).
And when you read, I and the Father are
One,{ keep before your eyes the Unity of Sub
stance ; but when you see, " We will come to
him, and make Our abode with him," 1 remem
ber the distinction of Persons ; and when you
see the Names, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
think of the Three Personalities.

XIV. With Luke be inspired as you study
the Acts of the Apostles. Why do you range
yourself with Ananias and Sapphira, those
vain embezzlers (if indeed the theft of one's
own property be a vain thing) and that by
appropriating, not silver nor any other cheap
and worthless thing, like a wedge of gold,f or
a didrachma, as did of old a rapacious soldier ;
but stealing the Godhead Itself, and lying,
not to men but to God, as you have heard.
What? Will you not reverence even the au
thority of the
Spirit Who breathes upon
whom, and when, and as He wills? He
comes upon Cornelius and his companions
before Baptism, to others after Baptism, by
the hands of the Apostles ; so that from both

alsai. vi. 3.
5 lb. x. 30.

0 Ps. xxxvi. 9.
€ John xiv. 33.

y John i. I.
£ Josh. vii. 91.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

sides, both from the fact that He comes in
the guise of a Master and not of a Servant,
and from the fact of His being sought to make
perfect, the Godhead of the Spirit is testified.
XV. Speak of God with Paul, who was
caught up to the third Heaven," and who some
times counts up the Three Persons, and that in
varied order, not keeping the same order, but
reckoning one and the same Person now first,
now second, now third ; and for what pur
pose? Why, to shew the equality of the
Nature.
And sometimes he mentions Three,
sometimes Two or One, because That which
is not mentioned is included.
And some
times he attributes the operation of God to
the Spirit, as in no respect different from Him,
and sometimes instead of the Spirit he brings
in Christ ; and at times he separates the Per
sons saying, ' ' One God, of whom are all
things, and we in Him ; and one Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom are all things, and we by
Him ; " 0 at other times he brings together the
one Godhead, " For of Him and through Him
and in Him are all things ; " » that is, through
the Holy Ghost, as is shown by many places in
Scripture.
To Him be glory for ever and ever.
Amen.

ORATION XXXVII.
On the Words of the Gospel, " When
Jesus had Finished these Sayings,"
etc. -S. Matt. xix. i.
I. Jesus Who Chose The Fishermen, Him
self also useth a net, and changeth place for
place. Why? Not only that He may gain
more of those who love God by His visitation ;
but also, as it seems to me, that He may hal
low more places.
To the Jews He becomes
as a Jew that He may gain the Jews ; to
them that are under the Law as under the
Law, that He may redeem them that are
under the Law ; to the weak as weak, that
He may save the weak.
He is made all things
to all men that He may gain- all. Why do I
say, All things to all men? For even that
which Paul could not endure to say of himself
I find that the Saviour suffered.
For He is
made not only a Jew, and not only doth He
take to Himself all monstrous and vile names,
but even that which is most monstrous of all,
even very sin and very curse; not that He
it such, but He is called so.
For how can He
be sin, Who setteth us free from sin ; and how
can He be a curse, Who redeemeth us from the
curse of the Law ? 4 But it is in order that He
may carry His display of humility even to this

a s Cor. xii. 3.
v Ram. xi. 36.

3 i Cor. vim. 6.
6 Gal. iii. io, 13.

extent, and form us to that humility which is
the producer of exaltation.
As I said then,
He is made a Fisherman ; He condescendeth to
all ; He casteth the net ; He endureth all things,
that He may draw up the fish from the depths,
that is, Man who is swimming in the unsettled
and bitter waves of life.

II. Therefore now also, when He had fin
ished these sayings He departed from Galilee
and came into the coasts of Judea beyond
Jordan ; He dwelleth well in Galilee, in order
that the people which sat in darkness may see
great Light." He removeth to Judea in order
that He may persuade people to rise up from
the Letter and to follow the Spirit. He teacheth, now on a mountain ; now He discourseth
on a plain ; now He passeth over into a ship ;
now Herebuketh the surges. And perhaps He
goes to sleep, in order that He may bless sleep
also; perhaps He is tired that He may hallow
weariness also ; perhaps He weeps that He
may make tears blessed.
He removeth from
place to place, Who is not contained in any
place ; the timeless, the bodiless, the uncircumscript, the same Who was and is ; Who
was both above time, and came under time,
and was invisible and is seen.
He was in the
beginning and was with God, and was God.fl
The word Was occurs the third time to be
What He was He
confirmed by number.
laid aside ; what He was not He assumed ;
not that He became two, but He deigned to
be One made out of the two.
For both are
God, that which assumed, and that which
was assumed ; two Natures meeting in One,
not two Sons (let us not give a false account
He who is such and so
of the blending).
great-but what has befallen me? I
have
fallen into human language.
For how can So
Great be said of the Absolute, and how can
That which is without quantity be called Sutth ?
But pardon the word, fori am speaking of Khe
greatest
things with a limited instrument.
And That great and long-suffering and form
less and bodiless Nature will endure this, namiely, my words as if of a body, and weaker than
the truth.
For if He condescended to Flesh,,
He will also endure such language.

III. And great multitudes followed Him,
and He healed them there, where the multitude
was greater.
If He had abode upon His own
eminence, if He had not condescended to in
firmity, if He had remained what He was,
keeping Himself unapproachable and incom
prehensible, a few perhaps would have fol
lowed Him-perhaps not even a few, possibly

a Isa- ix. 1.

p John i. I.

ON THE WORDS OF THE GOSPEL.

only Moses-and He only so far as to see
with difficulty the Back Parts of God.° For
He penetrated the cloud, either being placed
outside the weight of the body or being
withdrawn from his senses ;
for how could
he have gazed upon the subtlety, or the incorporeity, or I know not how one should call
it, of God, being incorporate and using mate
But inasmuch as He strips Himself
rial eyes ?
for us, inasmuch as He comes down (and I
speak of an exinanition, as it were, a laying
aside and a diminution of His glory), He be
comes by this comprehensible.

IV. And pardon me meanwhile that I again
suffer a human affection.
I am filled with
indignation and grief for my Christ (and I
would that you might sympathize with me)
when I see my Christ dishonoured on this ac
Is
count on which He most merited honour.
He on this account to be dishonoured, tell me,
that for you He was humble? Is He therefore
a Creature, because He careth for the creature ?
Is He therefore subject to time, because He
watches over those who are subject to time?
Nay, He beareth all things, He endureth all
things.3
And what marvel? He put up with
blows, He bore spittings, He tasted gall for
my taste.
And even now He bears to be
stoned, not only by those who deal despilefully with Him, but also by ourselves who
seem to reverence Him.
For to use corpo
real names when discoursing of the incor
poreal is perhaps the part of those who deal
despitefully and stone Him ; but pardon, I
say again to our infirmity, for I do not will
ingly stone Him ; but having no other words
to use, we use what we have.
Thou art
called the Word, and Thou art above Word ;
Thou art above Light, yet art named Light ;
Thou art called Fire not as perceptible to
sense, but l>ecause Thou purgest light and
worthless matter ;
a Sword, because Thou
severest the worse from the tetter ; a Fan,
because Thou purgest the threshing-floor, and
blowest away all that is light and windy, and
layest up in the garner above all
that is
weighty and full ; an Axe, localise Thou cuttest down the worthless fig-tree, after long
patience, because Thou cuttest away the roots
of wickedness ; the Door, because Thou bringest in ; the Way, because we go straight ; the
Sheep, because Thou art the Sacrifice ;
the
High Priest, because Thou offerest the Body ;
the Son, because Thou art of the Father.
Again I stir men's tongues ; again some men
rave against Christ, or rather against me, who

have been deemed worthy to be a herald of
the Word. I am like John, The Voice of one
crying in the wilderness"-a wilderness that
once was dry, but now is only too populous.

V. But, as I was saying, to return to my
argument ;
for this reason great multitudes
followed Him, because He condescended to
our infirmities.
What next? The Pharisees
also, it says, came unto Him, tempting Him,
it lawful for a man
and saying unto Him, is
to put away his wife for every cause ?
Again
the Pharisees tempt Him ; again they who
read the Law do not know the Law ; again
they who are expounders of the Law need
others to teach them.
It was not enough that
Sadducees should tempt Him concerning the
Resurrection, and Lawyers question Him about
perfection, and the Herodians about the polltax, and others about authority ; but some one
must also ask about Marriage at Him who can
not be tempted, the Creator of wedlock, Him
who from the First Cause made this whole race
of mankind.
And He answered and said unto
them, Have ye not read that He which made
them at the beginning made them male and
female? He knoweth how to solve some of
their questions and to bridle others.
When
He is asked, By what authority doest thou
these things? He Himself, because of the
utter ignorance of those who asked Him, re
plies with another question ; The baptism of
John; was it from Heaven or of men? He
on both sides entangles His questioners, so
that we also are able, following the example
of Christ, sometimes to check those who argue
with us over- officiously, and with still more
absurd questions to solve the absurdity of
their questions.
For we too are wise in
vanity at times, if I may boast of the things
of folly.
But when He sees a question that
calls for reasoning, then He does not deem
His questioners unworthy of prudent answers.
have put
seems to me to do honour to chastity, and to
demand a kind reply.
Chastity, in respect of
which I see that the majority of men are illdisposed, and that their laws are unequal and
irregular.
For what was the reason why they
restrained the woman, but indulged the man,
and that a woman who practises evil against
her husband's bed is an adulteress, and the
penalties of the law for this are very severe :
but if the husband commits fornication against
his wife, he has no account to give? I do not
accept this legislation ;
I do not approve this
They who made the Law were men,
custom.

VI. The question which you

a Kxod. xx. 21 : xxxiii. 20, 23.

fi 1 Cor. xiii. 7.

a Matt. iii. 3.

34Q

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

is hard

and therefore their legislation
on
women, since they have placed children also
under the authority of their fathers, while
leaving the weaker sex uncared for.
God
doth not so ; but saith Honour thy father and
thy mother, which is the first commandment
with promise ; that it may be well with thee ;
and, He that curseth father or mother, let him
die the death.
Similarly He gave honour to
good and punishment to evil. And, The bless
ing of a father strengtheneth the houses of
children, but the curse of a mother uprooteth
See the equality of the
the foundations."
legislation.
There is one Maker of man and
woman ; one debt is owed by children to
both their parents.

VII. How then dost thou demand Chastity,
while thou dost not thyself observe it? How
dost thou demand that which thou dost not
How, though thou art equally a body,
give?
dost thou legislate unequally ?
If thou en
quire into the worse-The Woman Sinned,
and so did Adam.0 The serpent deceived them
both ; and one was not found to be the
But dost
stronger and the other the weaker.
thou consider the better ?
Christ saves both
Was He made flesh for the
by His Passion.
Man ?
Did
So He was also for the woman.
He die for the Man ? The Woman also is
He is called of the
saved by His death.
seed of David ;v and so perhaps you think the
Man is honoured ; but He is born of a Virgin,
and this is on the Woman's side.
They two,
He says, shall be one Flesh ; so let the one
flesh have equal honour." And Paul legislates
for chastity by His example.
How, and in
what way ?
This Sacrament is great, he says,
But I speak concerning Christ and the Church.'
It is well for the wife to reverence Christ
is well for the
through her husband : and it
husband not to dishonor the Church through
his wife.
Let the wife, he says, see that she
reverence her husband, for so she does Christ ;
but also he bids the husband cherish his wife,
for so Christ does the Church.' Let us, then,
give further consideration to this saying.

VIII. Churn milk and it will be butter ;<
examine this and perhaps you may find some
thing more nourishing in it.
For I think
that the Word here seems to deprecate second
marriage.
For, if there were two Christs,
there may be two husbands or two wives ; but
if Christ is One, one Head of the Church, let
there be also one flesh, and let a second be
rejected ; and if it hinder the second what is
The first is law, the
to be said for a third?

second is indulgence, the third is transgres
sion, and anything beyond this is swinish,
such as has not even many examples of its
wickedness. Now the Law grants divorce for
every cause ; but Christ not for every cause ;
but He allows only separation from the whore ;
and in all other things He commands patience.
He allows to put away the fornicatress, be
cause she corrupts the offspring; but in all
other matters let us l>e patient and endure ; or
rather be ye° enduring and patient, as many
as have received the yoke of matrimony.
If
you see lines or marks upon her, take away
her ornaments ;
if a hasty tongue, restrain
if a meretricious laugh, make it modest ;
it ;
if immoderate expenditure or drink, reduce
if unseasonable going out, shackle it ; if
it ;
a lofty eye, chastise
is uncertain
it.
which is in danger, the separator or the se
Let thy fountain of water, it says,
parated.
be only thine own, and let no stranger share
it with thee ; * and, let the colt of thy favours
and the stag of thy love company with thee ;
do thou then take care not to be a strange
river, nor to please others better than thine
own wife.
But if thou be carried elsewher*,
then thou makest a law of lewdness for thy
partner also.

Thus saith the Saviour.

It

IX. But what of the Pharisees ? To them
Yes, for they are also
this word seems harsh.
displeased at other noble words-both the
older Pharisees, and the Pharisees of the pres
For it is not only race, but dispo
ent day.
sition also that makes a Pharisee.
Thus also
I reckon as an Assyrian or an Egyptian him
who is ranged among these by his character.
If the case
What then say the Pharisees ?
of the man be so with his wife, it
is not
Is it only now, O Pharisee,
good to marry.
is not good
that thou understandest this, It
to marry??
Didst thou not know it before
when thou sawest widowhoods, and orphan
hoods, and untimely deaths, and mourning
succeeding to shouting, and funerals coming
upon weddings, and childlessness, and all the
comedy or tragedy that is connected with
Either is most appropriate language.
this?
It
I too admit it, for
marriage is honourable in all, and the bed
is good for the temperate,
undefiled.4
not for those who are insatiable, and who
desire to give more than due honour to the
flesh.
When marriage is only marriage and
conjunction and the desire for a succession of
children, marriage is honourable, for it brings
But
into the world more to please God.

is good to marry ;

It

a Rcchis. iii. ii.
5 Kphc*. v. 32.

fi Gen. iii. 6.
c Ib.v. 22 seq.

y Rom. i. 3.
£ Prov. xxx. 33.

a An indication that S. Gregory was himself unmarried.
5 Hcb. xiii. 4.
y Matt. xix. 10.
0 Prov. v. 17.

ON THE WORDS OF THE GOSPEL.

34r

when it kindles matter, and surrounds us with
thorns, and as it were discovers the way of
vice, then I too say, It is not good to marry.
X. Marriage is honourable ; but I cannot
say that it is more lofty than virginity; for
virginity were no great thing if it were not
better than a good thing.
Do not however
be angry, ye women that are subject to the
yoke. We must obey God rather than man.
But be ye bound together, both virgins and
wives, and be one in the Lord, and each
There would be no celi
others' adornment.
bate if there were no marriage.
For whence
would the virgin have passed into this life?
t Marriage would not have been venerable un
less it had borne virgin fruit to God and to
Honour thou also thy mother, of whom
life.
thou wast born.
Honour thou also her who
is of a mother and is a mother." A mother
she is not, but a Bride of Christ she is.
The
visible beauty is not hidden, but that which
is unseen is visible to God.
All the glory of
the King's Daughter is within,3 clothed with
golden fringes, embroidered whether by ac
tions or by contemplation.
And she who
is under the yoke, let her also in some de
gree be Christ's; and the virgin altogether
Christ's.
Let the one be not entirely chained
to the world,!' and let the other not belong to
For that which is a part to
the world at all.
the yoked, is to the virgin all in all.
Hast
thou chosen the life of Angels? Art thou
ranked among the unyoked?
Sink not down
to the flesh ; sink not down to matter ; be
not wedded to matter, while otherwise thou
remainest unwedded. A lascivious eye guardeth
tongue
a
mingles with the Evil One ; feet that walk
Let
disorderly accuse of disease or danger.
it not rove
the mind also be virgin ;
about ; let it not wander ;
let it not carry in
itself forms of evil things (for the form is a
part of harlotry) ; let it not make idols in its
soul of hateful things.

not virginity ;

meretricious

let

XI. But He said unto them, All men can
not receive this saying, save they to whom
Do you see the sublimity of the
it is given.
It is found to be nearly incompre
matter?
is more than carnal
For surely it
hensible.
that that which is born of flesh should not
beget to the flesh.
Surely it is Angelic that
she who is bound to flesh should live not ac
cording to flesh, but be loftier than her na
The flesh bound her to the world, but
ture.
The flesh weighed
reason led her up to God.

not a mother" but the MSS are against him.

a The passage is obscure.
0 Ps. xlv. 14.

Combefis reads, "Though she be
y Luke viii. 14.

her down, but reason gave her wings; the
flesh bound her, but desire loosed her.
With
thy whole soul, O Virgin, be intent upon God
(I give this same injunction to men and to
women) ; and do not take the same view in
other respects of what is honourable as the
mass of men do ; of family, of wealth, of throne,
of dynasty, of that beauty which shews itself
in complexion and composition of members,
the plaything of time and disease.
If thou
hast poured out upon God the whole of thy
love ; if thou hast not two objects of desire,
both the passing and the abiding, both the
visible and the invisible, then thou hast been
so pierced by the arrow, of election, and hast
so learned the l>eauty of the Bridegroom, that
thou too canst say with the bridal drama and
song, thou art sweetness and altogether love
liness.

XII. You see how streams

confined, in
lead pipes, through being much compressed
and carried to one point, often so far depart
from the nature of water that that which is
pushed from behind will often flow constantly
upwards.
So if thou confine thy desire, and
be wholly joined to God, thou wilt not fall
downward ; thou wilt not be dissipated ; thou
wilt remain entirely Christ's, until thou see
Keep thyself unap
Christ thy Bridegroom.
proachable, both in word and work and life,
and thought and action.
From all sides the
Evil One interferes with thee ; he spies thee
everywhere, where he may strike, where
wound thee ; let him not find anything bared
and ready to his stroke.
The purer he sees
thee, the more he strives to stain thee, for the
stains on a shining garment are more conspic
Let not eye draw eye, nor laughter
uous.
night
laughter, nor
night, lest
bring destruction.
For that which is grad
ually drawn away and stolen, works a mischief
which is unperceived at the time, but yet at
tains to the consummation of wickedness.

familiarity

the mixed.

XIII. All men, He saith, cannot receive
this saying, but they to whom it
is given.
When you hear this, It is given, do not un
derstand it in a heretical fashion, and bring
in differences of nature, the earthly and the
are
spiritual and
people so evilly disposed as to think that some
men are of an utterly ruined nature, and some
of a nature which is saved, and that others
are of such a disposition as their will may lead
them to, either to the better, or to the worse.
For that men may have a certain aptitude,
one more, another less, I too admit ; but not
that this aptitude alone suffices for perfection,
but that it is reason which calls this out, that

For there

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

nature may proceed to action, just as fire is
produced when a flint
is struck with iron.
When you hear To whom it is given, add,
And it is given to those who are called and
to those who incline that way.
For wfien
you hear, Not of him that willeth, nor of
him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy," I counsel you to think the same.
For since there are some who are so proud of
their successes that they attribute all to them
selves and nothing to Him that made them
and gave them wisdom and supplied them
with good ; such are taught by this word that
even to wish well needs help from God ; or
rather that even to choose what is right is
divine and a gift of the mercy of God.
For
it is necessary both that we should be our own
masters and also that our salvation should be
This is why He saith not of him
of God.
that willeth ; that is, not of him that willeth
only, nor of him that runneth only, but also
of God.
Next ; since
to will also is from God, he has attributed the
However much
whole to God with reason.
you may run, however much you may wrestle,
yet you need one to give the crown.
Except
the Lord build the house, they laboured in
vain that built it: Except the Lord keep the
city, in vain they watched that keep it.P
know, He says, that the race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong,'' nor the vic
tory to the fighters, nor the harbours to the
good sailors ; but to God it belongs both to
work victory, and to bring the barque safe
to port.

That sheweth mercy.

XIV. In another place it

is also said and
understood, and perhaps it is necessary that I
should add it as follows to what has alreadybeen said, in order that I may impart to you
also my wealth. The Mother of the Sons of Zebedee, in an impulse of parental affection, asked
a thing in ignorance of the measure of what she
was asking,4 but pardonably, through theexcess
of her love and of the kindness due to her chil
dren.
For there is nothing more affectionate
than a Mother, -and I speak of this that I
may lay down a law for honouring Mothers.
Their mother, then, asked Jesus that they
might sit, the one on His right hand, the
other on his left.
But what saith the Saviour ?
He first asks if they can drink the Cup which
He Himself was about to drink ; and when
this was professed, and the Saviour accepted
the profession (for He knew that they were
being perfected by the same, or rather that
they would be perfected thereby) ; what saith

a Rom. ix. 16.
y Eccles. be., xx.

fi Ps. exxvii. i.
0 Matt, xx, 2o, etc.

He? " They shall drink the cup ; but to sit
on My right hand and on My left-it
is not
Mine, He saith, to give this, but to whom it
Is then the ruling mind
hath been given."
nothing?
Nothing the labour ? Nothing the
reasoning? Nothing the philosophy ? Nothing
the fasting?
Nothing the vigils, the sleeping
on the ground, the shedding floods of tears ?
Is it for nothing of these, but in accordance
with some election by lot, that a Jeremias is
sanctified, and others are estranged from the
womb?

XV. I fear lest some monstrous reasoning
may come in, as of the soul having lived else
where, and then having been bound to this .
body, and that it is from that other life that
some receive the gift of prophecy, and others
are condemned, namely, those who lived
But since such a conception is too
badly.
absurd, and contrary to the traditions of the
Church (others if they like may play with
such doctrines, but it is unsafe for us to play
with them) ; we must in this place too add to
the words "To whom it hath been given,"
this, " who are worthy ; " who have not only
received this character from the Father, but
have given it to themselves.

XVI. For there are eunuchs which were
made eunuchs from their mother's womb, etc.
I should very much like to be able to say some
Be not proud, ye
thing bold about eunuchs.
who are eunuchs by nature.
For, in point of
self-restraint, this is perhaps unwilling. For it
has not come to the test, nor has your selfrestraint been proved by trial.
For the good
which is by nature is not a subject of merit ;
that which is the result of purpose is laudable.
What merit has fire for burning, for it is its
nature to burn ? What merit has water for
falling, a property given to it,by its Maker?
What thanks does the snow get for its cold
ness, or the sun for its shining?-It shines
Claim merit if you
even if it does not wish.
You will
please by willing the better things.
claim it if, being carnal, you make yourself
yourself spiritual ; if, while drawn down by
the leaden flesh, you receive wings from rea
if though lowly born, you are found
son ;
if while chained down to
to be heavenly ;
the flesh, you shew yourself superior to the
flesh.

XVII. Since then, natural chastity is not
meritorious, I demand something else from
Do not go a whoring in re
the eunuchs.
spect of the Godhead.
Having been wedded
to Christ, do not dishonour Christ. Being per
fected by the spirit, do not make the Spirit
If I yet pleased men, says
your own equal.

ON THE WORDS

OF THE GOSPEL.

Paul, I should not be the servant of Christ.* If
I worshipped a creature, 1 should not be called
a Christian.
For why is Christianity pre
Is it not that Christ is God, unless
cious?
my mingling with Him in love is a mere hu
man passion ? And yet I honour Peter, but I
am not called a Petrine; and Paul, but have
never been called a Pauline.
I cannot allow
myself to be named after a man, who am born
of God.
So then, if it is because you believe
Him to be God that you are called a Chris
tian, may you ever be so called, and may you
remain in both the name and the thing ; but
if you are called from Christ only because you
have an affection for Him, you attribute no
more to him than other names which are
given from some practice or fact.

XVIII. Consider those men who are de
They are named after
voted to horse racing.
the colours and the sides on which they have
You know the names
placed themselves.
without my mentioning them.
If it is thus
that you have got the name of Christian, the
mere title is a very small thing even though
you pride yourself upon it.
But if it is be
cause you beheve Him to be God, shew your
faith by your works.
If the Son is a creature,
even now also you are worshipping the crea
If the Holy
ture instead of the Creator.
Ghost is a creature, you are baptized in vain,
and aire only sound on two sides, or rather
not even on them ; but on one you are alto
gether in danger.
Imagine the Trinity to be
asingle pearl, alike on all sides and*equally glis
If any part of the pearl be injured,
tening.
the whole beauty of the stone is gone.
So
when you dishonour the Son in order to hon
our the Father, He does not accept your hon
The Father doth not glory in the dis
our.
honour of the Son.
If a wise Son maketh a
glad Father/ how much more doth the hon
our of the Son become that of the Father !
And if you also accept this saying, My Son,
glory not in the dishonour of thy Father,?
similarly the Father doth not glory in the
Son's dishonour.
If you dishonour the Holy
Ghost, the Son receiveth not your honour. For
though He be not of the Father in the same
way as the Son, yet He is of the same Father.
Either honour the whole or dishonour the
whole, so as to have a consistent mind. I can
not accept your half piety.
I would have
you altogether pious, but in the way that I
Pardon my affection : I am grieved
desire.
even for those who hate me.
You were one
of my members, even though you are now cut

off: perhaps you will again become a mem
ber ; and therefore I speak kindly.
Thus
much for the sake of the Eunuchs, that they
may be chaste in respect of the Godhead.

Do not shew that it

XIX. For it is not only bodily sin which is
called fornication and adultery, but any sin
you have committed, and especially trans
gression against that which is divine.
Perhajw you ask how we can prove this : -They
went a whoring, it says, with their own in
ventions.0
Do you see an impudent act
of fornication ? And again, They committed
adultery in the wood.3
See you a kind of
adulterous religion ? Do not then commit
spiritual adultery, while keeping your bodies
chaste.
is unwillingly
you are chaste in body, by not being chaste
where you can commit fornication. Why
have you done your impiety ? Why are you
hurried to vice, so that it is all one to call a
man a Eunuch or a villain ?
Place yourselves
on the side of men, and, even though so late,
have some manly thoughts.
Avoid the wo
men's apartments ; do not let the disgrace of
proclamation be added to the disgrace of the
name.
Would you have us persevere a little
longer in this discourse, or are you tired with
what we have said ? Nay, by what follows let
For the word
even the eunuchs be honoured.
is one of praise.

XX. There are, He says, some eunuchs
which were so born from their mother's
womb ; and there are some eunuchs which
were made eunuchs of men ; and there be
eunuchs which have made themselves eunuchs
for the Kingdom of Heaven's sake. He that
is able to receive it, let him receive it.
think that the discourse would sever itself
from the body, and represent higher things by
bodily figures ;
for to stop the meaning at
bodily eunuchs would be small and very weak,
and unworthy of the Word ; and we must un
derstand in addition something worthy of the
Some, then, seem by nature to incline
Spirit.
to good.
And when I speak of nature, I am
not slighting free will, but supposing bothan aptitude for good, and that which brings
the natural aptitude to effect.
And there are
others whom reason cleanses, by cutting them
off from the passions.
These I imagine to be
meant by those whom men have made Eunuchs,
when the word of teaching distinguishing the
better from the worse and rejecting the one
and commanding the other (like the verse,
Depart from evil and do good),* works spiritual
This sort of making eunuchs I apchastity.

a Galat. i. 10.

fi Prov. x. i

y Ecclus. iii. xo.

a Ps. cvi. 39.

f$ Jer. iii. 9 (Libere).

y Vs. xxxvii. 27.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

prove ; and I highly praise both teachers and
taught, that the one have nobly effected, and
the other still more nobly endured, the cut
ting off.

XXI. And there be eunuchs which have
made themselves eunuchs for the Kingdom of
Heaven's sake.
Others, too, who have not
met with teachers, have been laudable teach
ers to themselves. No lather nor mother,
no Priest or Bishop, nor any of those com
missioned to teach, taught you your duty ;
but by moving reason in yourself and by
kindling the spark of good by your free will,
you made yourself a eunuch, and acquired
such a habit of virtue that impulse to vice be
came almost an impossibility to you.
There
fore I praise this kind of Eunuch-making also,
and perha|js even above the others.
He
that is able to receive it let him receive it.
Choose which part you will ; either follow the
Teacher or be your own teacher.
One thing
alone is shameful-that the passions be not
It matters not how they are ex
extirpated.
tirpated.
The teacher is God's creature ; and
you also have the same origin ; and whether
the teacher grasp this grace, or the good be
your own-it is equally good.

XXII. Only let us cut ourselves off from
passion, lest any root of bitterness springing
up trouble us ; a only let us follow the image ;
only let us reverence our Archetype.
Cut off
the bodily passions ; cut off also the spiritual.
For by how much the soul is more precious
than the body, by so much more precious is it
And if
to cleanse the soul than the body.
cleansing of the body be a praiseworthy act,
see, I pray you, how much greater and higher
is that of the soul.
Cut away the Arian im
piety ; cut away the false opinion of Sabellius ;
do not join more than is right, or wrongly
sever ; do not either confuse the Three Persons
into One, or make Three diversities of Nature.
The One is praiseworthy if rightly understood ;
and the Three when rightly divided, when the
division is of Persons, not of Godhead.

XXIII. I enact this for Laymen too, and I
enjoin it also upon all Priests, and upon those
commissioned to rule.
Come to the aid of the
Word, all of you to whom God has given power
It is a great thing to check murder,
to aid.
to punish adultery, to chastise theft ; much
more to establish piety by law, and to bestow
sound doctrine. My word will not be able to
do as much in fighting for the Holy Trinity as
your Edict, if you will bridle the ill disposed,
if you will help the persecuted, if you will

check the slayers, and prevent people from
I am speaking not merely of
being slain.
For all sin
bodily but of spiritual slaughter.
is the death of the soul.
Here let
.
my discourse end.

.

.

XXIV. But it remains that I speak a prayer
for those who are assembled.
Husbands alike
and wives, rulers and ruled, old men, and
young men, and maidens, every sort of age,
bear ye every loss whether of money or of
body, but one thing alone do not endure-to
lose the Godhead.
I adore the Father, I
adore the Son, I adore the Holy Ghost ; or
rather We adore them; 1, who am speaking,
before all and after all and with all, in the
same Christ our Lord, to whom be the glory
and the might for ever.

Amen.

INTRODUCTION TO THE ORATION
ON THE THEOPHANY.

6, 381.

according

which, however,

The Title of this Oration has given rise
to a doubt whether it was preached on Dec.
The word
25> 380, or on Jan.
Theophania is well known as .a name for the
Epiphany ;
to
Schaff,a was originally a celebration both
of the Nativity and the Baptism of our Lord.
The two words seem both to have been used
in the simplest sense of the Manifestation
of God, and certainly were applied to Christ
mas Day.
Thus Suidas, "The Epiphany is
the Incarnation of the Saviour;" and Epiphanius (Haer., 53), " The Day of the Epi
phany is the day on which Christ was born
according to the flesh."
But S. Jerome ap
plies the word to the Baptism of Christ ;
" The day of the Epiphany is still venerable ;
not, as some think, on account of His Birth in
the flesh ; for then He was hidden, not mani
fested ; but it agrees with the time at which
it was said, This is My beloved Son (In
Ezech. I.).
There is also a Sermon, attri
buted to S. Chrysostom, " On the Baptism of
Christ," in which it is expressly denied that
the name Theophany applies to Christmas.
The Oration itself, however, contains evidence
to shew that the Festival of our Lord's Birth
was kept at the earlier date; for in c. 16
the Preacher says, " A little later you shall see
Jesus submitting to be purified in the river
Jordan for my purification."
And another
piece of evidence occurs in the oration In
Sancta Lumina, c. 14, " At His Birth we duly
kept festival, both I the leader of the feast,

a Heb. xii. 15.

aH. E., Nic Per., p. 399.

ON THE THEOPHANY, OR' BIRTHDAY OF CHRIST.

and you.
action of Christ and another Mystery."

Now we are come to

another

The Oration is thus analysed by Abbe

Benoit :

inspires

" After an exordium which is full of the en
thusiasm and joy which such a subject natur
ally
the Orator recommends his
hearers to celebrate the Festival by a pious
gladness, and by hearing the Word of God ;
and not as the heathen celebrated their feasts,
by profane amusements and all kinds of ex
He will try to satisfy their desires by
cess.
speaking to them of God.
God is infinite,
He
ineffable, eternal, the Sovereign Good.
created the. Angels in the beginning out of
The fall of the Angels was followed
goodness.
by the creation of the material world.
Man
too fell, and God shewed His mercy even in
the punishment. He used various means to
raise him again ; and at length He came
Himself.
Then the speaker forcibly argues
against those who misuse the infinite conde
scension of the Word to contest His Godhead ;
he rapidly traces the principal features of His
Life-at once human and Divine ; and ends
with a recommendation to his hearers to imit
ate in all things the Life of Christ, so that
they may have a share in His Kingdom in
Heaven."

It is considered one of the best of Gregory's
discourses.
" By the grandeur of the plan,"
says Benoit, " the elevation of the ideas, and
the rich fund of doctrine, this discourse is incontestably one of S. Gregory's most remark
able efforts."

ORATION XXXVIII.

On the Theophanv, or Birthday of
Christ.

Christ
I. Christ is born, glorify ye Him.
Christ
from heaven, go ye out to meet Him.
on earth ; be ye exalted.
Sing unto the Lord
all the whole earth ; " and that I may join both
in one word, Let the heavens rejoice, and let
the earth be glad, for Him Who is of heaven
Christ in the flesh, rejoice
and then of earth.
with trembling and with joy ; with trembling
because of your sins, with joy because of your
hope.
Christ of a Virgin ; 0 ye Matrons live
as Virgins, that ye may be Mothers of Christ.
Who doth not worship Him That is from the
beginning? Who doth not glorify Him That
is the Last ?

a Ps. xcvi. i, 11.

Father

II. Again the darkness is past ; again Light is
made ; again Egypt is punished with darkness ;
again Israel is enlightened by a pillar." The
people that sat in the darkness of ignorance,
let it see the Great Light of full knowledge.^
Old things are passed away, behold all things
are become new.* The letter gives way, the
Spirit comes to the front.
The shadows flee
Melaway, the Truth comes in upon them.
chisedec is concluded.8 He that was without
Mother becomes without
(without
Mother of His former state, without Father of
His second).
The laws of nature are upset ;
Christ com
the world above must be filled.
mands it, let us not set ourselves against Him.
O clap your hands together all ye people,' be
cause unto us a Child is born, and a Son given
unto us, Whose Government is upon His
shoulder (for with the Cross it is raised up),
and His Name is called The Angel of the
Great Counsel of the Father. (
Let John cry,
Prepare ye the way of the Lord : 1 I too will
cry the power of this Day.
He Who is not
carnal is Incarnate ; the Son of God becomes
the Son of Man, Jesus Christ the Same yes
terday, and to-day, and for ever.9 Let the
Jews be offended, let the Greeks deride;" let
heretics talk till their tongues ache.
Then
shall they believe, when they see Him ascend
ing up into heaven ; and if not then, yet when
they see Him coming out of heaven and sit
ting as Judge.

III. Of these on a future occasion ; for the
Festival is the Theophany or
present the
Birth-day, for it is called both, two titles being
given to the one thing.
For God was mani
fested to man by birth. On the one hand
Being, and eternally Being, of the Eternal
Being, above cause and word, for there was no
word before The Word ; and on the other hand
for our sakes also Becoming, that He Who
gives us our being might also give us our Wellbeing, or rather might restore us by His In
carnation, when we had by wickedness fallen
from wellbeing.
The name Theophany is
given to it in reference to the Manifestation,
and that of Birthday in respect of His Birth.
it is this
which we are celebrating to-day, the Coming
of God to Man, that we might go forth,* or

IV. This is our present Festival ;

0 Isa. ix. 6.

yi Cor. v. 17.

a Exod. xiv. 20.
fi The meaning clearly is that the type presented by Melchisedec
(Heb. viL 3) is fulrtlled in Christ. The explanation here given by
Thus, e.g.,
S. Gregory is the ordinary one found in the Fathers.
Theodoret says, "Christ our Lord is without Mother as God, for
He was begotten of the Father alone ; and without Father as Man,
for He was born of a pure Virgin." Oecumenius has almost the
exact words of Gregory.
So also S. Augustine (Tract in Joann,
81, " Christ was singularly bom of a Father without a Mother, ofa
Mother without a Father ; without Mother as God. without Father
as Man."

• Ps. xlvii. 1.

( Isa. ix. 6.

0 Heb. xiii. 8.

« x Cor. i. 23.

i) Matt. iii. 3.
A Ephes. iv. 22, 24.

GREGORY ' N AZIANZEN.

rather (for this is the more proper expression)
that we might go back to God-that putting
off the old man, we might put on the New ;
and that as we died in Adam, so we might
live in Christ," being born with Christ and
crucified with Him and buried with Him and
rising with Him.P For I must undergo the
beautiful conversion, and as the painful suc
ceeded the more blissful, so must the more
blissful come out of the painful.
For where
sin abounded Grace did much more abound ; »
and if a taste condemned us, how much more
doth the Passion of Christ justify us?
There
fore let us keep the Feast, not after the man
ner of a heathen festival, but after a godly
sort ; not after the way of the world, but in
a fashion above the world ; not as our own,
but as belonging to Him Who is ours, or
rather as our Master's ; not as of weakness,
but as of healing ; not as of creation, but of
re-creation.

V. And how shall this be? Let us not adorn
our porches, nor arrange dances, nor decorate
let us not feast the eye, nor en
the streets ;
chant the ear with music, nor enervate the
nostrils with perfume, nor prostitute the taste,
nor indulge the touch, those roads that are so
prone to evil and entrances for sin ; let us not
be effeminate in clothing soft and flowing,
whose beauty consists in its uselessness, nor
with the glittering of gems or the sheen of
gold4 or the tricks of colour, belying the
beauty of nature, and invented to do despite
unto the image of God ; Not in rioting and
drunkenness, with which are mingled, I know
well, chambering and wantonness, since the
lessons which evil teachers give are evil ;
or rather the harvests of worthless seeds are
Let us not set up high beds of
worthless.
leaves, making tabernacles for the belly of
what belongs to debauchery.
Let us not ap
praise the bouquet of wines, the kickshaws of
cooks, the great expense of unguents.
Let
not sea and land bring us as a gift their prec
ious dung, for it is thus that I have learnt to
estimate luxury ; and let us not strive to out
do each other in intemperance (for to my
mind every superfluity is intemperance, and
all which is beyond absolute need),-and this
while others are hungry and in want, who are
made of the same clay and in the same man
ner.

VI. Let us leave all these to the Greeks and
to the pomjs and festivals of the Greeks, who
call by the name of gods beings who rejoice
in the reek of sacrifices, and who consistently

a 1 Cor. xv. aa. 0 Col. ii. ll.

y P'mh. v. 20.

2 Rom. xiii. 13.

worship with their belly ; evil inventors and
worshippers of evil demons.
But we, the Ob
ject of whose adoration is the Word, if we
must in some way have luxury, let us seek it
in word, and in the Divine Law, and in his
tories ; especially such as are the origin of this
Feast ; that our luxury may be akin to and
not far removed from Him Who hath called
Or do you desire (for to-day I
us together.
am your entertainer) that I should set before
you, my good Guests,
the story of these
things as abundantly and as nobly as I can,
that ye may know how a foreigner can feed a
the natives of the land, and a rustic the peo
ple of the town, and one who cares not for
luxury those who delight in it, and one who
is poor and homeless those who are eminent
for wealth ?

We will begin from this point ; and let me
ask of you who delight in such matters to
cleanse you mind and your ears and your
thoughts, since our discourse is to be of God
and Divine ; that when you depart, you may
have had the enjoyment of delights that really
fade not away.
And this same discourse shall
be at once both very full and very concise,
that you may neither be displeased at its de
ficiencies, nor find it unpleasant through sa
tiety.

VII. God always was,P and always is, and
always will be. Or rather, God always Is. For
Was and Will be are fragments of our time,
and of changeable nature, but He is Eternal
And this is the Name that He gives
Being.
to Himself when giving the Oracle to Moses
in the Mount.
For in Himself He sums up
and contains all Being, having neither begin
ning in the past nor end in the future ; like
some great Sea of Being, limitless and un
bounded, transcending all conception of time
and nature, only adumbrated by the mind,
and that very dimly and scantily
not by His Essentials, but by His Environ
ment ; one image being got from one source
and another from another, and combined into
some sort of presentation of the truth, which
escapes us before we have caught it, and takes
to flight before we have conceived it, blaz
ing forth upon our Master-part, even when
that is cleansed, as the lightning flash which
will not stay its course, does upon our sight
in order as I conceive by that part
of it which we can comprehend to draw
us to itself (for that which is altogether incom-

.

a Alluding to his own recent arrival at Constantinople, after a
life spent in the distant country of Cappadocia, and in ministering
in small and insignificant places like Nazianrns.
0 The whole of this passage_ occurs again verbatim in the second
Oration for Easter Day, cc. iii.-ix.

ON THE THEOPHANY, OR BIRTHDAY OF CHRIST.

prehensible is outside the bounds of hope,
and not within the compass of endeavour),
and by that part of It which we cannot com
prehend to move our wonder, and as an object
of wonder to become more an object of de
sire, and being desired to purify, and by puri
fying to make us like God ; • so that when we
have thus become like Himself, God may, to
use a bold expression, hold converse with us
as Gods, being united to us, and that perhaps
to the same extent as He already knows those
who are known to Him.
The Divine Nature
then is boundless and hard to understand ; and
all that we can comprehend of Him is His
boundlessness ; even though one may conceive
that because He is of a simple nature He. is
therefore either wholly incomprehensible, or
perfectly comprehensible.
For let us further
enquire what is implied by "is of a simple
nature."
this
simplicity is not itself its nature, just as com
position is not by itself the essence of com
pound beings.

For it is quite certain that

VIII. And when Infinity is considered from
two points of view, beginning and end (for
that which is beyond these and not limited by
them is Infinity), when the mind looks to the
depth above, not having whereto stand, and
leans upon phenomena to form an idea of God,
it calls the Infinite and Unapproachable which
it finds there by the name of Unoriginate.
And when it looks into the depths below, and
at the future, it calls Him Undying and Im
And when it draws a conclusion
perishable.
from the whole it calls Him Eternal (atWios).
For Eternity (auav) is neither time nor part
of time ; for it cannot be measured.
But
what time, measured by the course of the sun,
is to us, that Eternity is to the Everlasting,
namely, a sort of time-like movement and in
terval co-extensive with their'existence.
This,
however, is all I must now say about God ;
for the present is not a suitable time, as my
present subject is not the doctrine of God,
but that of the Incarnation.
But when I say
God, I mean Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
For Godhead is neither diffused beyond these,
so as to bring in a mob of gods ; nor yet is it
bounded by a smaller compass than these, so
as to condemn us for a poverty-stricken con
ception of Deity ; either Judaizing to save the
Monarchia, or falling into heathenism by the
multitude of our gods.
For the evil on either
side is the same, though found in contrary di
rections.
This then is the Holy of Holies,3
which is hidden even from the Seraphim, and

a John x. 15.
P The Holy of Holies here

the Holy Trinity.

is glorified with a thrice repeated Holy,"
meeting in one ascription of the Title Lord
and God, as one of our predecessors has most
beautifully and loftily pointed out.

IX. But since this movement ofself-contem
plation alone could not satisfy Goodness, but
Good must be poured out and go forth be
yond Itself to multiply the objects of Its be
neficence, for this was essential to the highest
Goodness, He first conceived the Heavenly
and Angelic Powers.
And this conception
was a work fulfilled by His Word, and per
fected by His Spirit.
And so the secondary
Splendours came into being, as the Ministers
of the Primary Splendour ; whether we are
to conceive of them as intelligent Spirits, or
as Fire of an immaterial and incorruptible
kind, or as some other nature approaching
I should like to say
this as near as may be.
that they were incapable of movement in the
direction of evil, and susceptible only of the
movement of good, as being about God, and
illumined with the first rays from God-for
earthly beings have but the second illumina
tion ; but I am obliged to stop short of saying
that, and to conceive and speak of them only
as difficult to move because of him,3 who for
his splendour was called Lucifer, but became
and is called Darkness through his pride ; and
the apostate hosts who are subject to him,
creators of evil* by their revolt against good
and our inciters.

X. Thus, then, and for these reasons, H$
gave being to the world of thought, as far as I
can reason upon these matters, and estimate
great things in my own poor language. Then
when His first creation was in good order, He
conceives a second world, material and visible ;
and this a system and compound of earth and
sky, and all that is in the midst of them-an ad
mirable creation indeed, when we look at the
fair form of every part, but yet more worthy
of admiration when we consider the harmony
and the unison of the whole, and how each

a The reference is to the Ter Sanetus or Triumphal Hymn,
which is found in every Liturgy. The previous writer referred to is
thought by some to he S. Athanasius, but by others S. Dionysius
the Arropagite. who has some words on this point in his treatise
Hut the most competent scholars deny the
De Ccelest. Hier., c. 7.
authenticity of the works attributed to .S. Dionysius, and place
thent from one hundred to one hundred and fifty years later than
S. Gregory's time.
|8 S. Thomas Aquinas (Summa I., qu. 63, art. 7) gives reasons
for thinking that Satan was oritiinallv the highest of all the angelic
hosts.
This, however, is an opinion in which many high authori
ties differ from him. At any rate, Satan as I.ucifer must have held
a very high place.
y Evil, says Nicettls here, has no positive existence, but is the
" The faculties of mind and body which arc
negation of good.
used in a sinful action are indeed things, and are the creatures of
itself is not a thing, and consequently not a
God : but the sin
creature. God is indeed the Author of all that is. of every sub
stance : but sin is not a substance, and is not.
It is a declination
{Mozley,
from substance tnd from being, and not a part of it.
Treatise on the Augustinian doctrine of predestination.)

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

part fits in with every other, in fair order, and
all with the whole, tending to the perfect
completion of the world as a Unit.
This was
to shew that He could call into being, not
only a Nature akin to Himself, but also one
altogether alien
For akin to
to Himself.
Deity are those natures which are intellectual,
and only to be comprehended by mind ; but
all of which sense can take cognisance are ut
terly alien to It ; and of these the furthest
removed are all those which are entirely des- ,
titute of soul and of power of motion.
But
perhaps some one of those who are too festive
and impetuous may say, What has all this to
do with us?
Talk to us about the Festival, and the reasons
for our being here
what I am about to do. although I have be
gun at a somewhat previous point, being com- j
pelled to do so by love, and by the needs
of my argument.

Spur your horse to the goal, j

Yes, this

to-day.

is I

XI. Mind, then, and sense, thus distin
guished from each other, had remained within
their own boundaries, and bore in themselves
the magnificence of the Creator-Word, silent
praisers* and thrilling heralds of His mighty
work. Not yet was there any mingling of both,
nor any mixtures of these opposites, tokens
of a greater Wisdom and Generosity in the
creation of natures ; nor as yet were the whole
riches of Goodness made known. Now the
Creator-Word, determining to exhibit this,
yid to produce a single living being out of
both-the visible and the invisible creations,
I mean-fashions Man ; and taking a body
from already existing matter, and placing in
it a Breath taken from Himself^ which the
Word knew to be an intelligent soul and the
Image of God, as a sort of second world. He
placed him, great in littleness » on the earth ;
a new Angel, a mingled worshipper, fully
initiated into the visible creation, but only
partially into the intellectual ; King of all
upon earth, but subject to the King above ;
earthly and heavenly ; temporal and yet im
mortal ; visible and yet intellectual ; half-way
between greatness and lowliness ; in one per
son combining spirit and flesh ; spirit, because
flesh, be
of the favour bestowed on him ;
cause of the height to which he had been
raised ; the one that he might continue to
live and praise his Benefactor, the other that
he might suffer, and by suffering be put in
remembrance, and corrected if he became
prond of his greatness.
A living creature
trained here, and then moved elsewhere; and,
to complete the mystery, deified by its incli
fi Gen, u. 7.

y Sc. a microcosm.

a Ps. xix. i, 3.

nation to God.
For to this, I think, tends
that Light of Truth which we here possess but
in measure, that we should both see and ex
perience the Splendour of God, which is wor
thy of Him Who made us, and will remake
us again after a loftier fashion.

.

.

.

.

XII. This being He placed in Paradise,
whatever the Paradise may have been, having
honoured him with the gift of Free Will (in
order that God might belong to him as the re
sult of his choice, no less than to Him who
had implanted the seeds of it), to till the im
mortal plants, by which is meant perhaps the
Divine Conceptions, both the simpler and the
more perfect ; naked in his simplicity and in
artificial
life, and without any covering or
screen ; for it was fitting that he who was
from the beginning should be such.
Also He
gave him a Law, as a material for his Free
Will to act upon.
This Law was a Com
mandment as to what plants he might partake
of, and which one he might not touch.
This
latter was the Tree of Knowledge ; not, how
ever, because it was evil from the beginning
when planted ; nor was it forbidden because
God grudged it to us
Let not the ene
.
mies of God wag their tongues in that direc
tion, or imitate the Serpent
But it
would have been good if partaken of at the
proper time, for the tree was, according to my
theory, Contemplation, upon which it is only
safe for those who have reached maturity of
habit to enter ; but which is not good for
still somewhat simple and
those who are
greedy in
food
is not good for those who are yet tender, and
have need of milk." But when through the
Devil's malice and the woman's caprice, to
which she succumbed as the more tender, and
which she brought to bear upon the man, as
she was the more apt to persuade, alas for my
weakness !
(for that of my first father was
mine), he forgot the Commandment which
had been given to him ;P he yielded to the
baleful fruit ; and for his sin he was banished,
at once from the Tree of Life, and from Para
dise, and from God ; and put on the coats of
that is, perhaps, the coarser flesh,
skins
This was the
both mortal and contradictory.
first thing that he learnt-his own shame ; » and
he hid himself from God.
Yet here too he
makes a gain, namely death, and the cutting
off of sin, in order that evil may not be im
Thus his punishment is changed into
mortal.
a mercy ; for it is in mercy, I am persuaded,
that God inflicts punishment.

just as solid

their habit ;

.

.

XIII. And having been first chastened by
a Heb. v. 13.

y Rom. i. 32-31.

ft Gen. iiL 5.

ON THE THEOPHANY, OR BIRTHDAY OF CHRIST.

many means (because his sins were many,
whose root of evil sprang up through divers
causes and at sundry times), by word, by law,
by prophets, by benefits, by threats, by plagues,
by waters, by fires, by wars, by victories, by
defeats, by signs in heaven and signs in the
air and in the earth and in the sea, by unex
pected changes of men, of cities, of nations
(the object of which was the destruction of
wickedness), at last he needed a stronger rem
edy,
for his diseases were growing worse ;
mutual slaughters, adulteries, perjuries, unnat
ural crimes, and that first and last of all evils,
idolatry and the transfer of worship from the
Creator to the Creatures.
As these required a
greater aid, so also they obtained a greater.
And that was that the Word of God Himself
-Who is before all worlds, the Invisible, the
Incomprehensible, the Bodiless, Beginning of
Beginning," the Light of Light, the Source of
Life and Immortality, the Image of the Ar
chetypal Beauty, the immovable Seal, the un
changeable Image, the Father's Definition 0
and Word, came to His own Image, and took
on Him flesh for the sake of our flesh, and
mingled Himself with an intelligent soul for
my soul's sake, purifying like by like ; and in
all points except sin was made man.
Con
ceived by the Virgin,» who first in body and
soul was purified by the Holy Ghost* (for
it was needful both that Childbearing should
be honoured, and that Virginity should receive
a higher honour), He came forth then as God
with that which He had assumed, One Person
in two Natures, Flesh and Spirit, of which the
latter deified the former.' O new comming
ling ; O strange conjunction ;
the Self-Exis
tent comes into being, the Uncreate is crea
ted, That which cannot be contained is con
tained, by the intervention of an intellectual
soul, mediating between the Deity and the
corporeity of the flesh.
And He Who gives
riches becomes poor, for He assumes the pov
erty of my flesh, that I may assume the rich
ness of His Godhead. He that is full empties
Himself, for He empties Himself of His glory

a Cf. Light of Ijght Begotten.

Christ our Lord is callefl "The
Beginning of the Creation nf Cod, because by Him all things
were made ; and He is of the Beginning, inasmuch as Cod the
Father is the Unoriginatc Principle of all, and the Origin and
rount of Godhead. The Scholiast here refers to Ps. ex. 3. which
in the Vulgate and I.XX. runs ''With Thee is the Beginning in ihe
day of Thy Power."
0 Cf. TheoL: IV. XX., where S. Gregory says " Perhaps this Re
lation might be comp-ired to that between the Definition and the
Nicetas remarks that, just as the definition de
thing defined "
clares the nature of the defined, so the Personal Word shows forth
Suidas (in voce 8pos ) says that the
the Nature of the Father.
phrase is used to show the Unity of Nature between the Father
and the Son.

It is not, however, of frequent occurrence.

y Luke i. 35.
6 S. Gregory does not seem to have been aware of the doctrine
« Sec note on In Sancta Lumina, c. xiv.

of the " Immaculate Conception."

What is

for a short while, that I may have a share in
What is the riches of His
His Fulness.
this mystery that is
Goodness?
around me? I had a share in the image ;
did not keep it ; He partakes of my flesh that
He may both save the image and make the
flesh immortal.
He communicates a second
Communion far more marvellous than the
first, inasmuch as then He imparted the better
Nature, whereas now Himself partakes of the
worse.
This is more godlike than the former
action, this is loftier in the eyes of all men of
understanding.

XIV. To this what have those cavillers to
say, those bitter reasoners about Godhead,
those detractors of all that is praiseworthy,
those darkeners of light, uncultured in respect
of wisdom, for whom Christ died in vain, those
unthankful creatures, the work of the Evil
One? Do you turn this benefit into a re
proach to God ?
Wilt thou deem Him little
on this account, that He humbled Himself for
thee ; because the Good Shepherd," He who
lays down His life for His sheep, came to seek
for that which had strayed upon the moun
tains and the hills, on which thou wast then
sacrificing, and found the wanderer ; and hav
ing found it,0 took it upon His shoulders-on
•which He also took the Wood of the Cross ;
and having taken it, brought it back to the
higher life ; and having carried it back, num
bered it amongst those who had never strayed.
Because He lighted a candle-His own Flesh
-and swept the house, cleansing the world
from sin ; and sought the piece of money, the
Royal Image that was covered up by passions.
And He calls together His Angel friends on
the finding of the coin, and makes them
sharers in His joy,v whom He had made to
share also the secret of the Incarnation ?
Be
cause on the candle of the Forerunner there
follows the light that exceeds in brightness ;
and to the Voice the Word succeeds ; and to
the Bridegroom's friend the Bridegroom ; to
him that prepared for the Lord a peculiar peo
ple, cleansing them by water in preparation
thou reproach God
for the Spirit?
with all
Dost thou on this account
this ?
deem Him lessened, because He girds Himself
with a towel and washes His disciples' feet,
and shows that humiliation is the best road to
exaltation ?
Because for the soul that was
bent to the ground He humbles Himself, that
He may raise up with Himself the soul that
was tottering to a fall under a weight of sin ?
Why dost thou not also charge upon Him as a

Dost

a John x. 11.

0 Luke xv. 4, sq.

y lb. xv. 8, 10.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

. and what ? .

crime the fact that He eats with Publicans and
at Publicans' tables,* and that He makes disci
ples of Publicans, that He too may gain some
. the salvation
.
what .
.
of sinners.
If so, we must blame the physi
cian for stooping over sufferings, and enduring
evil odours that he may give health to the
sick ; or one who as the Law commands bent
down into a ditch to save a beast that had
fallen into it.0

XV. He was sent, but as man, for He was
of a twofold Nature; for He was wearied, and
hungered, and was thirsty, and was in an
agony, and shed tears, according to the nature"
of a corporeal being.
And if the expression
be also used of Him as God, the meaning is
that the Father's good pleasure is to be con
sidered a Mission, for to this He refers all that
concerns Himself, both that He may honour
the Eternal Principle, and because He will
not be taken to be an antagonistic God. And
whereas it
is written both that He was be
trayed, and also that He gave Himself up*
and that He was raised up by the Father, and
taken up into heaven ; and on the other hand,
that He raised Himself and went up ; the for
mer statement of each pair refers to the good
pleasure of the Father, the latter to His own
Are you then to be allowed to dwell
Power.
upon all that humiliates Him, while passing
over all that exalts Him, and to count on your
side the fact that He suffered, but to leave
out of the account the fact that it was of His
See what even now the Word has
own will ?
to suffer.
Ry one set He is honoured as God,
but is confused with the Father,6 by another

Luke xiii. 15 and xiv. 5.

Lit."Copt. S. Hasil (lb.).

a Luke v. 99.
0 S. Gregory is referring t° the provision of the Law, which or
ders a man, if he sec his friend's or his enemy's ox or ass fallen
under a burden or going astray, to lend assistance ; but the terms
of his reference are rather to the reasoning of our Lord with the
Pharisees about the Sabbath.
y Cf. iv T7j wkj\ fv 1} iropcStftoro. fiaWov $« iavrbv wapttHov.
Canon of Liturgy of S. Murk (Swainson p. 517).
Ka nocte qua
Cum statuisset se
iradidit seipsum.
Coptic S. Hasil {Hammond, p. 209) Rot. Vatic, and
Iradcre.
Cod. Ross, of S. Mark, has only r. v. n iavr. iraptS.
(Swainson,
50) ; so too S. Hasil (lb., 81) in Cod. It. M., 2274.) and Harberini
of S. Chrys. (£b., oi) : but the whole expression in in Chryg. (cent
xi., ib., 129) and in Greek S. James (78. 272-3}. but Syriac S.
James has "in qua nocte tradendus erat."
(Canon. Univ.,
/Ethiop. Hammond, 258). Pridu quam f>atcretur '\s the form in
the Canon of the Roman, Ambrosian. and Saram Missals : but
the Mozarabic. which is largely of an Eastern character, has in
fua nocte tradebatur. (Hammond, 333).
The Sabellian heresy may be briefly described as the doctrine
of One God exercising three offices, as opposed to the Catholic
Faith ofOne God in three Persons.
Sabellius himself was a Priest
of the Libyan Pentapolis, whoat Rome in the timeof PopeZephyrinus embraced the heresy of Notus, which maintained that God
the Father suffered for us <jn the cross in the form of Christ. His
followers, who openlv declared themselves first about A.n. 357,
thought that God, to Whom as the Source of all things the name
of Father is given, is called the Son when He united Himself to
the humanity of Jesus for the work of our redemption ; and in
like manner He is the Holy Spirit when manifested for the work
of sanctification.
Sabellius was condemned by a Council held
at Rome, probably in 258 ; again at Nicea, and again at Constan
tinople, where Sabellian Baptism was pronounced invalid.

So did the Jews.

He is dishonoured as mere flesh « and severed
from the Godhead.
With which of them will
He be most angry, or rather, which shall
He forgive, those who injuriously confound
Him or those who divide Him ?
For the for
mer ought to have distinguished, and the lat
ter to have united Him ; the one in number,
Stumblest Thou at
the other in Godhead.
Or dost thou
His flesh?
call Him a Samaritan, and ... I will
Dost thou disbelieve in His
not say the rest.
Godhead ?
This did not even the demons,
O thou who art less believing than demons
Those did per
and more stupid than Jews.
ceive that the name of Son implies equality of
rank ; these did know that He who drove
them out was God, for they were convinced of
But you will ad
it by their own experience.
It
mit neither the equality nor the Godhead.
would have been better for you to have been
either a Jew or a demoniac (if 1 may utter
an absurdity), than in uncircumcision and in
sound health to be so wicked and ungodly in
your attitude of mind.

XVI. A little later on you will see Jesus
submitting to be purified in the River Jordan
for my Purification, or rather, sanctifying the
waters by His Purification (for indeed He
had no need of purification Who taketh away
the sin of the world) and the heavens cleft

before his

a Ariaiii^m was the result of a strong opposition to Sabellianism, coupled with a misunderstanding of the argument against
There was, no doubt, a danger of falling into the opposite
it.
error of Tritheism, to avoid which Arianism " divided the Sub
stance" and virtually-and in the end explicitly - denied the
Godhead of our Ixjrd Jesus Christ,
Arius was a Priest of Alex
andria, and it was there that he began to publish his opinions, in
the early years of the Fourth Century (318) : but Newman traces
the origin of the heresy to Antioch and its Judaizing tendency. At
a meeting of the clergy in Alexandria the Bishop, S. Alexander,
gave an address on the coeterniiy, and cocqualitv of the Father
and the Son, and used the expression t*\v a\rn\v owriav *x<iV* that
Arius protested against this as
j They had the same Substance.
' a Sabellian statement, and used the words Kricfia (creature* ami
n-ot'n/ma (a thing made) of the Son, adding the sentence which
j
6r« ovk 7je. -there wa»a time when the Son
; became so famous,
■ did not exist.
Having ineffectually tried private remnnsirance,
Provincial
j S. Alexander brought the matter in 321
! Synod, in which were present about 100 Egyptian and Pcntapolitan liishops who aficr giving the matter a patient hearing, ex-
| communicated Arius and his principal adherents. Hut it was too
late to undo thr mischief. The heresy spread widely, and the
I whole Eastern Church was stirred by the controversy. At last a
! great Council of the whole Church met at Nica^a in 3:5, sum-
, moned by the Emperor ; and there the heresy was unequivocally
condemned, and the great Creed propounded with its watchword,
the Homoousion.
The false teaching had however struck its
roots deep and wide ; and though now banned by ihe anathema
of the Church, it was long in dying ; and indeed at one time it
seemed as if-humanly speaking-it must swamp the whole Catholic
Church. Under various forms the Semi-Arians who claimed to
I differ from the faith cf Nicaea only by a single letter, the Actians
anil Eunomians, who went to the furthest extreme of the falsehood
(Anomoeans), and many others, the heresy spread fur and wide:
j
ant! when S. Gregory came to Constantinople there was not one
Catholic Church or Priest to be found in the place, and only a few
I scattered folk who still held to the Faith of the Consub>iantialGregory's wonderful discourses however came to their aid, and
I partly under his presidency was held the Second Oecumenical
Synod, which condemned the heresy of Macedonius a still further
p development of Arianism. which denied also the Deity of the
I Holy Ghost.
Arianism survived for another two centuries among
' the Goths and Vandals, the Burgundians and Lombards ; but

it never rose again as a power in the Church.

INTRODUCTION TO THE ORATION ON THE HOLY LIGHTS. 351

asunder, and witness borne to him by the
Spirit That is of one nature with Him ; ■ you
shall see Him tempted and conquering and
served by Angels,3 and healing every sickness')'
and every disease,5 and giving life to the dead
(O that He would give life to you who are
dead because of your heresy), and driving out
demons,' sometimes Himself, sometimes by his
disciples ; and feeding vast multitudes with a
few loaves ; f and walking dryshod upon seas ; *
and being betrayed and crucified, and cruci
fying with Himself my sin ; offered as a Lamb,
and offering as a Priest ; as a Man buried in
the grave, and as God rising again ; and then
ascending, and to come again in His own
glory. Why what a multitude of high festi
vals there are in each of the mysteries of the
Christ ;
all of which have one completion,
namely, my perfection and return to the first
condition of Adam.

XVII. Now then I pray you accept His Con
ception, and leap before Him ; if not like John
from the womb,9 yet like David, because of
Revere the enrol
the resting of the Ark.'
ment on account of which thou wast written
in heaven, and adore the Birth by which thou
wast loosed from the chains of thy birth," and
honour little Bethlehem, which hath led thee
back to Paradise ; and worship the manger
through which thou, being without sense,
wast fed by the Word.
Know as Isaiah bids
thee, thine Owner, like the ox, and like the
ass thy Master's crib ; A if thou be one of those
who are pure and lawful food, and who chew
the cud of the word and are fit for sacrifice.
Or if thou art one of those who are as yet
unclean and uneatable and unfit for sacrifice,
and of the gentile portion, run with the Star,
and bear thy Gifts with the Magi, gold and
frankincense and myrrh/ as to a King, and
to God, and to One Who is dead for thee.
With Shepherds glorify Him;" with Angels
join in chorus ; with Archangels sing hymns.
Lei this Festival be common to the powers
in heaven and to the powers upon earth.*
For I am persuaded that the Heavenly Hosts
join in our exultation and keep high Festi
because they love
val with us to-day 0
.
just like
men, and they love God
those whom David introduces after the Pas
sion ascending with Christ * and coming to meet

.

.

.

.

.

y lb. iv. 23.

a Matt. iii. 13, 17. t
0 lb. iv. i-tl.
SNicetas distinguishes between NoVoc and MaAaxta, saying
is actual disease, and the second ttie premonitory
that the first
failing of health which prognosticates a disease. And, so, he says,
in reference to the soul, Nocros is actual sin, while MaAcoKa is the
relaxation of the will which leads and assents to actual sin.
n lb. ix. as.
<T lb. ix. u.
k Luke ii. 1-5.
* 2 Sam. vi. 14.
p Isa. i. 3.

9 lb. ix.33.
0 Luke i. 41.
A I. e., original sin (Ps. li. 5).
f Luke ii. 14, 15.
» Matt. ii.

o The Liturgy.

r Ps. xxiv.

Him, and bidding one another to lift up the
gates.

.

.

.

XVIII. One thing connected with the Birth
the
of Christ I would have you hate
murder of the infants by Herod." Or rather'
you must venerate this too, the Sacrifice of
the same age as Christ, slain before the Offer
ing of the New Victim. If Hefiees into Egypt,3
It
joyfully become a companion of His exile.
is a grand thing to share the exile of the per
secuted Christ.
If He tarry long in Egypt,
call Him out of Egypt by a reverent worship
of Him there.
Travel without fault through
every stage and faculty of the Life of Christ.
Be purified ;
strip off the
be circumcised ;
veil which has covered thee from thy birth.
After this teach in the Temple, and drive out
the sacrilegious traders. v Submit to be stoned
if need be, for well I wot thou shalt be hidden
from those who cast the stones ; thou shalt
escape even through the midst of them, like
If thou be brought before Herod, an
God.a
swer not for the most part."
He will respect
thy silence more than most people's long
speeches.
If thou be scourged,f ask for what
they leave out. Taste gall for the taste's sake ; '
drink vinegar ;* seek for spittings ; accept blows,
be crowned with thorns,' that is, with the
hardness of the godly life ; put on the purple
robe, take the reed in hand, and receive mock
worship from those who mock at the truth ;
lastly, be crucified with Him, and share His
Death and Burial gladly, that thou mayest
rise with Him, and be glorified with Him and
reign with Him.
Look at and be looked at
by the Great God, Who in Trinity is wor
shipped and glorified, and Whom we declare
to be now set forth as clearly before you as
the chains of our flesh allow, in Jesus Christ
our Lord, to Whom be the glory for ever.
Amen.

INTRODUCTION TO THE ORATIONS
ON THE HOLY LIGHTS AND ON
HOLY BAPTISM.

The Oration on the Holy Lights was preached
on the Festival of the Epiphany 381, and was
followed the next day by that on Baptism.
In
the Eastern Church this Festival is regarded
as more particularly the commemoration of our
Lord's Baptism, and is accordingly one of the
great days for the solemn ministration of the
It is generally called Theophania,
Sacrament.

a Matt ii. 16.

• Luke xxiii. 9.
$ John xix. 29.

0 lb. v. 13.

y John ii. 15.

i lb. viii. 59.

£ John xix. 1.

n Matt, xxvii. 34.
t Matt xxvi. 67, and xxvii. 28.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

and the Gospel in the Liturgy is S. Matthew
iii. 13-17the Octave is
The Sunday in
called /xera to <jmra (After The Lights), point
ing to a time when the Feast was known as the
" Holy Lights," as seems to have been the
case in S. Gregory's day.
This name is de
rived from Baptism, which was often in an
cient days called Illumination, in reference to
which name (derived from the spiritual grace
of the Sacrament) lighted torches or candles
were carried by the neophytes.
It would ap
pear that the solemnites of the Festival lasted
two days, of which the second was devoted to
the solemn conferring of the Sacrament. Ac
cordingly we find two Orations belonging to
the Festival.
In the first, delivered on the
Day itself he dwells more especially on the
Feast and the Mystery of our Lord's Baptism
therein commemorated ; and proceeds to speak
of the different kinds of Baptism, of which he
enumerates Five, viz. : -

1 . The figurative Baptism of Israel by Moses

in the cloud and in the Sea.

2. The preparatory Baptism of repentance

ministered by S. John the Baptist.

3. The spiritual Baptism of water and the

Holy Ghost given us by our Lord.

4. The glorious Baptism of Martyrdom.
5. The painful Baptism of Penance.
In speaking of this last he takes occasion to
refute the extreme rigorism of the followers of
Novatus, who denied
absolution to certain
classes of sins committed after Baptism.

In the second Oration, delivered next day,
he dwells on the Sacrament of Baptism and its
spiritual effects ; and takes occasion to reprove
the then still prevalent practice of deferring
Baptism till the near approach of death.
He
likewise dwells on the truth that the validi
ty and spiritual effect of the Sacrament is
wholly independent of the rank or worthiness
of the Priest who may minister it ; and he
concludes with a sketch of the obligations
which its reception involves, with a very val
uable exposition of the Creed, and of the Cere
monies which accompanied the administration
of the Sacrament.

ORATION XXXIX.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

I. Again My Jesus, and again a mystery ; not
deceitful nor disorderly, nor belonging to
Greek error or drunkenness (for so I call their
solemnities, and so I think will every man of
sound sense) ; but a mystery lofty and divine,

and allied to the Glory above.
For the Holy
Day of the Lights, to which we have come,
and which we are celebrating to-day, has for
its origin the Baptism of my Christ, the True
Light That lighteneth every man that Cometh
into the world,0 and effecteth my purification,
and assists that light which we received from
the beginning from Him from above, but
which we darkened and confused by sin.

II. Therefore listen to the Voice of God,
which sounds so exceeding clearly to me, who
am both disciple and master of these mysteries,
as would to God it may sound to you ;
I Am
The Light Of The World/ Therefore ap
proach ye to Him and be enlightened, and let
not your faces be ashamed,» being signed with
the true Light. It is a season of new birth,4 let
It is a time of reformation,
us be born again.
Let 11s
let us receive again the first Adam.*
not remain what we are, but let us become
what we once were.
The Light Shineth In
Darkness,f in this life and in the flesh, and is
chased by the darkness, but is not overtaken
by it : -I mean the adverse power leaping up
in its shamelessness against the visible Adam,
but encountering God and being defeated ;-
in order that we, putting away the darkness,
may draw near to the Light, and may then
become perfect Light, the children of perfect
See the grace of this Day ; see the
Light.
Are you not lifted up
power of this mystery.
from the earth ?
Are you not clearly placed
on high, being exalted by our voice and
meditation ? and you will be placed much
higher when the Word shall have prospered
the course of my words.

III.

Is there any such among the shadowy
purifications of the Law, aiding as it did with
temporary sprinklings, and the ashes of an
heifer sprinkling the unclean ; 1 or do the
gentiles celebrate any such thing in
their
mysteries, every ceremony and mystery of
which to me is nonsense, and a dark inven
tion of demons, and a figment of an unhappy
mind, aided by time, and hidden by fable?
For what they worship as true, they veil as
mythical.
But if these things are true, they
ought not to be called myths, but to be proved
not to be shameful ; 9 and if they are false, they
ought not to be objects of wonder ; nor ought
people so inconsiderately to hold the most
contrary opinions about the same thing, as if
they were playing in the market-place with
boys or really ill-disposed men, not engaged

a John 1.9.
5 John iii. 3.
e I.e., the condition of man before the fall.
n This is the same word which in S. John i. 5, is rendered by

7 Ps. xxxiv. 5.

John viii. 12.

f IK i. 5.

" comprehend."

0 Heb. vii. 13.

ORATION ON THE HOLY LIGHTS.

in discussion with men of sense, and worship
pers of the Word, though despisers of this ar
tificial plausibility.

IV. We are not concerned in these mysteries
with births of Zeus and thefts of the Cretan
Tyrant" (though the Greeks may be displeased
at such a title for him), nor with the name of
Curetes, and the armed dances, which were to
hide the wailings of a weeping god, that he
might escape from his father's hate. For indeed
it would be a strange thing that he who was
swallowed as a stone should be made to weep
as a child. P
Nor are we concerned with Phry
gian mutilations and flutes and Corybantes,T
and all the ravings of men concerning Rhea,
consecrating people to the mother of the gods,
and being initiated into such ceremonies as
befit the mother of such gods as these.
Nor
have we any carrying away of the Maiden,8
nor wandering of Demeter, nor her intimacy
with Celei and Triptolemi and Dragons ; nor
her doings and sufferings .
. for I am ashamed
to bring into daylight that ceremony of the
night, and to make a sacred mystery of obscen
ity.
Eleusis knows these things, and so do
those who are eyewitnesses of what is there
guarded by silence, and well worthy of it.
Nor is our commemoration one of Dionysus,
and the thigh that travailed with an incom
plete birth, as before a head had travailed with
another ; « nor of the hermaphrodite god, nor
a chorus of the drunken and enervated host ;
nor of the folly of the Thebans which honours
him ; nor the thunderbolt of Semele which
they adore.
Nor is it the harlot mysteries
of Aphrodite, who, as they themselves admit,
was basely born and basely honoured ; nor
have we here Phalli and Ithyphalli,i shameful

a I.e. , Zeus, who was said by some to be a deified man, once
tyrant of Crete, where his tomb was shown.
(5 The allusion is to the birth of Zens. Kronos the Titan, father of
the gods, was the husband of Rhea, who bore him children.
But
an oracle having declared that Kronos should be dethroned by his
children, he swallowed them immediately after they were bom.
Rhea, however, on the birth of Zeus, aided by the Curetes, a wild
band of Cretan Priests, concealed the child, and substituted a
stone, which Kronos swallowed in his haste without perceiving the
difference. The stone made him very sick, and he vomited forth
the children whom he had previously swallowed : and by them
Kronos was deposed and
and Zeus the prophecy was fulfilled.
imprisoned in Tartarus.
y There was a temple of Rhea in Phrygia, in which at her
f-stivals people mutilated themselves to do her honour. The flutes
alluded to served to turn the thoughts of the sufferers from the pain
of the operation. The Corybantes were the ministers of the god
dess, who led the wild orgies of her worship.
It is believed that
there is an allusion to this practice of sclf-mutilation in Galat. v. 13.
So at least S. Jerome, S. Ambrose, and all the Greek Fathers take
the passage. S Thomas Aquinas, understanding the word in the
same sense, applies il mystically : and F.stius, who here follows Krasmus, refers the "cutting off" merely to excommunic.nion. a sense
which he calls " Apostohco sensu dignior," though why '* digHior "
Vet he acknowledges that those who interpret
it is not easy 10 see.
it literally do so " noit immtrito**
6 The mylhus of the Rape of Persephone and its consequences.
e Dionysus was said to have been born from the thigh of Zeus,
as Athene to have sprung full-grown and armed at all points from
his head.
i lltcse myths and practices are too shameful to be described.

both in form and action ; nor Taurian mas
sacres of strangers ; ■ nor blood of Laconian
youths shed upon the altars, as they scourged
themselves with the whips ; f and in this case
alone use their courage badly, who honour a
goddess, and her a virgin.
For these same
people both honour effeminacy, and worship
boldness.

V. And where will you place the butchery
of Pelops,T which feasted hungry gods, that
bitter and inhuman hospitality ?
Where the
horrible and dark spectres of Hecate, and the
underground puerilities and sorceries of Trophonius, or the babblings of the Dodonaaan
Oak, or the trickeries of the Delphian tri
pod, or the prophetic draught of Castalia,
which could prophesy anything, except their
own being brought to silence ?{
Nor is it the
sacrificial art of Magi, and their entrail fore
bodings, nor the Chaldsean astronomy and
horoscopes, comparing our lives with the
movements of the heavenly bodies, which
cannot know even what they are themselves,
Nor are these Thracian orgies,
or shall be.
from which the word Worship (vfyrjoWa) is
said to be derived ; nor rites and mysteries
of Orpheus, whom the Greeks admired so
much for his wisdom that they devised for him
a lyre which draws all things by its music.
Nor the tortures of Mithras' which it
is just
that those who can endure to be initiated into
such things should suffer ; nor the manglings
of Osiris, ^ another calamity honoured by the
Egyptians; nor the ill-fortunes of Isisi and
the goats more venerable than the Mendesians,
and the stall of Apis,9 the calf that luxuri
ated in the folly of the Memphites, nor all
those honours with which they outrage the
Nile, while themselves proclaiming it in song
to be the Giver of fruits and corn, and the
measurer of happiness by its cubits.'

VI. I pass over the honours they pay to rep-

a See the Iphigenia In Tauris of Euripides.
0 It was a custom of the Spartans that at their great festival of
Artemis the youths who were just coming of age (F.phebi) should
scourge themselves cruelly on her altar in honour of the goddess,
and to prove their manhood.
yThe gods came to dine with Tantalus, and he. to do them
honour, boded his sou Pelops for their food.
They, however,
found it out, and restored him to life : not. however, before Dem
eter had unwittingly ealen his shoulder, in the place of which they
substituted one of ivory.
& S. Jerome, commenting on Isaiah xli. 2a, says : " Why could
they never predict anything concerning Christ and His Apostles,
or the ruin and destruction of their own temples?
If then ihey
could not foretell their own destruction, how can they foretell any
thing good or bad ? "
• These Mysteries were of Persian origin, connected it is said
with the worship of the Sun. The neophytes were made to
undergo twelve different kinds of torture.

f The Egyptian Mysteries.
tj Zeus fell in love with Isis, and carried her off in the form of a
Here, discovering the fraud, sent a gadfly, which drove

0 Apis, the sacred bull, worshipped at Memphis.
1 i.e., that the prosperity of the country was proportionate to

the annual rise of the River.

heifer.
Isis mad.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

tiles, and their worship of vile things, each of
which has its peculiar cultus and festival, and
all share in a common devilishness ; so that, if
they were absolutely bound to be ungodly,
and to fall away from honouring God, and to
be led astray to idols and works of art and
things made with hands, men of sense could
not imprecate anything worse upon them
selves than that they might worship just such
things, and honour them in just such a way ;
that, as Paul says, they might receive in them
selves that recompense of their error which was
meet," in the very objects of their worhip ;
not so much honouring them as suffering dis-
. honour by them ; abominable because of their
error, and yet more abominable from the vileness of the objects of their adoration and
worship ; so that they should be even more
without understanding than the objects of
their worship ; being as excessively foolish as
the latter are vile.

having become

VII. Well, let these things be the amusement
of the children of the Greeks and of the demons
to whom their folly is due, who turn aside
the honour of God to themselves, and divide
men in various ways in pursuit of shameful
thoughts and fancies, ever since they drove us
away from the Tree of Life, by means of the
Tree of Knowledge unseasonably P and im
properly imparted to us, and then assailed us as
now weaker than before ; carrying clean away
the mind, which is the ruling power in us,
and opening a door to the passions.
For,
being of a nature envious and man-hating, or
so by their own
rather
wickedness, they could neither endure that we
who were below should attain to that which is
above, having themselves fallen from above
upon the earth ; nor that such a change in
their glory and their first natures should have
This is the meaning of their
taken place.
persecution of the creature.
For this God's
Image was outraged ; and as we did not like
to keep the Commandments,* we were given
over to the independence of our error. And
as we erred we were disgraced by the objects
of our worship.
For there was not only this
calamity, that we who were made for good
works* to the glory and praise of our Maker,
and to imitate God as far as might be, were

a Rom. i. 27.
(3 cf. Orat. in Theoph. c. 12. The explanation seems to be, that
the " Knowledge of good and evil " was a necessary part of the
development of man's intellect, but that a premature attempt
to attain it f>er satium instead of by a gradual progress would
prove fatal.
originally
intended educational stages, it might have reached to the knowiedge of evil without having that knowle ge alloyed and deletion
ated by the experience of evil, but might have known it. as God
d'les. without taint.
y Ibid. i. 38.

(Blount, Ann. Bible on (Jen. ii. 7.)
4 Eph. ii. 10 : Phil. i. 11.

Had human nature gone through its

turned into a den of all sorts of passions,
which cruelly devour and consume the inner
man ; but there was this further evil, that man
actually made gods the advocates of his pas
sions, so that sin might be reckoned not only
irresponsible, but even divine, taking refuge
in the objects of his worship as his apology.

VIII. But since to us grace has been given
to flee from superstitious error and to l)e joined
to the truth and to serve the living and true
God, and to rise above creation, passing by
all that is subject to time and to first motion ;
let us look at and reason upon God and things
divine in a manner corresponding to this Grace
But let us begin our discussion of
given us.
them from the most fitting point.
And the
most fitting is, as Solomon laid down for us;
us; The beginning of wisdom, he says, is to
get wisdpm." And what this is he tells us ;
For we
the beginning of wisdom is fear.''
must not begin with contemplation and leave
off with fear (for an unbridled contemplation
would perhaps push us over a precipice), but
we must be grounded and purified and so to
say made light by fear, and thus be raised to
the height.
For where fear is there is keep
ing of commandments ; and where there is
keeping of commandments there is purifying of
the flesh, that cloud which covers the soul and
And
suffers it not to see the Divine Ray.
where there is purifying there is Illumination ;
and Illumination is the satisfying of desire to
those who long for the greatest things, or the
Greatest Thing, or That Which surpasses all
greatness.

IX. Wherefore we must purify ourselves
first, and then approach this converse with the
Pure ; unless we would have the same experi
ence as Israel,v who could not endure the glory
of the face of Moses, and therefore asked for a
veil ; 4 or else would feel and say with Manoah
" We are undone O wife, we have seen God,"'
although it was God only in his fancy ; or
like Peter would send Jesus out of the boat.f
as being ourselves unworthy of such a visit ;
and when I say Peter, I am speaking of the
man who walked upon the waves ;* or like Paul
would be stricken in eyes,9 as he was before he
was cleansed from the guilt of his persecution,
when he conversed with Him Whom he was
persecuting-or rather with a short flash of
That great Light ; or like the Centurion1 would
seek for healing, but would not, through a
praiseworthy fear, receive the Healer into his
Let each one of us also speak so, as
house.

a Prov. iv. 7.
5 2 Cor. iii. 7.
q Malt. xiv. 29.

0 lb. i. 7 so,,
t Judg. xiii. 23.
0 Acts ix.

y Exod. xxxiv. 30.
£ I.uke v. 8.
1 Matt. viii. 8.

ORATION ON THE HOLY LIGHTS.

long as he is still uncleansed, and is a Centu
rion still, commanding many in wickedness,
and serving in the army of Cassar, the Worldruler of those who are being dragged down ;
" 1 am not worthy that thou shouldest come
under my roof."
But when he shall have
looked upon Jesus, though he be little of
stature like Zaccheus" of old, and climb up on
the top of the sycamore tree by mortifying his
members which are upon the earth,P and hav
ing risen above the body of humiliation, then
he shall receive the Word, and it shall be said
to him, This day is salvation come to this
hoLise.T Then let him lay hold on the salva
tion, and bring forth fruit more perfectly,
scattering and pouring forth rightly that which
as a publican he wrongly gathered.

.

.

.

.

.

X. For the same Word is on the one hand
terrible through its nature to those who areunworthy, and on the other through its loving
kindness can be received by those who are
thus prepared, who have driven out the un
clean and worldly spirit from their souls, and
have swept and adorned their own souls by
self-examination, and have not left them idle
or without employment, so as again to be oc
cupied with greater armament by the seven
spirits of wickedness .
the same number
as are reckoned of virtue (for that which is
hardest to fight against calls for the sternest
efforts)
but besides fleeing from evil,
practise virtue, making Christ entirely, or at
any rate to the greatest extent possible, to
dwell within them, so that the power of evil
cannot meet with any empty place to fill it
again with himself, and make the last state of
that man worse than the first, by the greater
energy of his assault, and the greater strength
and impregnability of the fortress. But when,
having guarded our soul with every care, and
having appointed goings up in dur heart,4 and
broken up our fallow ground," and sown unto
righteousness,fas David and Solomon and Jere
miah bid us, let us enlighten ourselves with
the light of knowledge, and then let us speak
of the Wisdom of God that hath been hid in
a mystery,' and enlighten others.
Meanwhile
let us purify ourselves, and receive the ele
mentary initiation of the Word, that we may
do ourselves the utmost good, making our
selves godlike, and receiving the Word at His
coming ; and not only so, but holding Him
fast and shewing Him to others.

XI. And now, having purified the theatre
by what has been said, let us discourse a little
about the Festival, and join in celebrating

a Luke xix. 3.

f Jer. iv. 3.

? Col. iii. 5.

y Luke xix. 9.

6 Ps. lxxxiv. 5.

i Prov. xi. 18.

q a Cor. ti. 6.

this Feast with festal and pious souls.
And,
since the chief point of the Festival is the re
membrance of God, let us call God to mind.
For I think that the sound of those who keep
Festival There, where is the dwelling of all
the Blissful, is nothing else than this, the
hymns and praises of God, sung by all who
are counted worthy of that City.
Let none
be astonished if what I have to say contains
some things that I have said before ; for not
only will I utter the same words, but I shall
speak of the same subjects, trembling both in
tongue and mind and thought when I speak of
God for you too, that you may share this
laudable and blessed feeling.
And when I
speak of God you must be illumined at once
by one flash of light and by three.
Three
in Individualities or Hypostases, if any prefer
so to call them, or persons," for we will not
quarrel about names so long as the syllables
amount to the same meaning ; but One in re
spect of the Substance-that is, the Godhead.
For they are divided without division, if I
may so say ; and they are united in division.
For the Godhead is one in three, and the

apparently

a The sense of Person (here irpdffwiroy). which is the usual
post-Nicene equivalent of uwdo-Taffic. was by no means generally
attached to that word during the first Knur Centuries, though here
Throughout the Arian
and there there are traces of such a use.
controversy a great deal of trouble and misunderstanding was
caused by the want of a precise definition of the meaning ol
It seems to have been at first understood by the
irx-oVrao-ic,
Eastern Church to mean Real Personal Existence-Reality being
the fundamental idea.
In this fundamental sense it was used in
Theology as expressing the distinct individuality and rel.itive bear
ing of the Three "Persons" of the Ulesscd Trinity to each other
lint Arius gave it a heretical
Imi&iw jrapa to #cou"6V, Suidas).
twist, and said that there are Three Hypostases, in the sense of
Natures or Substances : and this doctrine was anathematized by
the Nicene Council, which,
regardine the term
viroVTouric as exactly equivalent to ovata (as Arius tried to make
it) condemned the uroposit on that the Son is <f crrpac virotrrao-cwc
1} ovo-t'a? (Symb. Nic. ).
Similar is the use of the word in S. Athanasins.
As against Sabellius, however, who taught that in the
Godhead there are Tpi'a troda-wira (using this word in the sense of
Aspects only) but would not allow Tpeic virocratmc ,'i. c, Self-exis
tent Personalities), the posl-Niccnc Church regarded vv6arairvs
as designating the Person, and spoke freely of Tpftc viroffraartc.
The Western Church increased the confusion by continuing to re
gard utrdffTaaie as equivalent 10 ovtrt'o. and translating it by Sub
stantia or Snbsistentia.
It was not till the word Essentia came
into use to express ovaia that the Western Church grasped the dif
ference, so long accepted in the East, so as to use the words accu
Meantime, however, there would seem to have grown up a
rately.
difference in the use of the two words supposed to represent
virooratric, of the same kind as that between OirdVTOiric and ovcto;
Substantia being appropriated to the Essence of a thinp, ihat
which is the foundation of its being : while Subsistcntia came
rather to connote a limitation, i.e., Personality. Thus the West
also became confused, and Substantia was held to be the true
equivalent of iJirdo-Totric.
Hence the condemnation at Sardicn
(s.D. 347) by the Western llishops of the doctrine of Three Hypo
stases as Arian. The confusion lasted long, but in 362 a Council
was held at Alexandria, when this difference was seen to be a mere
logomachy, and it was pronounced orthodox to confess either
Tpeic tliroo-raffete in the sense of " Persons," or film* rWvran* in
that of " Substance." Our author in his Oration to the Fathers
of the Council of Constantinople fullv acknowledges this.
" What
do you mean," he says. '* by ihrooTao-ftc or irpdffoma? Von mean
that the Three are distinct, 'not in Nature, but in Personality"
And in the Panegyric on S. Athanasius (Or. xxi. c 35), he remarks
on the orthodoxy of the phrase ftta ovvia, rpctc dirooTaotie, that
the first expression refers to the Nature of the Godhead, the second
to the special properties of the Persons.
With this, he says, the
Italians agree, but the poverty of their language is such that it
does not admit of the distinction between oii<ria and thrdcTcunc,
and therefore has to call in the word irpotrwiroi*, which if misunder
stood is liable to be charged with Sabelltanism.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

three are one, in whom the Godhead is,
or to speak more accurately, Who are the
Godhead. Excesses and defects we will omit,
neither making the Unity a confusion, nor the
division a separation. We would keep equally
far from the confusion of Sabellius and from
the division of Arius, which are evils diametri
cally opposed, yet equal in their wickedness.
For what need is there heretically to fuse God
together, or to cut Him up into inequality?

XII. For to us there is but One God, the
Father, of Whom are all things, and One Lord
Jesus Christ, by Whom are all things ; and One
Holy Ghost, in Whom are all things;* yet
these words, of, by, in, whom, do not de
note a difference of nature (for if this were the
case, the three prepositions, or the order of
the three names would never be altered), but
they characterize the personalities of a nature
which is one and unconfused.
And this is
proved by the fact that They are again col
lected into one, if you will read-not care
lessly-this other passage of the same Apostle,
"Of Him and through Him and to Him are
all things ; to Him be glory forever, Amen." 0
The Father is Father, and is Unoriginate, for
He is of no one ; the Son is Son, and is not
unoriginate, for He is of the Father.
But if
you take the word Origin in a temporal sense,
He too is Unoriginate, for He is the Maker of
Time, and is not subject to Time. The Holy
Ghost is truly Spirit, coming forth from the
Father indeed, but not after the manner of
the Son, for it is not by Generation but by
Procession (since I must coin a word for the
sake of clearness >); for neither did the Father
cease to Ix; Unbegotten because of His beget
ting something, nor the Son to be begotten
because He is of the Unbegotten (how could
that be?), nor is the Spirit changed into
Father or Son because He proceeds, or because
He is God-though the ungodly do not be
lieve it.
For Personality is unchangeable;
else how could Personality remain, if it were
changeable, and could be removed from one
to another?
But they who make "Unbe
gotten " and " Begotten " natures of equivo
cal gods would perhaps make Adam and Seth

0 Rom. xi. 36.

a 2 Cor. viii. 6.
y The Coining is simply of the adverbial form ; the Substantive
is found in earlier writings.
S. Gregory himself uses it Orat.
Thcol. V. He uses other words also, as tKirtfufw, irpoodoc, and
the verbs vpoip\t<xOat, npoiivai.
As to the question of the Double Procession (Filioque) see
Dr. Swetc (Doctr. of H. S. p. 118)
Introd. to Orat. Theol. V.
says, " It is instructive to notice how at this period the two great
Sees of Rome and Constantinople seem to have agreed in abstain
ing from a minuter definition of the Procession.
Hoth in East and
West the relations of the Spirit to the Son were being examined by
individual theologians
but S. Gregory and S. Damasus appear
to have alike regained from entering upon a question which did
not touch the essentials of the l*"aith." He adds in a note '"This
is the more remarkable because Damasus was of Spanish origin."

I latter was born of Adam and Eve.

differ
in nature, since the former was not
born of flesh (for he was created), but the
There is
then One God in Three, and These Three
are One, as we have said.

XIII. Since then these things are so, or
rather since This is so ; and His Adoration
ought not to be rendered only by Beings above,
but there ought to be also worshippers on earth,
that all things may be filled with the glory
of God (forasmuch as they are filled with
God Himself) ;
therefore man was created
and honored with the hand" and Image of
But to despise man, when by the envy
God.
of the Devil and the bitter taste of sin he was
pitiably severed from God his Maker-this
was not in the Nature of God.
What then
was done, and what is the great Mystery that
concerns us? An innovation is made upon
nature, and God is made Man. "He that
rideth upon the Heaven of Heavens in the
East " P of His own glory and Majesty, is
glorified in the West of our meanness and
lowliness. And the Son of God deigns to
become and to be called Son of Man ; not
changing what He was (for It is unchange
able) ; but assuming what He was not (for
He is full of love to man), that the Incom
prehensible* might be comprehended, con
versing with us through the mediation of the
Flesh as through a veil ; since it was not pos
sible for that nature which is subject to birth
and decay to eaclure His unveiled Godhead.
Therefore the Unmingled is mingled ; and
not only is God mingled with birth and
Spirit4 with flesh, and the
Eternal with
time, and the Uncircumscribed with measure ;

.
.

.
.

a "The rest of the Creation was made by the command of
(Wordsworth
God, but Man was formed by the hand of God."
in Gen 11. 7.)
"There was a peculiar glory in the creation of Man, distin
guishing him from the rest of ihe creatures. The creatures in
ferior to man were called into being by a simplc'act of the Divine
I Will : hut ill the case of man, bearing as he does the nature and
the form which God was about to assume as His own, and which,
once assumed, was never again to be laid aside, the process of
creation was markedly different* Then for the first time the Most
Holy I'crsons of the Blessed Trinity appear upon the scene. They
' are manifested as in mutual consultation and common action pcr-
.
'I-ct Us make Man in Our Image
| tonally engaged.
. Then followed the exercise of crea
after Our I .ikeness '
tive power as a personal act, the putting forth the Hand of God
to fashion the body of Man ;
' 'I he Lord God formed Man of
Afterwards came the yet higher work in
' the dust of the earth.'
the infusion of the immaterial invisible life enshrined in the body,
' He breathed into his nostrils the
t perfecting the work of God :
breath of life and Man became a living soul.'" (T. T Carter, The
Divine Dispensations, p. 44. )t
£ Ps. Ixviii. 4.
y (Jllmann comments on this passage as follows : There is in it,
as follows especially from what comes after, the double sense that
the infinite Godhead entered in Christ into the limitations of a
finite human life ; and in consequence of this, since otherwise as
an infinite Meing it was not fully cognisable by the finite human
soul, became in this limitation cognisable in some degree to it, as
it was not before this special mamtestation in Christ
6 " In this and several other places trvev^a and povv evidently
denote the Divine the Spiritual, taken in the highest and purest
sense, in which it is lifted above the trapfi. and generally above all
that is material; in which sense S. John says, trt-cv/ia 6 ticoc."
Ultmann.

but also Generation with Virginity, and dis
honour with Him who is higher than all
honour ; He who is impassible with Suffering,"
For
and the Immortal with the corruptible.
since that Deceiver thought that he was uncon
querable in his malice, after he had cheated
us with the hope of becoming gods, he was
himself cheated by God's assumption of our
so that in attacking Adam as' he
nature ;
thought, he should really meet with God, and
thus the new Adam should save the old, and
the condemnation of the flesh should be abol
ished, death being slain by flesh.

us

XIV. At His birth we duly kept Festival,
both I, the leader of the Feast, and you, and all
that is in the world and above the world. With
the Star we ran, and with the Magi we wor
shipped, and with the Shepherds we were
illuminated, and with the Angels we glorified
Him, and with Simeon we took Him up in
our arms, and with Anna the aged and chaste
we made our responsive
confession. And
thanks be to Him who came to His own in
the guise of a stranger, because He glorified
Now, we come to another
the stranger. £
action of Christ, and another mystery.
cannot restrain my pleasure ; I am rapt into
God.
Almost like John I proclaim good tid
ings ; for though I be not a Forerunner, yet
Christ is illumined,
am I from the desert.*
let
Christ is
shine
baptized, let us descend with Him that we
may also ascend with Him.
Jesus is baptized ;
but we must attentively consider not only this
but also some other points. Who is He, and
by whom is He baptized, and at what time ?
He is the All-pure ; and He is baptized by
John ; and the time is the beginning of His
What are we to learn and to be
miracles.
taught by this ? To purify ourselves first ;
to be lowly minded ; and to preach only in
maturity both of spiritual and bodily stature.
The first4
has a word especially for those
who rush to Baptism off hand, and without
due preparation, or providing for the stabil
ity of the Baptismal Grace by the disposition
of their minds to good.
For since Grace con
tains remission of the past (for it is a grace),
it is on that account more worthy of reverence,

forth with Him.

a " In a double sense: -either that the Godhead is. in union
with the Man Jesus, subjected to suffering (cf. Or. XXI. 24). or
that the Divine Substance, which is unapproachable by any pas
sion or suffering, combined itself with a Man, whose nature cannot
be free from such emotions."
Ullmann.
0 i.e., human nature, which was severed from and made hostile
to Cod by sin.
6 That the All-pure was baptized is to remind us of our need
af preparation. That He was baptized by John is to teach us
humility towards the Priesthood, even if the Priest be socially our
inferior. That He was baptized at thirty years of age shews that
the Teachers and Rulers of the Church ought not to be very young
men.

y i.e., Sasiina.

Scholiast.

.

.

that we return not to the same vomit again.
The second speaks to those who rebel against
the Stewards of this Mystery, if they are their
The third is for those who
superiors in rank.
are confident in their youth, and think that
any time is the right one to teach or to pre
Jesus is purified, and dost thou despise
side.
purification?
and by John, and dost
.
thou rise up against thy herald?
and at thirty years of age, and dost thou be
fore thy beard has grown presume to teach
the aged, or believe that thou teachest them,
though thou be not reverend on account of
thine age, or even perhaps for thy character ?
But here it may be said, Daniel, and this or
that other, were judges in their youth, and
examples are on your tongues ; for every
wrongdoer is prepared to defend
himself.
But I reply that that which is rare is not the
law of the Church.
For one swallow does
not make a summer, nor one line a geome
trician, nor one voyage a sailor.

.

.

XV. But John baptizes, Jesus comes to Him*
perhaps to sanctify the Baptist him
self, but certainly to bury the whole of the
old Adam in the water ; and before this and
for the sake of this, to sanctify Jordan ; for
as He is Spirit and Flesh, so He consecrates
John will not re
us by Spirit and water. P
ceive Him; Jesus contends. "I have need
to be baptized of Thee" * says the Voice to
the Word, the Friend to the Bridegroom ; 4 he
that is above all among them that are born
of women,* to Him Who is the Firstborn of
every creature ; $ he that leaped in the womb,'
to Him Who was adored in the womb ; he
who was and is to be the Forerunner 9 to Him
Who was and is to be manifested.
" I have
need to be baptized of Thee;" add to this
" and for Thee ; " for he knew that he would
be baptized by Martyrdom, or, like Peter,
that he would be cleansed not only as to his
feet.' "And comest Thou to me?" This
also was prophetic ; for he knew that after
Herod would come the madness of Pilate,
and so that when he had gone before Christ
But what saith Jesus?
would follow him.
" Suffer
this is the
time of His Incarnation ; for He knew that
yet a little while and He should baptize the
Baptist. And what is the "Fan?" The
Purification.
the " Fire ? "
And what is
The consuming of the chaff, and the heat

it to be so now,' 1 for

3 John v. 35.
« Matt. xi. 11.

a Matt. iii. 14.
5 John iii. 39.
rj Luke t. 41.
6 " He who was the forerunner on earth, and was to be the
forerunner in Hades of Christ, Who manifested Himself on
Eltas Crciensis.
earth, and manifested Himself also in Hades."

v Matt. iii. 17.
5 Col. i. 5.

1 John xiii. 9.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

And what the " Axe ? "

of the Spirit.
The
excision of the soul which is incurable even
after the dung." And what the Sword ? The
cutting of the Word, which separates the
worse from the better,^ and makes a division
between the faithful and the unbeliever ; v and
stirs up the son and the daughter and the
bride against the father and the mother and
the mother in law,* the young and fresh against
the old and shadowy. And what is the
Latchet of the shoe, which thou John who
baptizest Jesus mayst not loose ? * thou who
art of the desert, and hast no food, the new
Elias.f the more than Prophet, inasmuch as
thou sawest Him of Whom thou didst pro
phesy, thou Mediator of the Old and New
Testaments.
Perhaps the
Message of the Advent, and the Incarnation,
of which not the least point may be loosed,
I say net by those * who are yet carnal and
babes in Christ, but not even by those who
are like John in spirit.

What is

this?

.

.

flaming sword.

XVI. But further-Jesus goeth up out of
the water ... for with Himself He car
ries up the world
and sees the
.
heaven opened which Adam had shut against
himself and all his posterity,* as the gates
of Paradise by the
And
the Spirit bears witness to His Godhead,
for he descends upon One that is like Him,
as does the Voice from Heaven (for He to
Whom the witness is borne came from thence),
and like a Dove, for He honours the Body
(for this also was God, through its union with
God) by being seen in a bodily form ; and
moreover, the Dove has from distant ages
been wont to proclaim the end of the Deluge.'
But if you are to judge of Godhead by bulk
and weight, and the Spirit seems to you a
small thing because He came in the form of a
Dove, O man of contemptible littleness of
thought concerning the greatest of things, you
must also to be consistent despise the King
dom of Heaven, because it is compared to a
grain of mustard seed ; * and you must exalt
the adversary above the Majesty of Jesus, be
cause he is called a great Mountain,* and
Leviathan »» and King of that which lives in the
water, whereas Christ is called the Lamb,'' and
the Pearl,* and the Drop0 and similar names.
XVII. Now, since our Festival is of Bap
tism, and we must endure a little hardness with

0 Hcb. iv. 12.
ejohn i. 27.
1 lb. viii. 11.

a Luke xiii. 8.
o Micah vii. 6.
i) One important MS. reads " Us Who."
0 Gen. iit. 24.
A Zech. iv. 7
p The word Leviathan does not occur in the I.XX., though it is
found twice in other Greek Versions of the Mook of Job, viz.:-iii.
8 and xl. 20.

y Malt x. 35.
5 Luke vii. 26.
«t Matt. xiii. 31.

F Isa. liii. 7.

{ Matt. xiii. 46.

o Ps. Ixxii. 6.

Still

Him Who for our sake took form, and was bap
tized, and was crucified; let us speak about
the different kinds of Baptism, that we may
Moses baptized a
come out thence purified.
but it was in water, and before that in the
cloud and in the sea.P This was typical as
Paul saith ; the Sea of the water, and the
Cloud of the Spirit ; the Manna, of the Bread
! of I'ife ; the Drink, of the Divine Drink. John
also baptized ; but this was not like the baptism
of the Jews, for it was not only in water, but
also " unto repentance."
it was not
wholly spiritual, for he does not add " And
Jesus also baptized, but in
in the Spirit."
the
This is the perfect Baptism.
Spirit.
And how is He not God, if I may digress a
little, by whom you too are made God ?
know also a Fourth Baptism-that by ■ Mar
tyrdom and blood, which also Christ himself
underwent ;-and this one is far more august
than all the others, inasmuch as it cannot be
defiled by after-stains.
Yes, and I know of a
Fifth also, which is that of tears, and is much
more laborious, received by him who washes
his bed every night and his couch with tears ;*
j whose bruises stink through his wickedness ;*
and who goeth mourning and of a sad counte
nance ; who imitates the repentance of Manasseh'and the humiliation of the NinevitesS upon
which God had mercy ; who utters the words
of the Publican in the Temple, and is justified
rather than the stiff-necked Pharisee ; i who
like the Canaanite woman bends down and
asks for mercy and crumbs, the food of a dog
that is very hungry.*

XVIII. I, however, for I confess myself to be
a man,-that is to say, an animal shifty and of a
changeable nature,-both eagerly receive this
Baptism, and worship Him VVho has given it
me, and impart it to others ; and by shewing
mercy make provision
For 1
know that I too am compassed with infirmity,1
and that with what measure I mete it shall be
But what sayest thou,
measured to me again."
O new Pharisee pure* in title but not in in
tention, who dischargest upon us the senti
ments of Novatus,* though thou sharest the

for mercy.

3 i Cor. x. 2.

y Ps. vi. 6.
£ Jon. iii. 7-10.

& lb. xxxviii. 5.
ri Luke xvui. 13.

a Lev. xi.
t 2 Chron. xxxviii. 12.
k Matt. vii. 2.
1 Heb. v. 2.
0 Matt. xv. 27.
A The Novatians were known as Calhari or Puritans.
ft In A.D. 251 Novatus, a Presbyter of the Church of Carthage,
who with others had formed a party against S. Cyprian, their
Bishop, came to Rome, and excited Novatian tc become leader in
a similar schism against Cornelius, the recently elected Bishop of
the Apostolic See. The plea urged on behalf of the schism was
that Cornelius, who was of one accord with Cyprian, had lapsed in
the time of the persecution under Decius. A.D. 250. and that he
had relaxed the discipline of the Church by admitting to Com
munion on too easy terms those who had been guiltv of a similar
offence ; and that therefore he ought not to be recoguired as a true
>iishop of the Church, but a faithful Pastor should be chosen in his
place. Consequently Novatian was elected by some who held these
views, and was consecrated by three Bishops. There seem to

ORATIONS ON THE HOLY LIGHTS.

Wilt thou not give any
same infirmities?
place to weeping?
Wilt thou shed no tear ?
Mayest thou not meet with a Judge like thy
Art thou not ashamed by the mercy
self?
of Jesus, Who took our infirmities and bare
our sicknesses ; " Who came not to call the
righteous but sinners to repentance ; P Who
will have mercy rather than sacrifice ; who
forgiveth sins till seventy times seven. t How
blessed would your exaltation be if it really
were purity, not pride, making laws above
the reach of men, and destroying improve
ment by despair.
For both are alike evil,
indulgence not regulated by prudence, and
condemnation that will never forgive; the one
because it relaxes all reins, the other because
it strangles by its severity.
Shew me your
purity, and I
will approve your boldness.
But as it is, I fear that being full of sores you
will render them incurable.
Will you not
admit even David's repentance, to whom his
penitence preserved even the gift of prophecy ?
nor the great Peter himself, who fell into hum
an weakness at the Passion of our Saviour ?
Yet Jesus received him, and by the threefold
question and confession healed the threefold
denial.8 Or will you even refuse to admit
that he was made perfect by blood (for your
Or the trans
folly goes even as far as that) ?
gressor at Corinth ?
But Paul confirmed love
towards him when he saw his amendment,
and gives the reason, " that such an one be
not swallowed up by overmuch sorrow,"'
being overwhelmed by the excess of the pun
ishment, i
And will you refuse to grant
liberty of marriage to young widows on ac
count of the liability of their age to fall ?
Paul ventured to do so ; but of course you
for you have been caught
can teach him ;
up to the Fourth heaven, and to another
Paradise, and have heard words more un
speakable, and comprehend a larger circle in
your Gospel.

XIX. But these sins were not after Baptism,
you will say.
Either
prove it-or refrain from condemning ; and if

Where is your proof?

a Matt. vm. 17.

have been a good many of his followers in Constantinople at this
lime. There had been at one time a disposition among them to
reunite themselves to the Catholic Church, for they were orthodox
in faith ; but it had been hindered by the malevolence of their
party leaders ; so that the schism continued, and the Novatians
mu,t be added to the opponents with whom S. Gregory had to
deal.
v lb. xviti. 22.
6 John xxi. 15 sq.
5 "This too often ignored page gives a solemn contradiction to
tho-c who, falsifying nistory as well as theology, pretended two
centuries ago to revive by their extravagant rigour (he spirit of the
The spirit of the Church never changes.
primitive Lhurch.
In
flexible against error, it is full of gentleness and kindliness for
repentant sinners.
The spirit of the Church is that of the Saints
of all times ; or rather it is that of the Divine Shepherd, Who
made Himself known above all by His unspeakable tenderness and
His inexhaustible mercy to lost sheep."

(Uenoit S. G. de N.)

€ 2 Cor. ii. 7.

0 lb. ix. 13.

If they were unrepentant .

there be any doubt, let charity prevail. But Novatus, you say, would not receive those who
lapsed in the persecution.
What do you
mean by this?
he was right ;
I too would refuse to receive
those who either would not stoop at all or not
sufficiently, and who would refuse to make
their amendment counterbalance their sin ;
and when I do receive them, I will assign them
their proper place;" but if he refused those
who wore themselves away with weeping, I
will not imitate him.
And why should Novatus's want of charity be a rule for me? He
never punished covetousness, which is a sec
ond idolatry ; but he condemned fornication
as though he himself were not flesh and body.
What say you ?
Are we convincing you by
these words ? Come and stand here on our
Let
side, that is, on the side of humanity.
us magnify the Lord together.
Let none of
you, even though he has much confidence in
himself, dare to say, Touch me not for I am
Give us too
pure, and who is so pure as I ?
But perhaps we
a share in your brightness.
are not convincing you ?
Then we will weep
for you.
Let these men then if they will,
follow our way, which is Christ's way; but
if they will not, let them go their own.
Per
haps in it they will be baptized with Fire, in
that last Baptism which is more painful and
longer, which devours wood like grass,P and
consumes the stubble of every evil.

XX. But let us venerate to-day the Baptism
of Christ ; and let us keep the feast well, not in
pampering the belly, but rejoicing in spirit.
And how shall we luxuriate? "Wash you,
make you clean." f
If ye be scarlet with sin
and less bloody, be made white as snow ; if
ye be red, and men bathed in blood, yet be
ye brought to the whiteness of wool. Any
how be purified, and you shall be clean (for
God rejoices in nothing so much as in the
amendment and salvation of man, on whose
behalf is every discourse and every Sacra
ment), that you may be like lights in the
world, a quickening force to all other men ;
that you may stand as perfect lights beside
That great Light, and may learn the mys
tery of the illumination of Heaven, enlight
ened by the Trinity more purely and clearly,
of Which even now you are receiving in a
measure the One Ray from the One God
head in Christ Jesus our Lord ; to Whom
be the glory and the might for ever and
ever.

Amen.

tt i.e., their proper class among the Penitents.
Y lsaL* *• 17» '8.
0 1 Cor. iii. 12-19.

36o

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

ORATION XL.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

Preached at Constantinople Jan. 6, 381, being the day
following the delivery of that on the Holy Lights.

I. Yesterday we kept high Festival on the
illustrious Day of the Holy Lights ; for it was
fitting that rejoicings should be kept for our
Salvation, and that far more than for wed
dings and birthdays, and namedays, and
house-warmings, and registrations of children,
and anniversaries, and all the other festivities
that men observe for their earthly friends.
And now to-day let us discourse briefly conconcerning Baptism, and the benefits which
accrue to us therefrom, even though our dis
course yesterday spoke of it cursorily ; partly
because the time pressed us hard, and partly
because the sermon had to avoid tediousness.
For too great length in a sermon is as much
an enemy to people's ears, as too much food
It will be worth
.
is to their bodies.
your while to apply your minds to what we
say, and to receive our discourse on so im
portant a subject not perfunctorily, but with
ready mind, since to know the power of this
Sacrament is itself Enlightenment."

.

.

II. The Word recognizes three Births for
us ; namely, the natural birth, that of Baptism,
and that of the Resurrection.
Of these the
first
is by night, and is servile, and involves
passion ; but the second is by day, and is
destructive of passion, cutting off all the veil^
that is derived from birth, and leading on to
the higher life ; and the third is more terrible
and shorter, bringing together in a moment
all mankind,v to stand before its Creator, and
to give an account of its service and con
versation here ; whether it has followed the
flesh, or whether it has mounted up with the
spirit, and worshipped the grace of its new
creation. My Lord Jesus Christ has showed
that He honoured all these births in His own
Person ; the first, by that first and quickening
Inbreathing ;a the second by His Incarnation
and the Baptism wherewith He Himself was
baptized ; and the third by the Resurrection
of which He was the Firstfruits ; condescend-

a Knliglitcnment (^wTKr/xiS?) is one of the most ancient names
for Holy Haptism ; the name, in fact, which S. Gregory uses
throughout this Oration, and which his Latin translator almost
invariably renders by Haptismus.
This Veil is Original Sin, by which the soul is darkened and
as it were covered.
irAa<ru.a would not he cor
y AH Mankind (irai* rb n\a.<jfta).
rectly rendered by Creation.
It is a word belonging solely to
Man, who was formed by the Hand of Clod, and who, alone
among creators, has to give an account of his past life to his
(tdd. liencd.)
Creator at the Last Day.

6 Gen. ii. 7.

ing, as He became the Firstborn a among many
brethren, so also to become the Firstborn from
the dead.^

is

1 Lights.

Illumination

III. Concerning two of these births, the first
and the last, we have not to speak on the
present occasion.
Let us discourse upon the
second, which is now necessary for us, and
which gives its name to the Feast of the
the splendour of
souls, the conversion of the life, the question
It is the aid
1. put to the Godward conscience. >
to our weakness, the renunciation of the flesh,
the following of the Spirit, the fellowship of
the Word, the improvement of the creature,
the overwhelming of sin, the participation of
It is the
light, the dissolution of darkness.
' carriage to God, the dying with Christ, the
I perfecting of the mind, the bulwark of Faith,
the key of the Kingdom of heaven, the change
of life, the removal of slavery, the loosing of
chains, the remodelling of the whole man.
Why should I go into further detail?
Il
lumination is the greatest and most magnifi
For just as we
cent of the Gifts of God.
speak of the Holy of Holies, and the Song of
Songs, as more comprehensive and more ex1 cellent than others, so is this called Illumina
as being more holy than any other

tion,
illumination which we possess.

IV. And as Christ the Giver of it is called
by many various names, so too is this Gift,
; whether it is from the exceeding gladness of
its nature (as those who are very fond of a
thing take pleasure in using its name), or that
the great variety of its benefits has reacted for
us upon its names. We call it, the Gift, the
I Grace, Baptism, Unction, Illumination, the
Clothing of Immortality, the Laver of Re
generation, the Seal, and everything that is
honourable. We call it the Gift, because it is
given to us in return for nothing on our part ;
Grace, because it is conferred even on debtors ;
Baptism, because sin is buried with it in the
water; Unction, as Priestly and Royal, for
such were they who were anointed ; Illumina
tion, because of its splendour ; Clothing, be
cause it hides our shame ; the Laver, because
it washes us ; the Seal because it preserves us,
and is moreover the indication of Dominion.
In it the heavens rejoice; it is glorified by
Angels, liecause of its kindred splendour.
It
is the image of the heavenly bliss. We long

P Col. i. 18.

a Rom. viii. 20.
y This is the literal version of the passage, which is somewhat
loosely quoted from 1 S. Prtcr iii. 21, where the A. V. renders
the answer of a good conscience towards God." and the R. V.,
"The interrogation (Marg. inquiry) of a good conscience, etc"
The passage is usually explained as referring to the Interroga
tories in Holy Haptism, answered by the threefold Vow which en
under Christ's banner against sin, the world, and the
lists 11s
Devil," professes the Faith, and promises obedience.

!

ORATION ON HOLY BAPTISM.

indeed to sing out its praises, but we cannot
worthily do so.

V. God is Light : a the highest, the unap
proachable, the ineffable, That can neither l)e
conceived in the mind nor uttered with the
Yips/ That giveth life to every reasoning creat
ure.* He is in the world of thought, what the
sun is in the world of sense ; presenting Himself
to our minds in proportion as we are cleansed ;
and loved in proportion as He is presented to
our mind ; and again, conceived in proportion
as we love Him ; Himself contemplating and
comprehending Himself, and pouring Himself
out upon what is external to Him. That Light,
I mean, which is contemplated in the Father
and the Son and the Holy Ghost, Whose
riches is Their unity of nature, and the one
outleaping of Their brightness. A second
Light is the Angel, a kind of outflow or com
munication of that first Light, drawing its
illumination from its inclination and obedi
ence thereto ; and I know not whether its il
lumination is distributed according to the
order of its state, or whether its order is due
to the respective measures of its illumination.2
A third Light is man ; a light which is visible
to external objects.
For they call man light '
because of the faculty of speech in us. And
the name is applied again to those of us who
are more like God, and who approach God
more nearly than others.
I also acknowledge
'another Light, by which the primeval dark
ness was driven away or pierced. '
It was the
first of all the visible creation to be called into
existence ; and it irradiates the whole uni
verse, the circling orbit of the stars, and all
the heavenly beacon fires.

VI. Light was also the firstborn command
ment given to the firstborn man (for the com
mandment of the Law is a lamp and a light ; f
and again, Because Thy judgments are a light
upon the earth) ; i although the envious dark
ness crept in and wrought wickedness.
And
a Light typical and proportionate to those
who were its subjects was the written law,
adumbrating the truth and the sacrament of
the great Light, for Moses' face was made
glorious by it.9 And, to mention more Lights
-it was Light that appeared out of Fire to
Moses, when it burned the bush indeed, but
did not consume it,1 to shew its nature and to
declare the power that was in it.
And it was
Light that was in the pillar of fire that led

/) 1 Tim. vi. 16.

a i John i. 5.
8 S. Thomas Aquinas (Summa I qu. to8) seems to solve this
e ^wf (masc) is a common poetical word for Man. It is prob
which also

y John i. 9.
question in accordance with the second of these alternatives.
ably derived from the root (Indo-Eur. Kha) of
appears in 6w"> and modified in ^aiint.

H Ps. cxix. 105.

0 Exod. xxxiv. 30.

£ Prov. vi. 33.
4 lb. iii. a.

Israel and tamed the wilderness."
It was
Light that carried up Elias in the car of fire,0
and yet did not burn him as it carried him.
It was Light that shone round the Shepherds *
when the Eternal Light was mingled with the
temporal.
It was Light that was the beauty
of the Star that went before to Bethlehem to
guide the Wise Men's way,* and to be the
escort of the Light That is above us, when He
came amongst us.
Light was That Godhead
Which was shewn upon the Mount to the dis
ciples-and a little too strong for their eyes.'
Light was That Vision which blazed out upon
Paul,? and by wounding his eyes healed the
darkness of his soul.
Light is also the bril
liancy of heaven to those who have been puri
fied here, when the righteous shall shine forth
as the Sun,i and God shall stand in the midst
of them,* gods and kings, deciding and dis
tinguishing the ranks of the Blessedness of
heaven.
Light beside these in a special sense
is the illumination of Baptism of which we are
now speaking ; for it contains a great and mar
vellous sacrament of our salvation.

VII. For since to be utterly sinless belongs
to God, and to the first and uncompounded
nature (for simplicity is peaceful, and not
subject to dissension), and I venture to say
also that it belongs to the Angelic nature too;
or at least, I would affirm that nature to be
very nearly sinless, because of its nearness to
God ; but to sin is human and belongs to the
Compound on earth (for composition is the
beginning of separation); therefore the master
did not think it right to leave His creature
unaided, or to neglect its danger of separation
from Himself; but on the contrary, just as
He gave existence to that which did not exist,
so He gave new creation to that which did
exist, a diviner creation and a loftier than the
first, which is to those who are beginning life
a Seal, and to those who are more mature in
age both a gift and a restoration of the image
which had fallen through sin, that we may
not, by becoming worse through despair, and
ever being borne downward to that which is
more evil, fall altogether from good and from
virtue, through despondency ;
and having
fallen into a depth of evil (as it is said) despise
Him ; ' but that like those who in the course
of a long journey make a brief rest from labour
at an inn, we should be enabled to accomplish
the rest of the road fresh and full of courage.
Such is the grace and power of baptism ; not
an overwhelming of the world as of old, but a

a Ex. xiii. 21.
8 Matt. ii. 9.
n Matt. xiii. 43.

0 2 Kin^s ii zi.
e Luke ix. 32, 34.
8 Wisd. iii. 7.

v Luke ii. 9.
£ Acts ix. 3.

i Prov. xviiL 3 (LXX.).

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

purification of the sins of each individual, and
a complete cleansing from all the bruises and
stains of sin.

VIII. And since we are double-made, I mean i

For, to say it

of body and soul, and the one part is visible, the
other invisible, so the cleansing also is twofold,
by water and the spirit; the one received visibly
in the body, the other concurring with it in
visibly and apart from the body ; the one typ- j
ical, the other real and cleansing the depths.
And this which comes to the aid of our first
birth, makes us new instead of old, and like
God instead of what we now are ; recasting us |
without fire, and creating us anew without
breaking us up,
all in one
word, the virtue of Baptism is to be under
stood as a covenant with God for a second
life and a purer conversation. And indeed
all need to fear this very much, and to watch
our own souls, each one of us, with all care,
that we do not become liars in respect of this
profession.
For if God is called upon as a
Mediator to ratify human professions, how
great is the danger if we be found transgressors
of the covenant which we have made with
God Himself; and if we be found guilty be
fore the Truth Himself of that lie, besides our
other transgressions .
. and that when there
.
is no second regeneration, or recreation, or re
storation to our former state, even though we
seek it with all our might, and with many
sighs and tears, by which it is cicatrized over
(with great difficulty in my opinion, though
Yet
we all believe that it may be cicatrized).
if we might wipe away even the scars I should
be glad, since I too have need of mercy.
But
it is better not to stand in need of a second
cleansing, but to stop at the first, which is, I
know, common to all, and involves no labour,
and is of equal price to slaves, to masters, to
poor, to rich, to humble, to exalted, to gentle,
to simple, to debtors, to those who are free
from debt ; like the breathing of the air, and
the pouring forth of the light, and the changes
of the seasons, and the sight of creation, that
great delight which we all share alike, and ,
the equal distribution of the faith.

IX. For it is a strange thing to substitute for
a painless remedy one which is more painful;
to cast away the grace of mercy, and owe a
debt of punishment ; and to measure our
amendment against sin.
must we contribute before they can equal the
fount of baptism ; and who will be surety for
us that death shall wait for our cure, and that
the judgment seat shall not summon us while
still debtors, and needing the fire of the other
You perhaps, as a good and pitiful
world ?

For how many tears I

husbandman, will entreat the Master still to
spare the figtree," and not yet to cut it down,
though accused of unfruitfulness ; but to allow
you to put dung about it in the shape of tears,
sighs, invocations, sleepings on the ground,
vigils, mortifications of soul and body, and
correction by confession and a life of humili
ation.
is uncertain if the Master will
spare it, inasmuch as it cumbers the ground of
another asking for mercy, and becoming de
teriorated by the longsuffering shewn to this
one.
Let us then be buried with Christ by
Baptism,P that we may also rise with Him ; let
us descend with Him, that we may also be
exalted with Him ; let us ascend with Him,
that we may also be glorified together.

But it

(as

X. If after baptism the persecutor and
tempter of the light assail you (for he assailed
even the Word my God through the veil,* the
hidden Light through that which was mani
fested), you have the means to conquer him.
Fear not the conflict ; defend yourself with
the Water ; defend yourself with the Spirit, by
Which all the fiery darts of the wicked shall
It is Spirit, but That Spirit
be quenched.4
It is Water, but
which rent the Mountains.'
If he assail you
that which quenches fire.
by your
assail
to
dared
he
want
Christ), and asks that stones should be made
bread, do not be ignorant of his devices. t
Teach him what he has not learnt.
Defend
yourself with the Word of life, Who is the
Bread sent down from heaven, and giving life
If he plot against you with
to the world. i
vain glory (as he did against Christ when he
led Him up to the pinnacle of the temple and
said to Him, Cast Thyself down* as a proof
of Thy Godhead), be not overborne by ela
tion.
If you be taken by this he will not
For he is insatiable, he grasps at
stop here.
every thing. He fawns upon you with fair
pretences, but he ends in evil ; this
is the
manner of his fighting.
Yes, and the robber
is skilled in Scripture. On the one side was
that It is written about the Bread, and on
the other that it Is written about the Angels.
is written, quoth he, He shall give His
It
thee, and they
Angels charge concerning
shall
hands.' O vile
their
sophist ! how was it that thou didst suppress
the words that follow, for I know it well,
even if thou passest it by in silence? I will
make thee to go upon the asp and basil
tread upon serpents and
isk, and I
Trinity.
by the
fenced
scorpions,

will
being

bear

thee

in

a Luke xiii. 8.
v i.e., the Sacred Manhood.
if John vi. 3^.
£ 2 Cor. ti. 11.

0 Rom. vi. 4 ; Cot. ii. 13.
8 Kphes. vi. 16.
9 Matt. iv. 6.

e 1 Ki. xix. II.
t Ps. xci. 14.

ORATION ON HOLY BAPTISM.

If he wrestle against thee to a fall through
avarice, shewing thee all the Kingdoms at
one instant and in the twinkling of an eye, as
belonging to himself, and demand thy worship,
despise him as a beggar.
Say to him relying
on the Seal, "I am myself the Image of God ;
I have not yet been cast down from the
heavenly Glory, as thou wast through thy
I have put on Christ ; 1 have been
pride ;
transformed into Christ by Baptism ; worship
thou me. ' ' Well do I know that he will depart,
defeated and put to shame by this ; as he did
from Christ the first Light, so he will from
Such
those who are illumined by Christ.
blessings does the laver bestow on those who
apprehend it ; such is the rich feast which it
provides for those who hunger aright.

XI. Let us then be baptized that we may
let us partake of the cleans
win the victory ;
ing waters, more purifying than hyssop, purer
than the legal blood, more sacred than the
ashes of the heifer sprinkling the unclean," and
providing a temporary cleansing of the body,
but not a complete taking away of sin ;
if once purged, why should they need
for
further purification ?
Let us be baptized to
day, that we suffer not violence 3 to-morrow ;
and let us not put off the blessing as if it were
an injury, nor wait till we get more wicked
that more may be forgiven us ; and let us not
become sellers and traffickers of Christ, lest
we become more heavily burdened than we
are able to bear, that we be not sunk with all
handstand make shipwreck of the Gift, and
lose all because we expected too much. While
thou art still master of thy thoughts run to the
Gift.
While thou art not yet sick in body or
in mind, nor seemest so to those who are with
thee (though thou art really of sound mind) ;
while thy good is not yet in the power of others,
but thou thyself art still master of it ; while thy
tongue is not stammering or parched, or (to say
no more) deprived of the power of pronouncing
the sacramental words ; while thou canst still
be made one of the faithful, not conjecturally

a Heb. x. 4.

0 There is here an tintranslateable play upon words.
y Again a play upon words.

Banri£e<70at is sometimes used in
the sense of to be drowned. The word primarily means to Im
merse, and this of course, when applied to a ship, is to sink her.
The practice of immersion in Holy Haptism was undoubtedly
universal in the primitive ages, except where in cases of necessity
persons were baptized in sickness, or in prison under sentence of
death ; and in such cases this "Clinic" Haptism. though recog
nized as valid, and therefore not to be repeated, was viewed as ir
regular, and disqualified its recipient from subsequently receiving
Affusion was gradually allowed, probably for clim
Holy Orders.
of the West,
atic reasons, to become the prevailing practice
though immersion predominated as late as the Twelfth Century.
It is, however, a remarkab'e fact that the Didache, a Manual of
instruction which some date within the lifetime of the Apostles,
and nearly all are agreed in placing not later than the early years
ofthi Second Century, expressly permits affusion, without any
hint of irregularity, or mention of any circumstance of necessity
except scarcity of water.

but confessedly ; and canst still receive not
pity but congratulation ;
while the Gift is
still clear to thee, and there is no doubt about
it ; while the grace can reach the depth of
thy soul, and it is not merely thy body that
is washed for burial ; and before tears sur
round thee announcing thy decease-and even
these restrained perhaps for thy sake-and thy
wife and children would delay thy departure,
and are listening for thy dying words ; before
the physician is powerless to help thee, and is
giving thee but hours to live-hours which
are not his to give-and is balancing thy salv
ation with the nod of his head, and discours
ing learnedly on thy disease after thou art
dead, or making his charges heavier by with
drawals, or hinting at despair ; before there
is a struggle between the man who would
baptize thee and the man who seeks thy
money, the one striving that thou mayest re
ceive thy Viaticum, the other that he may be
inscribed in thy Will as heir-and there is no
time for both.

XII. Why wait for a fever to bring you this
blessing, and refuse it from God ? Why will
you have it through lapse of time, and not
through reason ? Why will you owe it to a
plotting friend, and not to a saving desire ?
Why will you receive it of force and not of
free will ; of necessity rather than of liberty ?
Why must
you hear of your death from
another, rather than think of it as even now
present? Why do you seek for drugs which
will do no good, or the sweat of the crisis,
when the sweat of death is perhajw upon you ?
Heal yourself before your extremity ;
have
pity upon yourself the only true healer of
your disease ; apply to yourself the really
saving medicine ; while you are still sailing
with a favouring breeze fear shipwreck, and
you will be in less danger of it, if you make
use of your terror as a helper.
Give yourself
occasion to celebrate the Gift with feasting,
not with mourning ; let the talent be cultiv
ated, not buried in the ground ;
let some
time intervene between the grace and death,
that not only may the account of sins be
wiped out,
but something better may be
written in its place ; that you may have not
only the Gift, but also the Reward ; that you
may not only escape the fire, but may also in
herit the glory, which is bestowed by cultiva
For to men of little soul
tion of the Gift.
but
it is a great thing to escape torment ;
men of great soul aim also at attaining re
ward.

XIII. I know of three classes among the
saved ; the slaves, the hired servants, the sons.

3^4

If you are a slave, be afraid of the whip ; if you
are a hired servant, look only to receive your
hire ; if you are more than this, a son, revere
Him as a Father, and work that which is good,
because it is good to obey a Father ; and even
though no reward should come of it for you,
this is itself a reward, that you please your
Father.
Let us then take care not to despise
these things. How absurd it would be to
grasp at money and throw away health ; and
to be lavish of the cleansing of the body, but
economical over the cleansing of the soul ;
and to seek for freedom from earthly slavery,
but not to care about heavenly freedom ; and to
make every effort to be splendidly housed and
dressed, but to have never a thought how you
yourself may become really very precious ;
and to be zealous to do good to others, with
out any desire to do good to yourself.
And
if good could be bought, you would spare no
money; but if mercy is freely at your feet,
you despise it for its cheapness.
Every time
is suitable for your ablution, since any time
may be your death.
With Paul I shout to
you with that loud voice, " Behold now is
the accepted time ; behold Now is the day of
salvation ; " « and that Now does not point to
any one time, but is every present moment.
And again "Awake, thou that sleepest, and
Christ shall give thee light," • dispelling the
darkness of sin.
For as Isaiah says,* In the
night hope is evil, and it is more profitable to
be received in the morning.

XIV. Sow in good season, and gather to
gether, and open thy barns when it is the time
to do so ; and plant in season, and let the clus
ters be cut when they are ripe, and launch
boldly in spring, and draw thy ship on shore
again at the beginning of winter, when the sea
And let there be to thee also
begins to rage.
a time for war and a time for peace ; a time to
marry, and a time to abstain from marrying ;
a time for friendship, and a time for discord,
if this be needed ; and in short a time for
everything, if you will follow Solomon's ad
vice.8 And it is best to do so, for the advice
is profitable.
But the work of your salvation
is one upon which you should be engaged at
all times; and let every time be to you the
If you are always
definite one for Baptism.
passing over to-day and waiting for to-mor
row, by your little procrastinations you will be
cheated without knowing it by the Evil One,
as his manner is.
Give to me, he says, the
present, and to God the future ; to me your
youth, and to God old age ; to me your pleas-

a 2 Cor. vi. a.

y Isa. xxviii. 10, LXX.

0 Ephes. v.- 14.
& Eccl. iii. 1 sq.

ures, and to Him your uselessness.
How
great is the danger that surrounds you. How
many the unexpected mischances.
War has
expended you ; or an earthquake overwhelmed
you ; or the sea swallowed you up ; or a wild
beast carried you off; or a sickness killed you ;
or a crumb going the wrong way (a most
insignificant thing, but what is easier than for
a man to die, though you are so proud of the
divine image) ; or a too freely indulged drink
ing bout ;' or a wind knocked you down ;
or a horse ran away with you ; or a drug mali
ciously scheming against you, or perhaps found
to be deleterious when meant to be whole
some ; or an inhuman judge ; or an inexorable
executioner ; or any of the things which make
the change swiftest and beyond the power of
human aid.

XV. But if you would fortify yourself before
hand with the Seal, and secure yourself for the
future with the best and strongest of all aids,
being signed both in body and in soul with
the unction, as Israel was of old with that
blood and unction of the firstborn at night
that guarded him/ what then can happen to
you, and what has been wrought out for you?
Listen to the Proverbs.
" If thou sittest, he
says, thou shalt be without fear; and if thou
sleepest, thy sleep shall be sweet. "> And listen
to David giving thee the good news, "Thou
shalt not be afraid for the terror by night, for
mischance or noonday demon."4 This, even
while you live, will greatly contribute to your
sense of safety (for a sheep that is sealed is
not easily snared, but that which is unmarked
is an easy prey to thieves), and at your death
a fortunate shroud, more precious than gold,
more magnificent than a sepulchre, more re
verent than fruitless libations,' more season
able than ripe firstfruits, which the dead bestow
on the dead, making a law out of custom.
Nay, if all things forsake thee,* or be taken
violently away from thee ; money, possessions,
thrones, distinctions, and everything that be
longs to this early turmoil, yet you will be
able to lay down your life in safety, having
suffered no loss of the helps which God gave
you unto salvation.

XVI. But are you afraid lest you should de
stroy the Gift, and do you therefore put off your
cleansing, because you cannot have it a sec
ond time ? What ? Would you not be afraid
of danger in time of persecution, and of losing

a Some MSS. read " A flooded river."
0 Exod. xii. 22.
y Prov. iii. 24.
in his text, a
< ttillius suggests, though without adopting it
slight conjectural alteration, which would read '* Than funeral
but this, though it gives a very good
games and libations : "
f Luke ix. 6o>
sense, is a needless departure from the MSS.

6 Ps. xci. 5.

the most precious Thing you have-Christ ?
Would you then on this account avoid be
coming a Christian ?
Perish the thought.
Such a fear is not for a sane man ; such an
argument argues insanity. O incautious cau
tion, if I may so. O trick of the Evil One !
Truly he is darkness and pretends to be light ;
and when he can no longer prevail in open
war, he lays snares in secret, and gives ad
vice, apparently good, really evil, if by some
trick at least he may prevail, and we find no
And this is clearly
escape from, his plotting.
what he is aiming at in this instance.
For,
being unable to persuade you to despise Bap
tism, he inflicts loss upon you through a fic
titious security ; that in consequence of your
fear you may suffer unconsciously the very
thing you are afraid of ; and because you fear
to destroy the Gift, you may for this very
reason fail of the Gift altogether.
This is his
character ; and he will never cease his duplic
ity as long as he sees us pressing onwards to
wards heaven from which he has fallen. Where
fore, O man of God, do thou recognize the
for the battle is
plots of thine adversary ;
is concerned
against him that hath, and it
with the most important interests.
Take not
thine enemy to be thy counsellor ; despise not
to be and to be called Faithful. As long as you
are a Catechumen you are but in the porch of
Religion ; you must come inside, and cross
the court, and observe the Holy Things, and
look into the Holy of Holies, and be in com
Great are the inter
pany with the Trinity.
ests for which you are fighting, great too the
stability which you need.
Protect yourself
with the shield of faith.
He fears you, if you
fight armed with this weapon, and therefore
he would strip you of the Gift, that he may
the more easily overcome you unarmed and
defenceless.
He assails every age, and every
form of life ; he must be repelled by all.

XVII. Art thou young ? stand against thy
passions ; be numbered with the alliance in the
army of God : a do valiantly against Goliath. 0
Take your thousands or your myriads ; v thus
enjoy your manhood ; but do not allow your
youth to be withered, being killed by the im
Are you old and
perfection of your faith.
near the predestined necessity?
Aid your
few remaining days.
Entrust the purification
to your old age. Why do you fear youthful
passion in deep old age and at your last

a The Benedictine Editors punctuate differently, and render
"Stand against passions with the assistance (of Baptism), be
numbered in the army of God." remarking that David fought GoHath without allies, leaning on God's assistance : and that S.
Gregory here certainly means that a Christian who relies on the
aid of his Baptism is to stand firm in the battle against^the Devil.

fS i Sam. xvii. 3a.

y lb. xviii. 7.

3&S

breath ?
Or will you wait to be washed till
you are dead, and not so much the ob
ject of pity as of dislike ?
Are you re
gretting the dregs of pleasure, being your
self in the dregs of life?
It is a shame
ful thing to be past indeed the flower of
your age, but not past your wickedness ; but
either to be involved in it still, or at least to
Have
seem so by delaying your purification.
you an infant child ?
Do not let sin get any
opportunity, but let him be sanctified from
his childhood ; from his very tenderest age let
him be consecrated by the Spirit.
Fearest
thou the Seal on account of the weakness of
O what a small-souled mother, and
nature ?
of how little faith !
Why, Anna even before
Samuel was born" promised him to God, and
after his birth consecrated him at once, and
brought him up in the priestly habit, not
fearing anything in human nature, but trust
ing in God.
You have no need of amulets or
incantations, with which the Devil also conies
in, stealing worship from God for himself in
Give your child
the minds of vainer men.
the Trinity, that great and noble Guard.

I will join you in wedlock.

XVIII. What more ? Are you living in Vir
ginity? Be sealed by this purification ; make
this the sharer and companion of your life. Let
this direct your life, your words, every member,
every movement, every sense. Honour it, that
it may honour you ; that it may give to your
head a crown of graces, and with a crown of
delights may shield you.3 Art thou bound by
Be bound also by the Seal ; make
wedlock ?
it dwell with you as a guardian of your con
tinence, safer than any number of eunuchs or
of doorkeepers.
Art thou not yet wedded to
Fear not this consecration ; thou art
flesh ?
I will take the risk
pure even after marriage.
of that.
I will
dress the bride. We do not dishonour mar
riage because we give a higher honour to vir
ginity. I will imitate Christ, the pure Grooms
man and Bridegroom, as He both wrought a
miracle at a wedding, and honours wedlock
Only let marriage be
with His Presence.?
pure and unmingled with filthy lusts.
This
only I ask ; receive safety from the Gift, and
give to the Gift the oblation of chastity in its
due season, when the fixed time of prayer
comes round, and that which is more precious
And do this by common con
than business.
sent and approval.
For we do not command,
we exhort ; and we would receive something
of you for your own profit, and the common
And in one word,
security of you both.

a 1 Sam. i. 10.

/3 Ecclus. xxxii. 3.

y John ii. i-xi.

there is no state of life and no occupation to
which Baptism is not profitable.
You who
are a free man," be curbed by it ; you who
are in slavery, be made of equal rank ; you
who are in grief, receive comfort; let the
gladsome be disciplined ;
the poor receive
riches that cannot be taken away ; the rich
be made capable of being good stewards of
Do not play tricks or lay
their possessions.
plots against your own salvation.
For even
if we can delude others we cannot delude
ourselves.
And so to play against oneself is
very dangerous and foolish.

.

.

.

XIX. But you have to live in the midst of
public affairs, and are stained by them ; and it
would be a terrible thing to waste this mercy.
The answer is simple.
Flee, if you can, even
from the forum, along with the good company,
making yourself the wings of an eagle, or, to
speak more suitably, of a dove ... for
what have you to do with Caesar or the things
of Caesar ?
until you can rest where
there is no sin, and no blackening, and no
biting snake in the way to hinder your godly
steps.
Snatch your soul away from the world ;
flee from Sodom ; flee from the burning ;
travel on without turning back, lest you
should be fixed as a pillar of salt.0
Escape to
the Mountain lest you be destroyed with the
plain.
But if you are already bound and
constrained by the chain of necessity, reason
thus with yourself ; or rather let me reason
It is better both to attain the
thus with you.
But if it
good and to keep the purification.
be impossible to do both it is surely better to
be a little stained with your public affairs than
to fall altogether short of grace ; just as I think
it better to undergo a slight punishment from
father or master than to be put out of doors ;
and to be a little beamed upon than to be left
in total darkness.
And it is the part of wise
men to choose, as in good things the greater
and more perfect, so in evils the lesser and
Wherefore do not overmuch dread
lighter.
the purification.
For our success is always
judged by comparison with our place in life
by our just and merciful Judge ; and often one
who is in public life and has had small success
has had a greater reward than one who in the
enjoyment of liberty has not completely suc
ceeded ; as I think it more marvellous for a
man to advance a little in fetters, than for one
to run who is not carrying any weight ; or to
be only a little spattered in walking through
mud, than to be perfectly clean when the road
To give you a proof of what I have
is clean.

said : -Rahab the harlot was justified by one
thing alone, her hospitality," though she re
ceives no praise for the rest of her conduct ;
and the Publican was exalted by one thing,
his humility,0 though he received no testimony
for anything else ; so that you may learn not
easily to despair concerning yourself.

XX. But some will say, What shall I gain,
if, when I am preoccupied by baptism, and have
cut off* myself by my haste from the pleasures
of life, when it was in my power to give the
reins to pleasure, and then to obtain grace?
For the labourers in the vineyard who had
worked the longest time gained nothing there
by, for equal wages were given to the very
last.y
You have delivered me from some
trouble, whoever you are who say this, be
cause you have at last with much difficulty
told the secret of your delay ; and though I
cannot applaud your shiftiness, I do applaud
your confession.
But come hither and listen
to the interpretation of the parable, that you
may not be injured by Scripture for want of
First of all, there is no question
information.
here of baptism, but of those who believe at
different times and enter the good vineyard
of the Church.
For from the day and hour
at which each believed, from that day and
And then, al
hour he is required to work.
though they who entered first contributed
more to the measure of the labour yet they
did not contribute more to the measure of the
purpose ; nay perhaps even more was due to
the last in respect of this, though the statement
may seem paradoxical.
For the cause of their
later entrance was their later call to the work
In all other respects let us
of the vineyard.
see how different they are.
The first did not
believe or enter till they had agreed on their
hire ; but the others came forward to do the
work without an agreement, which is a proof
of greater faith.
And the first were found to
be of an envious and murmuring nature, but
no such charge is brought against the others.
And to the first, that which was given was
wages, though they were worthless fellows ; to
the last it was the free gift.
So that the first
were convicted of folly, and with reason de
Let us see what
prived of the greater reward.
would have happened to them if they had been
late.
HowWhy, the equal pay, evidently.
then can they blame the employer as unjust
because of their equality ?
For all these things
take away the merit of their labour from the
first, although they were at work first ; and
therefore it turns out that the distribution of

a iv c£otwia evidently means Tui juris-your own master.
0 Gen. xix. 26.

a Jo<h, vi. 25; James ii. 25.
y Matt. xx. 1 sq.

P Luke xviii. 14.

ORATION ON HOLY BAPTISM.

equal pay was just, if you measure the good
will against the labour.

XXI. But supposing that the Parable does
sketch the power of the font according to your
interpretation, what would prevent you, if you
entered first, and bore the heat, from avoiding
envy of the last, that by this very lovingkindness you might obtain more, and receive the
reward, not as of grace but as of debt? And
next, the workmen who receive the wages are
those who have entered, not those who have
missed, the vineyard ; which last is like to be
So that if it were certain that you
your case.
would obtain the Gift, though you are of such
a mind, and maliciously keep back some of
the labour, you might be forgiven for taking
refuge in such arguments, and desiring to
make unlawful gain out of the kindness of the
master ; though I might assure you that the
very fact of being able to labour is a greater
reward to any who is not altogether of a huck
stering mind.
But since there is a risk of
your being altogether shut out of the vineyard
through your bargaining, and losing the capit
al through stopping to pick up little gains,
do let yourselves be persuaded by my words
to forsake the false interpretations and contra
dictions, and to come forward without arguing
to receive the Gift, lest you should be snatched
away before you realize your hopes, and
should find out that it was to your own loss
that you devised these sophistries.

XXII. But then, you say, is not God merci
ful, and since He knows our thoughts and
searches out our desires, will He not take the
desire of Baptism instead of Baptism ?
You are
speaking in riddles, if what you mean is that
because of God's mercy the unenlightened is
enlightened in His sight ; and he is within the
kingdom of heaven who merely desires to at
tain to it, but refrains from doing that which
pertains to the kingdom.
I will, however,
speak out boldly my opinion on these matters ;
and I tiiink that all other sensible men will
range themselves on my side.
Of those who
have received the gift, some were altogether
alien from God and from salvation, both ad
dicted to all manner of sin, and desirous to be
bad ; others were semivicions, and in a kind
of mean state between good and bad ; others
again, while they did that which was evil, yet
did not approve their own action, just as men
in a fever are not pleased with their own sick
ness.
And others even before they were il
luminated were worthy of praise ; partly by
nature, and partly by the care with which
they prepared themselves for Baptism. These
after their initiation became evidently better,

and less liable to fall ; in the one case with a
I view to procuring good, and in the other in
order to preserve it. And amongst these,
those who gave in to some evil are better
! than those who were altogether bad ; and
J better still than those who yielded a little, are
I those who were more zealous, and broke up
' their fallow ground before Baptism ; they
I have the advantage over the others of having
already laboured ; for the font does not do
away with good deeds as it does with sins.
But better even than these are they who are
also cultivating the Gift, and are polishing
themselves to the utmost possible beauty.

XXIII. And so also in those who fail to re
ceive the Gift, some are altogether animal or
bestial, according as they are either foolish or
wicked ; and this, I think, has to be added to
their other sins, that they have no reverence at
all for this Gift, but look upon it as a mere gift
-to be acquiesced in if given them, and if
not given them, then to be neglected.
Others
know and honour the Gift, but put it off ;
some through laziness, some through greedi
ness.
Others are not in a position to receive
it, perhaps on account of infancy," or some
perfectly involuntary circumstance
through
which they are prevented from receiving it,
As then in the former case
even if they wish.
we found much difference, so too in
this.
They who altogether despise it are worse than
they who neglect it through greed or care
These are worse than they who
lessness.
have lost the Gift through ignorance or tyran
ny, for tyranny is nothing but an involuntary
error. 0
And I think that the first will have
to suffer punishment, as for all their sins, so
for their contempt of baptism ; and that the
second will also have to suffer, but less, be
cause it was not so much through wickedness
as through folly that they wrought their fail
ure ; and that the third will be neither glori
fied nor punished by the righteous Judge, as
unsealed and yet not wicked, but persons who
have suffered rather than done wrong.
For
not every one who is not bad enough to be
punished is good enough to be honoured ;
just as not every one who is not good enough
to be honoured is bad enough to be punished.
And I look upon it as well from another
point of view.
If you judge the murderously
disposed man by his will alone, apart from the

a That S. Gregory did not reject infant Baptism is clear, from
the directions given later on in this Oration fc. xxviii : and cfc.
xvii. s. fin.). He is here referring simply to the inability of infants
to bring themselves to the font whereby through the mistaken
scruples of parents many must have died unonptized.
fi i.e., The sins which are due altogether to external tyranny
do not involve guilt, inasmuch as they are involuntary, wherear
the guilt of sin is in the will.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

act of murder, then you may reckon as bap
tized him who desired baptism apart from the
But if you cannot do
reception of baptism.
I cannot
the one how can you do the other ?
see it.
Or, if you like, we will put it thus : -
If desire in your opinion has equal power
with actual baptism, then judge in the same
way in regard to glory, and you may be con
tent with longing for it, as if that were itself
glory.
And what harm is done you by your
not attaining the actual glory, as long as you
have the desire for it ?

Illumining.

XXIV. Therefore since you have heard these
words, come forward to it, and be enlightened,
and your faces shall not be ashamed a through
missing the Grace.
Receive then the En
lightenment in due season, that darkness pur
sue you not, and catch you, and sever you
The night cometh
from the
when no man can work ' after our departure
hence.
The one is the voice of David, the
other of the True Light which lighteth
every man that cometh into the world. » And
consider how Solomon reproves you who are
too idle or lethargic, saying, How long wilt
thou sleep, O sluggard,4 and when wilt thou
arise out of thy sleep ?
You rely upon this or
that, and " pretend pretences in sins;" • I am
I prefer Easter ; I will
waiting for Epiphany ;
wait for Pentecost.?
It is better to be bap
tized with Christ, to rise with Christ on the
Day of His Resurrection, i to honour the Man
ifestation of the Spirit.
And what then ?
The end will come suddenly in a day for
which thou lookest not, and in an hour that
thou art not aware of; and then you will have
for a companion lack of grace ; and you will
be famished in the midst of all those riches of
goodness, though you ought to reap the oppos
ite
fruit from the opposite course, a harv
est by diligence, and refreshment from the
font, like the thirsty hart* that runs in haste
to the spring, and quenches the labour of his
race by water ; and not to be in Ishmael's

a Ps. xxxiv. c. 9 John xii 35. y lb. 1.4. A* Prov. vi^o. r Ps. exli. 4.
(The Festivals of Faster and Pentecost were set apart as
early as the Second Crnturyfor the solemn administration of Holy
Baptism ; and S. Siricius Bishop of Rome about the time of
S. Gregory of Nazianzus, states that all the Churches agreed in
keeping these exclusively.
But this is a mistake (though van Fspen says (II., c. _i„ tit.
a. c. 4) that S. Siriciusacknnwledges the
existence of the different custom, but condemns it, and gives refer
ence to ad. Himerum Tarraconensem, c. 2), for there is e\idence
that in manv Churches the Epiphany also was thus observed, and
in some Christmas also. But Tcrtullian (De Bapt.) says that no
In the Western Church, however. Papal de
time is unsuitable.
crees, Conciliar Canons, and Imperial Capitularies from the Vlth
to the Xlllth. Centuries abound, limiting the administration, ex
cept in cases of sickness, to the two seasons of Easter and Pente
cost, on the Vigils of which it is still provided for in the Missals.
No doubt it was felt 10 be a very useful limitation, when most per10ns who were presented for Baptism were adults, and required
aration. When this ceased to be the case the rule gradually
I'--;
me obsolete, and has long ceased to be observed.
$ Ps. xtii- 1.

1 Matt. xxiv. 50.

I pass and then to long for food.

case, dried up for want of water," or as the
fable has it, punished by thirst in the midst
It is a sad thing to let the
of a spring.^
for
market day go by and then to seek
It is a sad thing to let the Manna
work.
It is a sad
thing to take a counsel too late, and to be
come sensible of the loss only when it is im
possible to repair it ; that is, after our depart
ure hence, and the bitter closing of the acts
of each man's life, and the punishment of sin
There
ners, and the glory of the purified.
fore do not delay in coming to grace,
but
hasten, lest the robber outstrip you, lest the
adulterer pass you by, lest the insatiate be sat
isfied before you, lest the murderer seize the
blessing first, or the publican or the fornicator,
or any of these violent ones who take the King
For it suffers vio
dom of heaven by force.''.
lence willingly, and is tyrannized over through
goodness.

XXV. Take my advice, my friend, and be
slow to do evil, but swift to your salvation ;
for readiness to evil and tardiness to good are
If you are invited to a revel, be
equally bad.
not swift to go ; if to apostasy, leap away ;
if
a company of evildoers say to you, " Come
with us, share our bloodguiltiness, let us hide
in the earth a righteous man unjustly," 6 do
not lend them even your ears.
Thus you will
make two very great gains ; you will make
known to the other his sin, and you will
deliver yourself from evil company.
But
if David the Great say unto you, Come
and let us rejoice in the Lord ; • or another
Prophet, Come and let us ascend into the
Mountain of the Lord ; i or our Saviour Him
self, Come unto me all ye that labour and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest;1'
or, Arise, let us go hence, shining brightly,
glittering above snow, whiter than milk,*
shining above the sapphire stone ;
us
not resist or delay.
Let us be like Peter and
as they did to the
John, and let us hasten
Sepulchre and the Resurrection, so we to the
Font; running together, racing against each
other, striving to be first to obtain this Bless
ing. And say not, " Go away, and come
again, and tomorrow I will be baptized,"*
" I

| when you may have the blessing today.

let

a Gen xix. 15. sqq
(J The allusion is to the well known story of Tantalus, whose
punishment in hell was said to !>e that, being tormented with husger and thirst, he was condemned to stand for ever in water up 10
his lips, but to be unable to drink, and to have a tree laden with
luscious fruit within easy reach, but to be unable to gather of it.
fi Prov. i. it.

v Matt. xi. 12.
f Mic. iv. 1.
6 The A. V. is here used, as more accurate than the LXX.
* John xx. 3.

The passage is quoted freely from Tarn. iv. 7.
A Prov. iii. 28.
.

i) Matt. xi. 28.

« Ps. xcv. 1.

ORATION ON HOLY BAPTISM.

For it

will have with me father, mother, brothers,
wife, children, friends, and all whom I value,
and then I will be saved ; but it is not yet
the fitting time for me to be made bright ;"
for if you say so, there is reason to fear lest
you should have as sharers of your sorrow
those whom you hoped to have as sharers of
your joy.
If they will be with you, well;-
is base
but do not wait for them.
to say, " But where is my offering for my
baptism, and where is my baptismal robe, in
which I shall be made bright, and where
is what is wanted for the entertainment of my
baptizers, that in these too I may become
worthy of notice?
For, as you see, all these
things are necessary, and on account of this
Do not thus
the Grace will be lessened."
trifle with great things, or allow
yourself
The Sacrament- is greater
to think so basely.
Offer your
than the visible environment.
self; clothe yourself with Christ,
feast me
with your conduct ;
I rejoice to be thus
affectionately treated, and God Who gives
Nothirig is
these great gifts rejoices thus.
great in the sight of God, but what the poor
may give, so that the poor may not here also
be outrun, for they cannot contend
with
the rich.
In other matters there is a dis
tinction between poor and rich, but here the
more willing is the richer.

XXVI. Let nothing hinder you from going
on, nor draw you away from your readiness.
While your desire is still vehement, seize upon
While the iron is hot,
that which you desire.
let it be tempered by the cold water, lest any
thing should happen in the interval, and put
an end to your desire.
I am Philip; do you
be Candace's Eunuch. a Do you also say,
" See, here is water, what doth hinder me
to be baptized?"
Seize the opportunity;
rejoice greatly in the blessing; and having
spoken be baptized ; and having been bap
tized be saved ; and though you be an Ethi
Do not
opian body, be made white in soul.
say, "A Bishop shall baptize me,-and he
a Metropolitan,-and he of Jerusalem (for the
Grace does not come of a place, but of the
Spirit), -and he of noble birth, for it would
be a sad thing for my nobility to be insulted
by being baptized by a man of no family."
Do not say, " I do not mind a mere Priest, if
he is a celibate, and a religious, and of an
gelic life ; for it would be a sad thing for me
to be defiled even in the moment of my cleans
Do not ask for credentials of the
ing."
For another is his
preacher or the baptizer.

judge," and the examiner of what thou canst
not see.
For man looketh on the outward
appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart.
But to thee let every one be trustworthy for
purification, so only he is one of those who
have been approved, not of those who are
openly condemned, and not a stranger to the
Church. Do not judge your judges, you who
need healing ; and do not make nice distinc
tions about the rank of those who shall cleanse
you, or be critical about your spiritual fathers.
One may be higher or lower than another, but
all are higher than you.
Look at it this way.
One may be golden, another iron, but both
are rings and have engraved on them the
same royal image ; and thus when they im
press the wax, what difference is there be
tween the seal of the one and that of the
Detect the material in the
other?
wax, if you are so very clever.
Tell me
which is the impression of the iron ring,
and which of the golden. And how do they
come to be one? The difference is in the
material and not in the seal. And so anyone
can be your baptizer ;
for though one may
excel another in his life, yet the grace of
baptism is the same, and any one may be
your consecrator who is formed in the same
faith.

None.

XXVII. Do not disdain to be baptized with
a poor man, if you are rich ; or if you are noble,
with one who is lowborn ; or if you are a mas
ter, with one who is up to the present time your
slave. Not even so will you be humbling your
self as Christ, unto Whom you are baptized to
day, Who for your sake took upon Himselfeven
the form of a slave.
From the day of your
new 'birth all the old marks were effaced, and
Do not
Christ was put upon all in one form.
disdain to confess your sins, knowing how
John baptized, that by present shame you may
escape from future shame (for this too is a
part of the future punishment) ; and prove
that you really hate sin by making a shew of
it openly, and triumphing over it as worthy
of contempt.
Do not reject the medicine of
exorcism, nor refuse it because of its length.
This too is a touchstone of your right disposi
What labour have you to do
tion for grace.
compared with that of the Queen of Ethiopia,3
who arose and came from the utmost part of
the earth to see the wisdom of Solomon ? And
behold a Greater than Solomon is here? in the
Do
judgment of those who reason maturely.
not hesitate either at length of journey, or
distance by sea ; or fire, if this too lies before

a Acts viii. 36.

a 1 Sam. xvi. 7.

J3 1 Kgs. x. 1.

7 Matt. xiL 42.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

you ; or of any other, small or great, of the
hindrances that you may attain to the gift.
But if without any labour and trouble at all
you may obtain that which you desire, what
folly it is to put off the gift : " Ho, every one
that thirsteth, come ye to the waters," • Esaias
invites you, " and he that hath no money,
come buy wine and milk, without money and
without price." O swiftness of His mercy:
O easiness of the Covenant : This blessing
may be bought by you merely for willing it ;
He accepts the very desire as a great price ;
He thirsts to be thirsted for; He gives to
drink to all who desire to drink ; He takes it
as a kindness to be asked for the kindness ; He
is ready and liberal ; He gives with more plea
sure than others receive.3
Only let us not be
condemned for frivolity by asking for little,
and for what is unworthy of the Giver.
Blessed is he from whom Jesus asks drink, as
He did from that Samaritan woman, and
gives a well of water springing up unto eter
nal life.*
Blessed is he that soweth beside all
waters, and upon every soul, tomorrow to be
ploughed and watered, which today the ox
and the ass tread, while it is dry and without
water,4 and oppressed with unreason.
And
blessed is he who, though he be a " valley of
rushes,"' is watered out of the House of the
Lord ; for he is made fruitbearing instead of
rushbearing, and produces that which is for
the food of man, not that which is rough and
unprofitable.
And for the sake of this we
must be very careful not to miss the Grace.

XXVIII. Be it so, some will say, in the case
of those who ask for Baptism ; what have you
to say about those who are still children, and
conscious neither of the loss nor of the grace?
Certainly, if
Ai;e we to baptize them too ?
any danger presses.
For it is better that they
should be unconsciously sanctified than that
they should depart unsealed and uninitiated.
A proof of this is found in the Circumcision
on the eighth day, which was a sort of typical
seal, and was conferred on children before
they had the use of reason. And so is the
anointing of the doorposts,( which preserved
the firstborn, though applied to things which
But in respect of
had no consciousness.
others'' I give my advice to wait till the end
of the third year, or a little more or less, when
they may be able to listen and to answer some
thing about the Sacrament ; that, even though
they do not perfectly understand it, yet at any

rate they may know the outlines ; and then to
sanctify them in soul and body with the great
sacrament of our consecration.
For this is
how the matter stands ; at that time they be
gin to be responsible for their lives, when rea
son is matured, and they learn the mystery of
life (for of sins of ignorance owing to their
tender years they have no account to give),
and it is far more profitable on all accounts to
be fortified by the Font, because of the sud
den assaults of danger that befall us, stronger
than our helpers.

XXIX. But, one says, Christ was thirty
years old when He was baptized," and that al
though He was God ; and do you bid us hurry
our Baptism ?-You have solved the difficulty
when you say He was God. For He was abso
lute cleansing ; He had no need of cleansing ;
but it was for you that He was purified, just as it
was for you that, though He had not flesh, yet
He is clothed with flesh.
Nor was there any
danger to Him from putting off Baptism, for
He had the ordering of His own Passion as of
But in your case the danger
His own Birth.
is to no small interests, if you were to depart
after a birth to corruption alone, and without
being clothed with incorrtiption. And there is
this further point for me to consider, that that
particular time of baptism was a necessity for
Him, but your case is not the same.
He
manifested Himself in the thirtieth year after
His birth and not before ;
first, in order that
He might not appear ostentatious, which is
a condition belonging to vulgar minds ; and
next, because that age tests virtue thoroughly,
and is the right time to teach.
And since it
was needful for Him to undergo the passion
which saves the world, it was needful also
that all things which belong to the passion
should fit into the passion ; the Manifestation,
the Baptism, the Witness from Heaven, the
Proclamation, the concourse of the multitude,
the Miracles ; and that they should be as it
were one body, not torn asunder, nor broken
apart by intervals.
For out of the Baptism
and Proclamation arose that earthquake of
people coming together, 3 for so Scripture
calls that time ;» and out of the multitude arose
the shewing of the signs and the miracles that
lead up to the Gospel.
And out of these came
the jealousy, and from this the hatred, and out
of the hatred the circumstance of the plot
against Him, and the betrayal ; and out of
these the Cross, and the other events by which
Such are the
our Salvation has been effected.

Isa. Iv. 1.
& Isa. xxxii. 20.
oel iti. 18 : The Hebrew word rendered *' rushes" by the
. is in our Hebrew text Shittim-acacia trees.

0 Acts >cx. 35.

y John iv. 7.

i) i.e. when there is nu danger.

•It
£ Exod. xii. »a.

a Luke iii. 93.
3 " All the City was moved." A. V , lit. "shaken as by

y Matt. xxi. 10.

quake."

ORATION ON HOLY BAPTISM.

37i

reasons in the case of Christ * so far as we can
attain to them.
And perhaps another more
secret reason might be found.

XXX. But for you, what necessity is there
that by following the examples which are far
above you, you should do a thing so ill-advised
for yourself?
For there are many other details
of the Gospel History which are quite differ
ent to what happens nowadays, and the seasons
of which do not correspond.
For instance
Christ fasted a little before His temptation,
we before Easter.
As far as the fasting days
are concerned it is the same/ but the differ
ence in the seasons is no little one. He
armed Himself with them against temptation;
but to us this fast is symbolical of dying with
Christ, and it is a purification in preparation
forThe festival.
And He fasted absolutely
for forty days, for He was God ; but we
measure our fasting by our power, even though
some are led by zeal to rush beyond their
strength.
Again, He gave the Sacrament of
the Passover to His Disciples in an upper
chamber, and after supper, and one day
before He suffered ; but we celebrate it in
Houses of Prayer, and before food,'* and after
His resurrection.
He rose again the third
day ; our resurrection is not till after a long
But matters which have to do with
time.
Him are neither abruptly separated from us,
nor yet yoked together with those which con
cern us in point of time ; but they were handed
down to us just so far as to be patterns of what
we should do, and then they carefully avoided
an entire and exact resemblance.

XXXI. If then you will listen to me, you
will bid a long farewell to all such arguments,
•and you will jump at this Blessing, and begin
first, to pre
to struggle in a twofold conflict ;
pare yourself for baptism by purifying your
self ; and next, to preserve the baptismal gift ;
for it is a matter of equal difficulty to obtain a
blessing which we have not, and to keep it
For often what zeal
when we have gained it.
has acquired sloth has destroyed; and what
hesitation has lost diligence has regained. A
great assistance to the attainment of what you
desire are vigils, fasts, sleeping on the ground,
prayers, tears, pity of and almsgiving to those
who are in need. And let these be your
, thanksgiving for what you have received, and

a i.e., the reason* why He was not baptized till He was thirty.
0 Here is an indication that the Forty Days of Lent were a
well known observance in S. Gregory's time.
At the Council of
Nicza this period was taken for granted. The Great Fast of the
Eastern Church besrins on the Monday after the Sunday cor
responding to our Quinquagesima, and the Fast is kept to some
extent even on Sunday.
Y Note the rule of Fasting Communion here recognized as
universal.

1 by the- Sufferings of Christ.

at the same time your safeguard of them.
You have the benefit to remind you of many
commandments ; so do not transgress them.
Does a poor man approach you ? Remember
how poor you once were, and how rich you
were made.
One in want of bread or of
drink, perhaps another Lazarus," is cast at
your gate ; respect the Sacramental Table to
which you have approached, the Bread of
Which you have partaken, the Cup in Which
you have communicated,3 being consecrated
If a stranger
fall at your feet, homeless and a foreigner,
welcome in him Him who for your sake was
j a stranger, and that among His own,* and
who came to dwell in you by His grace, and
who drew you towards the heavenly dwelling
place.
Be a Zaccheus, 4 who yesterday was a
Publican, and is to-day of liberal soul; offer
all to the coming in of Christ, that though
small in bodily stature you may show yourself
great, nobly contemplating Christ. A sick
or a wounded man lies before you ; respect
your own health, and the wounds from which
If you see one naked
Christ delivered you.
! clothe him, in honour of your own garment
of incorruption, which is Christ, for as many
as were baptized into Christ have put on
If you find a debtor falling at your
Christ.'
feet.f tear up every document, whether just or
unjust.
Remember the ten thousand talents
which Christ forgave you, and be not a harsh
exactor of a smaller debt-and that from
From your fellow servant, you who
whom ?
were forgiven so much more by the Master.
Otherwise you will have to give satisfaction
to His mercy, which you would not imitate
■>
and take as your copy. r> >

p<j'

■> -

>

XXXII. Let the laver be not for your body
only, but also for the image of God in you ; not
merely a washing away of sins in you, but
also a correction of your temper; let it not
only wash away the old filth, but let it purify
Let it not only move you
the fountainhead.
to honourable acquisition, but let it teach you
also honourably to lose possession ; or, which
is more easy, to make restitution of what you
have wrongfully acquired.
For what profit
is it that your sin should have been forgiven
you, but the loss which you have inflicted
should not be repaired to him whom you have
injured ? Two sins are on your conscience,
the one that you made a dishonest gain, the

a I.uke xvi. 19 sq.
P Note that this allusion implies that Communion in both Kinds
was given separately, as in the Anglican Church, not by intinctton,
as in the present Orthodox Eastern Church.

y John i.
c Galat. iii. 27.

1 1.

& Luke xix: 1 sq.
£ Matt, xviii. 23, &C,

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

other that you retained the gains ; you re
ceived forgiveness for the one, but in respect
of the other you are still in sin, for you have
still possession of what belongs to another ;
and your sin has not been put to an end, but
only divided by the time which has elapsed.
Part of it was perpetrated before your Bap
tism, but part remains after your Baptism ;
for Baptism carries forgiveness of Past, not of
Present sins ; and its purification must not be
played with, but be genuinely impressed upon
you ; you must be made perfectly bright, and
not be merely coloured ; you must receive the
gift, not of a mere covering of your sins, but
Blessed are
of a taking them clean away.
.
they whose iniquities are forgiven"
.
this is done by the complete cleansing
.
and whose sins
this
.
belongs to those who are not yet healed in
Blessed is the man to
their deepest soul.
whom the Lord will not impute sin.
.
This is a third class of sinners, whose actions
are not praiseworthy, but who are innocent
of intention.

are hidden

.
.

.

.

.

.

.

XXXIII. What say I then, and what is my
argument?
Yesterday you were a Canaanite
soul bent together 0 by sin ; today you have
been made straight by the Word. Do not be
bent again, and condemned to the earth, as if
weighed down by the Devil with a wooden
collar, nor get an incurable curvature.
Yes
terday you were being dried up* by an abun
dant hemorrhage, for you were pouring out
crimson sin ; today stanched and flourishing
again, for you have touched the hem of Christ
and your issue has been stayed.
Guard, I
pray you, the cleansing lest you should again
have a haemorrhage, and not be able to lay
hold of Christ to steal salvation ; for Christ
does not like to be stolen from often, though
He is very merciful.
Yesterday you were
flung upon a bed, exhausted and paralyzed,
and you had no one when the water should
be troubled to put you into the pool.* To
day you have Him Who is in one Person Man
and God, or rather God and Man.
You
were raised up from your bed, or rather you
took up your bed, and publicly acknowledged
Do not again be thrown upon
the benefit.
your bed by sinning, in the evil rest of a
body paralyzed by its pleasures.
But as you
now are, so walk, mindful of the command,'
Behold thou art made whole ; sin no more
lest a worse thing happen unto thee if thou
prove thyself bad after the blessing thou hast

a Ps. xxxii, i.
0 I.ulce xiii. it, which S. Gregory has apparently mixed with a
8 John v. i, &c.
y Matt. ix. 20.

recollection of Matt. xv. al.

c lb. v. 14.

received.
You have heard the loud voice,
Lazarus, come forth," as you lay in the tomb ;
not, however, after four days, but after many
days; and you were loosed from the bonds
of your graveclothes.
Do not again become
dead, nor live with those who dwell in the
tombs; f nor bind yourself with the bonds of
your own sins ; » for it is uncertain whether
you will rise again from the tomb till the last
and universal resurrection, which will bring
every work into judgment,6 not to be healed,
but to be judged, and to give account of all
which for good or evil it has treasured up.

XXXIV. If you were full of leprosy, that
shapeless evil, yet you scraped off the evil mat
ter, and received again the Image whole.
Shew your cleansing to me your Priest, that I
may recognize how much more precious it is
than the legal one. Do not range yourself with
the nine unthankful men, but imitate the tenth.'
For although he was a Samaritan, yet he was
of better mind than the others.
Make cer
tain that you will not break out again with
evil ulcers, and find the indisposition of your
body hard to heal.
Yesterday meanness and
avarice were withering your hand ; to-day let
liberality and kindness stretch it out.f
It is a
noble cure for a weak hand to disperse abroad,
to give to the poor,'' to pour out the things
which we possess abundantly, till we reach
the very bottom ; and perhaps this will gush
forth food for you, as for the woman of Sarepta,6 and especially if you happen to be feed
ing an Elias, to recognize that it is a good
abundance to be needy for the sake of Christ,
Who for our sakes became poor.
If you were
deaf and dumb, let the Word sound" in your
ears, or rather keep there Him Who hath
Do not shut your ears to the In
sounded.
struction of the Lord, and to His Counsel,
like the adder to charms.*
If you are blind
and unenlightened, lighten your eyes that
you sleep not in death.''
In God's Light see
light," and in the Spirit of God be enlightened
by the Son, That Threefold and Undivided
Light.
If you receive all the Word, you will
bring therewith upon your own soul all the
healing powers of Christ, with which separate
ly these individuals were healed. Only be not
ignorant of the measure of grace ; only let not
the enemy, while you sleep, maliciously sow
tares.* Only take care that as by your cleans
ing you have become an object of enmity to
the Evil One, you do not again make yourself

3 Mark v. 3.

a John xi. 43.
« I.uke xvii. la. &c.
B 1 Kgs. xvii. 8, &c.
ft Id. xiii. 3.

y Ps. lxviii. 9
£ lb. vi. 6.
x Mark vii. 3a.

v lb. xxxvi. 9.

6 Eccles. xii. 14.
ij Ps. cxii. 9.
A Ps. lviti. 4, 5.
£ Matt. xiii. 35.

ORATION ON HOLY BAPTISM.

an object of pity by sin.
Only be careful
lest, while rejoicing and lifted up above meas
ure by the blessing, you fall again through
Only be diligent as to your cleansing,
pride.
"setting ascensions in your heart,"" and keep
with all diligence the remission which you
have received as a gift, in order that, while
the remission comes from God, the preserva
tion of it may come from yourself also.

XXXV. How shall this be ? Remember al
ways the parable,^ and so will you best and most
perfectly help yourself.
The unclean and
malignant spirit is gone out of you, being
chased by baptism. He will not submit to the
expulsion, he will not resign himself to be
houseless and homeless : He goes through
waterless places, dry of the Divine Stream, and
there he desires to abide. He wanders, seeking
rest ; he finds none. He lights on baptized
souls, whoso sins the font has washed away.
He fears the water ; he is choked with the
cleansing, as the Legion were in the sea.*
Again he returns to the house whence he
came out. He is shameless, he is contentious,
he makes a fresh assault upon it, he makes a
new attempt.
If he finds that Christ has
taken up His abode there, and has filled the
place which he had vacated, he is' driven back
again, and goes off without success and is
become an object of pity in his wandering
state.
But if he finds in you a place, swept
and garnished indeed, but empty and idle,
equally ready to take in this or that which
shall first occupy it, he makes a leap into it,
he takes up his abode there with a larger
train ; and the last state is worse than the
first, inasmuch as then there was a hope of
amendment and safety, but now the evil is
rampant, and drags in sin by its flight from
good, and therefore the possession is more se
cure to him who dwells there.

XXXVI. I will remind you again about Il
luminations, and that often, and will reckon
For I myself
them up from Holy Scripture.
shall be happier for remembering them (for
what is sweeter than light to those who have
tasted light?) and I will dazzle you with my
words. There is sprung up a light for the right
eous, and its partner joyful gladness.4 And,
The light of the righteous is everlasting ; « and
Thou art shining wondrously from the everlast-

a Ps. Ixxxiv. 6.

Various interpreta
So LXX. and Vulgate.
tions are given of these Steps, but they differ only by indicating
different virtues and good works as especially intended, and may
weil be summed up under the three heads of the purgative, il
luminative, and unitive ways of salvation. A man can set in his
heart such a "going up" by the co-operation of grace and free
will. -NEALB & LlTTLEDALB in Pss.
5 Ps. xcvii. 11.

/3 Luke xi. 24.
e Prov. xiii. 9.

y Mark v. 13.

ing mountains, is said to God, I think of the
Angelic powers which aid our efforts after good.
And you have heard David's words ; The
Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom
then shall I fear ? ■ And now he asks that the
Light and the Truth may be sent forth for
him.P now giving thanks that he has a share
in it, in that the Light of God is marked upon
him ; » that is, that the signs of the illumina
tion given are impressed upon him and recog
nized.
One light alone let us shun-that
which is the offspring of the baleful fire ; let
us not walk in the light of our fire,{ and in the
For I know a
flame which we have kindled.
cleansing fire which Christ came to send upon
the earth,* and He Himself is anagogically (
called a Fire.
This Fire takes away whatso
ever is material and of evil habit ; .and this
He desires to kindle with all speed, for He
longs for speed in doing us good, since He
gives us even coals of fire to help us.i
I know
also a fire which is not cleansing, but aveng
ing ; either that fire of Sodom e which He pours
down on all sinners," mingled with brimstone
and storms, or that which is prepared for the
Devil and his Angels* or that which proceeds
from the face of the Lord, and shall burn up
his enemies round about ; »* and one even more
fearful still than these, the unquenchable fire*
which is ranged with the worm that dieth not
but is eternal for the wicked.
For all these
belong to the destroying power ; though some
may prefer even in this place to take a more
merciful view 4 of this fire, worthily of Him
That chastises.

XXXVII. And as I know of two kinds of
fire, so also do I of light. The one is the light
of our ruling power directing our steps accord
ing to the will of God ; the other is a deceitful
and meddling one, quite contrary to the true
light, though pretending to be that light,
that it may cheat us by its appearance.
This
really is darkness, yet has the appearance of
And
noonday, the high perfection of light.
so I read that passage of those who continually
flee in darkness at noonday ; 0 for this is really
night, and yet is thought to be bright light
by those who have been ruined by luxury.
" Night was around
For what saith David ?
me and I knew it not, for I thought that my

a Ps. Ixxvi. 4.
y lb. iv. 7.
8 Isa. 1.
£Anagoce is one of the three methods of mystical int<

< Luke xii. 49.

J3 lb. xliii. 3.

1 1.

tion, according to the distich.'

I.ittcra scripta docet : Quid credas allceoria :
Quid speres anagoge; Quid agas tropologia.

0Gen. xix. 24.

i)cf. Isa. xlvii. 14. LXX.
A Matt. xxv. 41.
( i.e. To view the Kire there spoken of as Temporal punish
ment, with a purpose tii correcting and reforming the sinner. This
is not S. (Jregory's own view of the meaning of the passage, though
he admits it to be tenable.

rMark ix. 44, &c.

ft Ps. xcvii. 3.

o Isa. xvi. 3.

k Ps. xi. 6.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

luxury was enlightenment." °
But such are
they, and in this condition ; but let us kindle
for ourselves the light of knowledge. 0
This
will be done by sowing unto righteousness,
and reaping the fruit of life, for action is the
patron of contemplation, that amongst other
things we may learn also what is the true light,
and what the false, and be saved from falling
unawares into evil wearing the guise of good.
Let us be made light, as it was said to the
disciples by the Great Light, ye
the
light of the world. » Let us be made lights
in the world, holding forth the Word of Life ; s
that is, let us be made a quickening power to
others.
Let us lay hold of the Godhead ; let
us lay hold of the First and Brightest Light.
Let us walk towards Him shining, before our
feet stumble upon dark and hostile mountains.'
While it is day let us walk honestly as in the
day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness,? which are the
dishonesties of the night.

are

XXXVIII. Let us cleanse every member,
Brethren, let us purify every sense ; let nothing
in us be imperfect or of our first birth ; let us
leave nothing unilluminated. Let us enlighten
our eyes,' that we may look straight on, and not
bear in ourselves any harlot idol through cu
for even though we
rious and busy sight ;
might not worship lust, yet our soul would be
defiled.
If there be beam or mote,* let us
purge it away, that we may be able to see
those of others also.
Let us be enlightened
in our ears; let us be enlightened in our
tongue, that we may hearken what the Lord
God will speak," and that He may cause A
us to hear His lovingkindness in the morning,
and that we may be made to hear of joy and
gladness,* spoken into godly ears, that we may
not be a sharp sword, nor a whetted razor,'' nor
turn under our tongue labour and toil,* but
that we may speak the Wisdom of God in a
mystery, even the hidden Wisdom,0 reverenc
ing the fiery tongues." Let us be healed also
in the smell, that we be not effeminate; and
be sprinkled with dust instead of sweet per
fumes,0 but may smell the Ointment that was
poured out for us,5 spiritually receiving it ; and
so formed and transformed by it, that from us
too a sweet odour may be smelled.
Let us
cleanse our touch, our taste, our throat, not

a A strange paraphrase of the last clause of Ps. exxxix. II, in
the I.XX-, "And I said, then the darkness shall swallow me, and
night is enlightenment in my luxury."
3 Thus I,XX. in Hosea x. 12, where wc read " Break up your
fallow ground."
y Matt. v. 14.
f Rom. xiii. 13.
« Jer. xlii. 16.
0 Matt. vii. a.
( lb. x. 7.
v lb. Ivii. 4; lii. 2.
» Acts ii. 3.

6 Phil. ii. 15, 16.
1} Prov. iv. 25.
01 Cor. ii. 7.

k Ps. Ixxxv. 8.
p Isa. lii. 34.

A lb. cxliii. S.

c Cant. i. 3.

p. lb. Ii- 8.

touching them over gently, nor delighting in
smooth things, but handling them as is worthy
of Him, the Word That was made flesh for
the example of
us; and so far following
Thomas," not pampering them with dainties
and sauces, those brethren of a more baleful
pampering,3 but tasting and learning that the
Lord is good,v with the better and abiding
taste; and not for a short while refreshing
that baneful and thankless dust, which lets
pass and does not hold that which is given to
it ; but delighting it with the words which
are sweeter than honey.8

XXXIX. And in addition to what has been
said, it is good with our head cleansed, as the
head which is the workshop of the senses is
I cleansed, to hold fast the Head of Christ,'
[ from which the whole body is fitly joined to-
! gether and compacted ; and to cast down our
j sin that exalted itself, when it would exalt us
; above our better part.
It is good also for the
I shoulder to be sanctified and purified that it may
be able to take up the Cross of Christ, which
It is good for the
not everyone can easily do.
I hands to be consecrated, and the feet ; the
one that they may in every place be lifted up
holy ; i and that they may lay hold of the dis
cipline of Christ, lest the Lord at any time lie
angered ; and that the Word may gain cre
dence by action, as was the case with that
which was given in the hand of a prophet ; 9
the other, that they be not swift to shed blood,
nor to run to evil," but that they be prompt to
run to the Gospel and the Prize k of the high
Calling, and to receive Christ Who washes
and cleanses them.
And if there be also a
cleansing of that belly which receiveth and
digesteth the food of the Word, it were good
also ; not to make it a god by luxury and the
meat that perished!,*1 but rather to give it all
cleansing, and to make it more
possible
spare,
the Word of
God at the very heart, and grieve honourably
I find also the heart
over the sins of Israel. '
and inward parts deemed worthy of honour.
David convinces me of this, when he prays
that a clean heart may be created in him, and
a right spirit renewed in his inward parts ;f
meaning, I think, the mind and its movements
or thoughts.

it may receive

that

XL. And what of the loins, or reins., for we
Let the purifica
must not pass these over?
tion take hold of these also.
Let our loins be
girded about and kept in check by conti-

a John xx. 28.
€ Kplies iv. 16,

y Ps. xxxiv. 8.
k Mai. i. 1 sq. ; Prov. i. 16.

0 Quia gula est parens immunditue ct luxuriar.
0 Hag. i. 1.
n Ps. ii. 12.

f 1 Tim. ii. 8.

i Ps. cxix. 103.
A Phil. iii. 14

v Jer. iv. 19.

£ Ps. Ii. 10.

H John vi. 27.

ORATION ON HOLY BAPTISM.

nence, as the Law bade Israel of old when par
taking of the Passover. a For none comes out
of Egypt purely, or escapes the Destroyer,
except he who has disciplined these. And
let the reins be changed by that good conver
sion by which they transfer all the affections
to God, so that they can say, Lord, all my
desire is before Thee,0 and the day of man
have I not desired ; > for you must be a man of
desires,4 but they must be those of the spirit.
For thus you would destroy the dragon that
carries the greater part of his strength upon
his navel and his loins,* by slaying the power
Do not be
that comes to him from these.
surprised at my giving a more abundant hon
our to our uncomely parts,f mortifying them
and making them chaste by my speech, and
standing up against the flesh.
Let us give
to God all our members which are upon the
earth ; i let us consecrate them all ; not the
lobe of the liver* or the kidneys with the
fat, nor some part of our bodies now this now
that (why should we despise the rest?); but
let us bring ourselves entire, let us be reason
able holocausts," perfect sacrifices ; and let us
not make only the shoulder or the breast a
portion for the Priest to take away,* for that
would be a small thing, but let us give our
selves entire, that we may receive back our
selves entire ; for this is to receive entirely,
when we give ourselves to God and offer as a
sacrifice our own salvation.

XLI. Besides all this and before all, keep I
pray you the good deposit, by which I live and
work, and which I desire to have as the com
panion of my departure ; with which I en
dure all that is so distressful, and despise all
delights ; the confession of the Father and
This I commit
the Son and the Holy Ghost.
unto you to-day ; with this I will baptize you
and make you grow.
This I give you to
share, and to defend all your life, the One
Godhead and Power, found in the Three in
Unity, and comprising the Three separately,
not unequal, in substances or natures, neither
increased nor diminished by superiorities or
inferiorities; in every respect equal, in every

y Job xvii. 16.

£ 1 Cor. xii. 23.

€ Job xxxix. 16.

g Ps. xxxviii. 9.
a Exod. xii. u.
rj Col. iii. 5.
5 Dan. x. 11.
0 I.evit. iii. 4. The Mosaic I.aw ordered that the tipper part of
the liver and the kidneys, together with the fat, should in certain
sacrifices be consecrated to Go 1
; signifying that anger (which
was intimited by the liver, which produces bile), and lust (signi
fied by the kidneys and the fat) should especially be sacrificed to
f'rod.
Again Moses assigned the shoulder and the breast of some
sacrifices to the Priests, hinting obscurely at this, that we ought to
take care to offer our hearts to the Priests by confession (for the
heart is signified by the breast which protects it) and also our ac»
tions, which are intended by the shoulder, that by the Priest they
maybe presented to God.
But the Apostle bids us mortify .ill our
members which are upon the earth, and offer ourselves entire as a
sacrifice to God, destroying with the sword of the Word of God all
our evil and corrupt affections.-N icktas.

« Rom, xii. 1.

A Levit. vii. 34.

respect the same ; just as the beauty and the
greatness of the heavens is one ; the infinite
conjunction of Three Infinite Ones, Each God
when considered in Himself ; as the Father so
the Son, as the Son so the Holy Ghost ; the
Three One God when contemplated together ;
Each God t>ecause Consubstantial ; One God
because of the Monarchia.
No sooner do I
conceive of the One than I am illumined by
the Splendour of the Three ; no sooner do I
distinguish Them than I am carried back to
the One.
When I think of any One of the
Three I think of Him as the Whole, and my
eyes are filled, and the greater part of what I
am thinking of escapes me."
I cannot grasp
the greatness of That One so as to attribute a
greater greatness to the Rest.
When I con
template the Three together, I see but one
torch, and cannot divide or measure out the
Undivided Light.

XLII. Do you fear to speak of Generation
lest you should attribute aught of passion to the
impassible God? I on the other hand fear to
speak of Creation, lest I should destroy God
by the insult and the untrue division, either
cutting the Son away from the Father, or
from the Son the Substance of the Spirit.
For this paradox is involved, that not only is
a created Life foisted into the Godhead by
those who measure Godhead badly ; but even
this created life is divided against itself.
For
as these low earthly minds make the Son sub
ject to the Father, so again is the rank of the
Spirit made inferior to that of the Son, until
both God and created life are insulted by the
new Theology.
No, my friends, there is
nothing servile in the Trinity, nothing cre
ated, nothing accidental, as I have heard one
If I yet pleased men I
of the wise 0 say.
should not be the servant of Christ, says the
Apostle ; f and if I yet worshipped a creature,
or were baptized into a creature, I should not
be made divine, nor have changed my first
What shall I say to those who wor
birth.
ship Astarte or Chemosh, the abomination of
the Sidonians, or the likeness of a star,4 a god
a little above them to these idolaters, but
yet a creature and a piece of workmanship,
when I myself either do not worship Two of
Those into Whose united Name I am bap
tized, or else worship my fellow-servants, for
they are fellow-servants, even if a little higher
in the scale ; for differences musf exist among
fellow-servants.

XLIII. I should like to call the Father the

in my mind, and so the greater part of God escapes me.

a i.e.
£ 5. Gregory Thaumaturgus.

Tf I think of One Blessed Person, the other Two are not
6 Amos v. 36.

y Galat. i. 10.

3/6

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

greater, because from him flows both the Equal
ity and the Being of the Equals (this will be
granted on all hands), but I am afraid to use the
word Origin, lest I should make Him the Ori
gin of Inferiors, and thus insult Him by prece
dencies of honour.
For the lowering of those
Who are from Him is no glory to the Source.
Moreover, I look with suspicion at your in
satiate desire, for fear you should take hold of
this word Greater, and divide the Nature, us
ing the word Greater in all senses, whereas it
does not apply to the Nature, but only to Orig
ination.
For in the Consubstantial Persons
there is nothing greater or less in point of Sub
stance.
I would honour the Son as Son be
fore the Spirit, but Baptism consecrating me
through the Spirit does not allow of this.
But are you afraid of being reproached with
Do you take possession of this
Tritheism?
good thing, the Unity in the Three, and leave
me to fight the battle.
Let me be the ship
builder, and do you use the ship ; or if another
is the builder of the ship, take me for the
architect of the house, and do you live in it
with safety, though you spent no labour upon
it.
You shall not have a less prosperous voy
age, or a less safe habitation than I who built
them, because you have not laboured upon
See how great is my indulgence ; see
them.
the goodness of the Spirit ; the war shall be
mine, yours the achievement ;
I will be un
der fire, and you shall live in peace ; but
join with your defender in prayer, and give
me your hand by the Faith.
I have three
stones which I will sling at the Philistine ; a I
have three inspirations against the son of the
Sareptan,^ with which I will quicken the slain ;
I have three floods against the faggots with
which I will consecrate the Sacrifice with
water, raising the most unexpected fire ;v and I
will throw down the prophets of shame by the
power of the Sacrament.

XL IV. What need have I any more of
speech? It is the time for teaching, not for con
I protest before God and the elect
troversy.
Angels,4 be thou baptized in this faith.
If thy
heart is written upon in some other way than
as my teaching demands, come and have the
writing changed ; I am no unskilled caligrapher of these truths.
I write that which is writ
ten upon my own heart ; and I teach that which
I have been taught, and have kept from the
Mine is
beginning up to these hoar hairs.*

a j Sam. xvii. 49.
y lb. xviii 33.
e Supposing S. Gregory's birth to have been in 325, the earliest
date which seems at all probable, he would be under 60 in 381, when
this Oration was delivered : so that the expression on the text must
Sutdas, however, pushes
be held to be a rhetorical exaggeration.

fi 1 Kgs. xvii. 21.
& 1 Tun. v. 21.

the risk ; be mine also the reward of being
the Director of your soul, and consecrating
you by Baptism.
But if y»u are already right
ly disposed, and marked with the good in
scription, see that you keep what is written,
and remain unchanged in a changing time
concerning an unchanging Thing.
Follow
Pilate's example in the better sense ; you who
are rightly written on, imitate him who wrote
wrongfully.
Say to those who would persuade
you differently, what I have written, I have
written." For indeed I should be ashamed if,
while that which was wrong remained in
flexible, that which is right should be so easily
bent aside ; whereas we ought to be easily bent
to that which is better from that which is
worse, but immovable from the better to the
worse.
If it be thus, and according to this
teaching that you come to Baptism, lo I will
not refrain my lips/ lo I lend my hands to the
Spirit ;
The
let us hasten your salvation.
Spirit is eager, the Consecrator is ready, the
Gift is prepared.
But if you still halt and
will not receive the perfectness of the God
head, go and look for someone else to baptize
-or rather to drown you : I have no time to
cut the Godhead, and to make you dead in the
moment of your regeneration, that you should
have neither the Gift nor the Hope of Grace,
but should in so short a time make shipwreck
of your salvation.
For whatever you may
subtract from the Deity of the Three, you will
have overthrown the whole, and destroyed
your own being made perfect.

Give me the tables of your heart ;

XLV. But not yet perhaps is there formed
upon your soul any writing good or bad ; and
you want to be written upon today, and formed
Let us go within the
by us unto perfection.
cloud.
will be your Moses, though this be a bold
thing to say ; I will write on them with the
I will write
finger of God a new Decalogue.''
on them a shorter method of salvation.
And
if there be any heretical or unreasoning beast,
let him remain below, or he will run the risk
of being stoned by the Word of truth.
I will
baptize you and make you a disciple in the
Name of the Father and of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost ; 4 and These Three have One
common name, the Godhead. And you shall
know, both by appearances* and by words
that you reject all ungodliness, and are united
to all the Godhead.
Believe that all that is
in the world, both all that is seen and all that

back the date of his birth as far as 209 or 300 : which does not fit
in well with the chronology of his life, as given by himself.
p* Ps. xl. 9.
(Matt, xxviii. 19.

y Exod. xxxviii. 28.

A John xix. 39.

6 lb. xix. 13.

ORATION ON HOLY BAPTISM.

is unseen, was made out of nothing by God,
and is governed by the Providence of its
Creator, and will receive a change to a better
Believe that evil has no substance or
state.
kingdom, either unoriginate or self-existent or
created by God ; but that it is our work, and
the evil one's, and came upon us through our
heedlessness, but not from our Creator.
Be
lieve that the Son of God, the Eternal Word,
Who was begotten of the Father before all
time and without body, was in these latter
days for your sake made also Son of Man, born
of the Virgin Mary ineffably and stainlessly
(for nothing can be stained where God is,
and by which salvation comes), in His own
Person at once entire Man and perfect God,
for the sake of the entire sufferer, that He
may bestow salvation on your whole being,
having destroyed the whole condemnation of
your sins: impassible in His Godhead, pas
sible in that which He assumed ; as much Man
for your sake as you are made God for His.
Believe that for us sinners He was led to
death ; was crucified and buried, so far as to
taste of death ; and that He rose again the
third day, and ascended into heaven, that He
might take you with Him who were lying
low ; and that He will come again with His
glorious Presence to judge the quick and the
dead ; no longer flesh, nor yet without a body,
according to the laws which He alone knows
of a more godlike body, that He may be seen
by those who pierced Him,a and on the other
hand may remain as God without carnality.
Receive besides this the Resurrection, the
Judgment and the Reward according to the
righteous scales of God ; and believe that this
will be Light to those whose mind is purified
(that is, God -seen and known) proportionate
to their degree of purity, which we call the
Kingdom of heaven ; but to those who suffer
from blindness of their ruling faculty, dark
ness, that is estrangement from God, propor
Then, in the
tionate to their blindness here.
tenth place, work that which is good upon
this foundation of dogma ; for faith without
works is dead,3 even as are works apart from
faith.
This is all that may be divulged of
the Sacrament, and that is not forbidden to
the ear of the many.
The rest you shall learn
within the Church by the grace of the Holy
Trinity ; and those matters you shall conceal
within yourself, sealed and secure.

XLVI. But one thing more I preach unto
you. The Station in which you shall presently
stand after your Baptism tefore the Great

a Rev. i. 7.

3 James ii. 17.

Sanctuary ' is a foretype of the future glo-
! ry.
The Psalmody with which you will
I be received is a prelude to the Psalmody of
Heaven ; the lamps which you will kindle are
a Sacrament of the illumination there with
which we shall meet the Bridegroom, shining
and virgin souls, with the lamps of our faith
shining, not sleeping through our carelessness,
i that we may not miss Him that we look for if
He come unexpectedly ; nor yet unfed, and
without oil, and destitute of good works, that
we be not cast out of the Bridechamber.
For
I see how pitiable is such a case. He will
come when the cry demands the meeting, and
they who are prudent shall meet Him, with
their light shining and its food abundant, but
the others seeking for oil too late from those
who possess it.
And He will come with
speed, and the former shall go in with Him,
but the latter shall be shut out, having wasted
in preparations the time of entrance ; and they
shall weep sore when all too late they learn the
penalty of their slothfulness, when the Bridechamber can no longer be entered by them for
all their entreaties, for they have shut it against
themselves by their sin, following in another
fashion the example of those who missed the
Wedding feast3 with which the good Father
feasts the good Bridegroom ; one on account of
a newly wedded wife ; another of a newly pur
chased field ; another of a yoke of oxen ; which
he and they acquired to their misfortune,
since for the sake of the little they lose the
For none are there of the disdainful,
great.
nor of the slothful, nor of those who are clothed
in filthy rags and not in the Wedding gar
ment even though here they may have thought
themselves worthy of wearing the bright robe
there, and secretly intruded themselves, de
ceiving themselves with vain hopes.
And
then, What? When we have entered, then
the Bridegroom knows what He will teach us,
and how He will converse with the souls that
He will converse
have come in with Him.
with them, I think in teaching things more
perfect and more pure.
Of which may we
all, both Teachers and Taught, have share, in
the Same Christ our Lord, to Whom be the
Glory and the Empire, for ever and ever.
Amen.

a The word liere used is Rema, which properly means n
Platform.
In an Oriental Church the East end of the building is
raised hv one or more steps above the choir. A little distance
East of these steps is a great Screen called the Iconostasis. from
the pictures (Icons) with which it is covered.
It has three doors,
one in the centre, called the Royal Gates leadine to the Altar :
one on the left hand, leading to the Prothesis. or Credence : and
one on the right to the Sacristy. The whole raised portion is
called the Hema, or sometimes the Altar, the Altnr proper being
known as the Throne.
0 Luke xiv. 16, &c.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

INTRODUCTION TO THE ORATION
ON PENTECOST.

It is uncertain to what year the following
Oration belongs.
It was, however, certainly
delivered at Constantinople; the Benedictine
Editors think in the year 381, in which case
.the day would be May 16.
An indication
tending to establish this date is found in c. 14,
in the expression of apprehension of personal
danger to himself for his boldness in setting
forth the true faith.
In fact, in the earlier
part of this year, after the Emperor Theodosius had put him in possession of the Patri
archal Throne, vacant by the expulsion and
deposition of the Arian Demophilus, he had
narrowly escaped assassination at the hands of
the Arians.

The Oration deals again with the subject of
the Fifth Theological Oration, the question of
the Deity of the Holy Ghost, but proceeds to
establish the point by quite a different set of
arguments from those adopted in the former
discourse, none of whose points are here re
peated.

The Preacher begins by commenting on the
Various ways in which Festivals are kept by
Jews, by Heathen and by Christians.
Then
he remarked on the mystical significance of
the number Seven, which he illustrates by
several instances ; and next proceeds with his
principal Subject.

God the Holy Ghost, he says, completes
Those who regard Him
the work of Christ.
as a Created Being, as did the followers of
Macedonius, are thereby guilty of blasphemy
and impiety. The true Faith recognizes Him
as God ; and this belief is necessary to salva
tion ; yet some reserve must be employed in
applying that Name to Him. We must in
deed insist on the recognition of His posses
sion of all the attributes of Godhead ; and we
must at any rate bear with those who, like the
Orator himself, also give Him the Name of
God, which he hopes all his hearers will re
ceive from the Holy Ghost grace to do. Then
he proceeds to shew from Holy Scripture that
in fact all the Attributes of Deity do belong
to the Holy Spirit; and that His distinctive
Personal Mark is that He is neither Unbegotten like the Father, nor Begotten like the
Son. He does not touch on the question of
the double Procession.

It would seem from some expressions in c. 8
that this Discourse was not delivered to his
usual audience, but to an Assembly of " Re
ligious."

The Title of the Oration varies in different

! MSS.

Thus some have it "Of The Same
On Pentecost," to which one adds "And On
The Holy Spirit;" and another puts it "Of
The
The Same, a Homily on Pentecost."
printed Editions before the Benedictine have

I "On The Holy Pentecost."

ORATION XLI.

On Pentecost.

For while following after

I. Let us reason a little about the Festival,
For dif
that we may keep it spiritually.
ferent persons have different ways of keeping
Festival ; but to the worshipper of the Word
a discourse seems best ; and of discourses,
that which is best adapted to the occasion.
And of all beautiful things none gives so much
joy to the lover of the beautiful, as that the
lover of festivals should keep them spiritu
ally.
The
Let us look into the matter thus.
Jew keeps festival as well as we, but only in
the
the letter.
bodily Law, he has not attained to the spirit
ual Law.
The Greek too keeps festival, but
only in the body, and in honour of his own
gods and demons, some of whom are creators
of passion by their own admission, and others
Therefore
were honoured out of passion.
even their manner of keeping festival
is
passionate,
as though their very sin were
an honour to God, in Whom their passion
takes refuge as a thing to be proud of." We
too keep festival, but we keep it as is pleasing
to the Spirit.
And it is pleasing to Him that
we should keep it by discharging some duty,
This then is our
either of action or speech.
to treasure up
manner of keeping festival,
in our soul some of those things which are
permanent and will cleave to it, not of those
which will forsake
be destroyed,
and which only tickle our senses for a little
while ; whereas they are for the most part,
in my judgment at least, harmful and ruinous.
For sufficient unto the body is
evil
thereof.
What need has that fire of further
fuel, or that beast of more plentiful food,
to make it more uncontrollable, and too vio
lent for reason ?

us and

the

II. Wherefore we must keep the feast spiritu
ally.
And this is the beginning of our dis
course ; for we must speak, even if our speech
do seem a little too discursive ; and we must
be diligent for the sake of those who love

a They deify bad passions, and then act as if the gratification of
them were an honour to the gods in whom they tave personified
them.

festival.

learning, that we may as it were mix up some
seasoning with our solemn
The
children of the Hebrews do honour to the
number Seven, according to the legislation of
Moses (as did the Pythagoreans in later days
to the number Four, by which indeed they
were in the habit of swearing* as the Simonians and Marcionites^ do by the number
Eight and the number Thirty, inasmuch as
they have given names to and reverence a
system of ^ions of these numbers) ;
I can
not say by what rules of analogy, or in conse
quence of what power of this number ; any
One thing indeed
how they do honour to it.
is evident, that God, having in six days
created matter, and given it form, and having
arranged it in all kinds of shapes and mix
tures, and having made this present visible
world, on the seventh day rested from all His
works, as is shewn by the very name of the
Sabbath, which in Hebrew means Rest.
If
there be, however, any more lofty reason than
this, let others discuss it.
But this honour
is not confined to days
which they pay to it
alone, but also extends to years.
That be
longing to days the Sabbath proves, because it
is continually observed among them ; and
in accordance with this the removal of leaven
is for that number of days.* And that belong
ing to years is shewn by the seventh year, the
year of Release;* and it consists not only of
of Hebdomads of Heb
Hebdomads, but
domads, alike in days and years.
The Heb
domads of days give birth to Pentecost, a
day called holy among them ; and those
of years to what they call the Jubilee, which
also has a release of land, and a manumission
of slaves, and a release of possessions bought.
For this nation consecrates to God, not only

a The followers of Pythagoras swore by their master, who
taught them the mystic properties of the number Four, which he
called the Fountain of the Universe, because alt things were made
of four elements.
0 Tlie Simonians and Marcionites were two Gnostic sects, the
one deriving its name from Simon Magus, the other from Marcion
of Sinope.
Simon, of whom we read in the Acts c. viii., is gen
erally regarded by the Fathers as the precursor of the Gnostic
Heresies. He maintained a system of Emanations from God. of
which he claimed to be himself the chief.
In his teaching the first
cause of all things was an Ineffable Existence or Non-existence,
which he sometimes called Silence and sometimes Fire, from which
the Universe was generated by a series of six Emanations called
Roots, which he arranged in pnirs. male and female ; and these
six contained among them the whole Essence of his first Principle
Silence. These Roots with Simon himself and his consort Helena,
made up the Oejdoad referred to in the text.
Marcion was a native of Smope in Pontus, and flourished about
the middle of the Second Century.
His system of teaching was
mainly rationalistic, and did not recognize (Dr. Mansel tells us.
" Gnostic Heresies," p. 203) any theory of Emanations as connect
ing links between God and the world : for from his point of view the
Supreme God was not, even indirectly, the Author of the world.
It would seem that S. Gregory is confusing Marcion with Valenlinus, an Egyptian heresiarch who flourished alrout the same time.
Jn his theory we first find a system of '* ^Cons," divided into an
Ogdoad. a J>ecad, and a Dodecad. Or he may mean Marcus, a
follower of Valcntinus, and founder of the subordinate sect of the
Marcosian«.

y Exod. xii. 15.

S lb. xxi a.

I the firstfruits of offspring, or of firstborn, but
also those of days and years.
Thus the ven
eration paid to the number Seven gave rise
For seven
also to the veneration of Pentecost.
fifty
being multiplied by seven
generates
all but one day, which we borrow
from
the world to come, at once the Eighth and
the first, or rather one and indestructible.
For the present sabbatism of our souls can
find its cessation there, that a portion may be
given to seven and also to eight" (so some
of our predecessors have interpreted this pas
sage of Solomon).

III. As to the honour paid to Seven there are
many testimonies, but we will be content with
a few out of the many.
For instance, seven
precious spirits are named ; for I think Isaiah f
loves to call the activities of the Spirit spirits ;
and the Oracles of the Lord are purified seven
times according to David,')' and the just is de
livered from six troubles and in the seventh is
not smitten.4 But the sinner is pardoned not
seven , times, but seventy times seven.* And
we may see it by the contrary also (for the
punishment of wickedness is to be praised),
Cain being avenged seven
times, that is,
punishment being exacted from him for his
fratricide, and Lamech seventy times seven,4
because he was a murderer after the law and
the condemnation.'' And wicked neighbours

a.

0 Tsa. xi. 2.

f Gen. iv. 24.

c Matt, xviii. aa.

xi.
a F.ccles.
S. Gregory himself {Or. xviii. '*in laudem
Patris," c. 20) comments upon this passage as enjoining liberal
S. Ambrose (in Luc. vi.) has a mystical interpreta
almsgiving.
tion somewhat resembling that here referred to : but I cannot find
a predecessor of Gregory on the verse. Some later commentators,
according to Cornelius and Lapide, take the Seven of the poor in
this life, and the Eight of the souls in Purgatory, following a com
y Ps. xix. 6.
mon interpretation of these numbers.
i Job v. 19.
tj It will be worth while, says Nicctas, to add S. John Chrysostnm's account of the sevenfold punishment which was inflicted on
Cain. The number Seven he says (Horn, in Gen. xix. 5, p. 168 c.)
is often used in Holy Scripture in the sense of multitude, as e.g.,
in such places as, "The barren hath borne seven," and the like.
So here ; the greatness of the crime is implied, and that it is not a
simple and single crime, but seven sins : and those of such a sort
that every one of them must be avenged by a very severe punish
ment,
rirst, that he envied his brother when he saw that God
loved him, a sin which without any other added to it was suffi
cient to be deadly. The next was that this sin was against a
'brother. The third that he compassed a deceit. The fourth that
he perpetrated a murder. The fifth that it was his brother that he
slew. The sixth that he was the first man to commit a murder.
The seventh that he lied to God. Von have followed these steps
with your mind, or do you desire that I should repeat the enumera
tion in a fuller way. to make you understand bow each of these
sins would be visited with a very severe penalty, even if it stood
alone. Who would judge a man worthy of pardon who envies
another simply because he enjoys the favour and love of God *
Here then is one very great and inexpiable sin. And this is shewn
to lie even more atrocious when he who is envied is a brother, and
has done him no wrong.
Further, he contrived a deceit, bringing
his brother out bv a trick into the field, without reverence foi
nature herself. The fourth crime is the murder which he com
mitted. The fifth is that it was his brother whom be put to death ;
Sixthly, he
his brother, I say, that came out of the same womb.
Seventhly, w hen questioned by
was the first inventor of murder.
God he did not hesitate to lie. And therefore because he dared
to lay hands on his brother, he draws upon himself severe punish
ments. He then proceeds to shew how Lamech's crime was worse
than Cain's, and is therefore said to be punished seventy limes :
that is, in manifold ways. Lamech slew a man and a young man,
and this, after the law against murder had !>cen given : that is
Cain's punishment he says was
after God had punished Cain.

38o

receive sevenfold into their bosom : • and the
House of Wisdom rests on seven pi liars,P and
the Stone of Zerubbabel is adorned with seven
eyes ; » and God is praised seven times a day.4
And again the barren beareth seven,' the per
fect number, she who is contrasted with her
who is imperfect in her children." (

IV. And if we must also look at ancient his
tory, I perceive that Enoch, * the seventh among
our ancestors, was honoured by translation.
perceive also that the twenty-fifst, Abraham,8
was given the glory of the Patriarchate, by
the addition of a greater mystery.
For the
Hebdomad thrice repeated brings out this
number.
And one who is very bold might
venture even to come to the New Adam, my
God and Lord Jesus Christ, Who is counted
the Seventy-seventh from the old Adam who
fell under sin, in the backward genealogy
according to Luke." And I think of the seven
trumpets of Jesus, the son of Nave, and the
same number of circuits and days and priests,
by which the walls of Jericho were shaken
down.* And so too the seven compassings of
the City ; in the same way as there is a mys
tery in the threefold breathings of Elias, the
Prophet, by which he breathed life into the
son of the Sareptan widow,*1 and the same
number of his floodings of the wood,'' when
he consumed the sacrifice with fire sent from
God, and condemned the prophets of shame,
who could not do the like at his challenge.
And the
the cloud
imposed upon the young servant ; and Elissaeus stretching himself that number of times
upon the child of the Shunammite, by which
stretching the breath of life was restored. *

sevenfold looking

for

3.

sevenfold, corresponding to his seven sins:-t. Cursed is the
i.e., thou
2. Thou shah till the ground ;
ground for thy sake.
shalt never rest from the toils of husbandry.
It shall not yield
unto thee its strength: 4. thy labours shall be barren, and
sighing
and trembling " shalt thou be. And the sixth is from the lips of
Cain himself :-" If Thou easiest me nut from the earth," i.e.,
from all earthly conveniences, ''from Thy face shall I be hid."
And God put a mark upon Cain ; this is the seventh punishment
-a mark of infamy declaring his guilt and shame to all that should
Others'according to the same authority (and liishop
sec him.
thus. From
Wordsworth adopts the explanation) explains it
Cain to the Deluge arc seven generations, and then the world was
punished because sin had spread far and wide.
Hut Lantech's
sin could not he cured by the Deluge, but only by Him Who
tlketh away the sin of the world. Then count all the generations
from Adam to Christ, and according to the Genealogy in Luke,
you will find that our Lord was iKirn in the seventieth generation.
This is S. Jerome's explanation.
e 1 Sam. ii. 5.
0 Prov. ix. i.
y Zech. iii. 9.
£ Peninnah who had "many" children is called Imperfect in
her children, because Many is an indefinite word : whereas Han
nah's one chiH Samuel was so perfect a man tli3t he was as it
For Seven is mystically, as Six or Ten
were seven to his mother.
is arithmetically, the perfect number.
(Six because it is the sum of
its own factors 1, 2, 3 : Ten. because it
is the basis of numera
tion ; Seven because it is the number of Creation : for God rested
on the Sabbath Day.)
rj Judei4.
A Tosh. vi. 4. &C

n 1 Kizs. xvii. 21.
f 2 Kgs. iv. 25, where the I,XX. has "he contracted himself
upon the child until seven times, and the child opened his eyes ; "
laying nothing about the sneezing of the child, which the Hebrew
and Vulgate mention, while they omit the number in the case of I

8 Ps. cxix. 164.

a Ps. Ixxix. 12.

« Luke iii. 74.

v Ih. xviii, 31.

6 Gen. v. 27.

To the same doctrine belongs, I think (if I
may omit the seven-stemmed and seven-lamped
candlestick of the Temple") that the ceremony
of the Priests' consecration lasted seven days ; 3
and seven that of the purifying of a leper,')' and
that of the Dedication of the Temple4 the
same number, and that in the seventieth year
the people returned from the Captivity ; « that
whatever is in Units may appear also in
Decads, and the mystery of the Hebdomad
But
be reverenced in a more perfect number.
why do I speak of the distant past ?
Jesus
Himself who is pure perfection, could in the
desert and with five loaves feed five thousand,
and again with seven loaves four thousand.
And the leavings after they were satisfied were
in the first case twelve baskets full, and in the
other seven
I imagine,
baskets ; f neither,
without a reason or unworthy of the Spirit.
And if you read for yourself you may take
note of many numbers which contain a mean
ing deeper than appears on the surface.
But
to come to an instance which is most useful
to us on the present occasion, not that for
these reasons or others very similar or yet
more divine, the Hebrews honour the Day of
Pentecost, and we also honour it ; just as there
are other rites of the Hebrews which we observe
typically observed by
them, and by us they are sacramentally re
instated.
And now having said so much by
way of preface about the Day, let us proceed
to what we have to say further.

they were

V. We are keeping the feast of Pentecost and
of the Coming of the Spirit, and the appointed
time of the Promise, and the fulfilment of our
And how great, how august, is the
hope.
Mystery.
The dispensations of the Body of
Christ are ended ; or rather, what belongs to
His Bodily Advent (for I hesitate to say the
Dispensation of His Body, as long as no dis
course persuades me that it
is letter to have
put off the body i), and that of the Spirit is
beginning. And what were the things per
taining to
Christ? The Virgin, the
Birth, the Manger, the Swaddling, the Angels
glorifying Him, the Shepherds running to
Him, the course of the Star, the Magi wor
shipping Him and bringing Gifts, Herod's

the

y lb. xiv. 8.

e 2 Chron. xxxvi. 32.

S. Bernard has a curious explanation of
F.lisha's similar action.
the seven sneezes of the child (in Cant. xvi).
a Kx. xxv. 32. 37.
0 Levil. viii. 33.
6 1 Kings viii. 6.
f Different words are used here as in the New Testament for
Banket*. The second implies a larger size: it is the word used
for the " basket " in which St. Paul was let down Irom the wall of
Damascus, Acts ix. 25.
n S. Gregory makes this explanation because there were certain
heretics who taught that our I/»rd at His Ascension laid aside His
Humanity.
It is said that this was held by certain Manirhirans.
who based their idea on Ps. xix. 4. where the LXX. and Vul^a'e
read, " He hath set His Tabernacle in the Sun."

ON PENTECOST.

Resurrection,

murder of the children, the Flight of Jesus
into Egypt, the Return from Egypt, the Cir
cumcision, the Baptism, the Witness from
Heaven, the Temptation, the Stoning for our
sake (because He had to be given as an Ex
ample to us of enduring affliction
for the
Word), the Betrayal, the Nailing, the Burial,
the
the Ascension ; and of
these even now He suffers many dishonours
at the hands of the enemies of Christ ; and
He bears them, for He is longsuffering.
But
from those who love Him He receives all that
is honourable. And He defers, as in the for
mer case His wrath, so in ours His kindness ;
in their case perhaps to give them the grace
of repentance, and in ours to test our love ;
whether we do not faint in our tribulations "
and conflicts for the true Religion, as was
from of old the order of His Divine Economy,
and of his unsearchable judgments, with which
He orders wisely all that concerns us.
Such
are the mysteries of Christ.
And what fol
lows we shall see to be more glorious ; and
As to the things of the
may we too be seen.
Spirit, may the Spirit be with me, and grant
me speech as much as I desire ; or if not that,
yet as is in due proportion to the season.
Anyhow He will be with me as my Lord ;
not in servile guise, nor awaiting a command,
as some think. F
For He bloweth where He
wills and on whom He wills, and to what ex
tent He wills.> Thus we are inspired both to
think and to speak of the Spirit.

VI. They who reduce the Holy Spirit to the
rank of a creature are blasphemers and wicked
servants, and worst of the wicked.
For it is
the part of wicked servants to despise Lord
ship, and to rebel against dominion, and to
make That which is free their fellow-servant.
But they who deem Him God are inspired by
God 4 and are illustrious in their mind ; and
they who go further and call Him so, if to
well disposed hearers are exalted ;
if to the
low, are not reserved enough, for they com
mit pearls to clay, and the noise of thunder

a Ephes. iii. 13.
0 The reference is to the Macedonians or Pneumatomachi, fol
lowers of Macedonius, Patriarch of Constantinople, who had
passed from extreme or Anomoean Arianism to Semi-Arianisin,
and was forcibly intruded on the See by order of Constantius in
343, but was afterwards deposed.
After his deposition he
broached the heresy known by his name, denying the Deity of the
Holy Ghost ; some of its adherents, with Macedonius himself,
maintaining Him to be a mere creature ; others stopping short of
this ; and others calling Him a creature and servant of the Son.
The heresy was formally condemned in the F.cumenical Council
of Constantinople in 381.
& S. Gregory here commends the practice of reserve in respect
of the Deity of the Holy Ghost. To believe it is necessary to sal
vation, he would say ; but in view of the prevailing ignorance it is
well to be careful before whom we give Him the Name of God.
But he demands that his hearers should give to the Holy Ghost
all the Attributes of Godhead, and should bear with those who,
like himself, .gave Him also the Name, as he prays that they all
may have grace to do (Benott).

y John iii. 8.

. to weak ears, and the sun to feeble eyes, and
solid food to those who are still using milk ; a
whereas they ought to lead them little by little
up to what lies beyond them, and to bring
them up to the higher truths ; adding light to
light, and supplying truth upon truth.
There
fore we will leave the more mature discourse,
for which the time has not yet come, and
will speak with them as follows.

VII. If, my friends, you will not acknowl
edge the Holy Spirit to be uncreated, nor yet
eternal ; clearly such a state of mind is due to
the contrary spirit-forgive me, if in my zeal I
If, however,
speak somewhat over boldly.
you are sound enough to escape this evident
impiety, and to place outside of slavery Him
Who gives freedom to yourselves, then see for
yourselves with the help of the Holy Ghost
For I am persuaded
and of us what follows.
that you are to some extent partakers of Him,
so that I will go into the question with you as
kindred souls.
Either shew me some mean
between lordship and servitude, that I may
there place the rank of the Spirit ; or, if you
shrink from imputing servitude to Him, there
is no doubt of the rank in which you must
place the object of your search.
But you are
dissatisfied with the syllables, and you stumble
at the word, and it is to you a stone of stum
bling and a rock of offence ; P for so is Christ
to some minds.
It is only human after all.
Let us meet one another in a spiritual man
ner ; let us be full rather of brotherly than of
Grant us the Power of the God
self love.
head, and we will give up to you the use of
the Name. Confess the Nature in other words
for which you have greater reverence, and we
will heal you as infirm people, filching from
For
you some matters in which you delight.
it is shameful, yes, shameful and utterly illogi
cal, when you are sound in soul, to draw petty
distinctions about the sound, and to hide the
Treasure, as if you envied it to others, or were
afraid lest you should sanctify your own tongue
too.
But it is even more shameful for us to
be in the state of which we accuse you, and,
while condemning your petty distinctions of
words to make petty distinctions of letters.

VIII. Confess, my friends, the Trinity to be
of One Godhead ; or if you will, of One Nature ;
and we will pray the Spirit to give you this
word God. He will give it to you, I well know,
inasmuch as He has already granted you the
first portion and the second ; * and especially

a Heb. v. la.
0 Isa. viii. 14 : Rom. ix. 33 :
y i.e., inasmuch as He has granted you a right faith in the
Consubstantialitv and Unity of the Trinity, I am sure He will til
time grant you the grace also to call Htm by the Name of God.

t Pet. ii. 8.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

if that about which we are contending is .
some spiritual cowardice, and not the devil's
objection.
Yet more clearly and concisely,
let me say, do not you call us to account for
our loftier word (for envy has nothing to do
with this ascent), and we will not find fault
with what you have been able to attain, until
by another road you are brought up to the
For we are not seeking
same resting place.
victory, but to gain brethren, by whose separ
ation from us we are torn.
This we concede
to you in whom we do find something of vital
truth, who are sound as to the Son. We ad
mire your life, but we do not altogether ap
prove your doctrine. Ye who have the things
of the Spirit, receive Himself in addition, that
ye may not only strive, but strive lawfully,11
which is the condition of your crown. May
this reward of your conversation be granted
you, that you may confess the Spirit perfectly
and proclaim with us, aye and before us, all
that is His due.
Yes, and I will venture even
more on your behalf; I will even utter the
So much do I cling to you,
Apostle's wish.
and so much do I revere your array, and the
colour of your continence, and those sacred
assemblies, and the august Virginity, and
purification, and the Psalmody that lasts all
night 0 and your love of the poor, and of the
brethren, and of strangers, that I could con
sent to l)e Anathema from Christ, and even
to suffer something as one condemned, if only
you might stand beside us, and we might
For of the
glorify the Trinity together.
others why should I speak, seeing they are
clearly dead (and it is the part of Christ alone
to raise them, Who quickeneth the dead by
His own Power), and are unhappily separated
in place as they are bound together by their
doctrine ; and who quarrel among them
selves as much as a pair of squinting eyes in
looking at the same object, and differ with
one another, not in sight but in position-if
indeed we may charge them only with squint
ing, and not with utter blindness.
And now
that I have to some extent laid down your
position, come, let us return again to the
subject of the Spirit, and I think you will fol
low me now.

IX. The Holy Ghost, then, always existed,
and exists, and always will exist. He neither
had a beginning, nor will He have an end ; but
He was everlastingly ranged with and num
bered with the Father and the Son. For it was

not ever fitting that either the Son should be
wanting to the Father, or the Spirit to the
Son.
For then Deity would be shorn of Its
Glory in its greatest respect, for It would seem
to have arrived at the consummation of per
fection as if by an afterthought.
Therefore
He was ever being partaken, but not partak
ing; perfecting, not being perfected ; sancti
deifying, not
fying, not being sanctified ;
being deified ; Himself ever the same with
Himself, and with Those with Whom He is
ranged; invisible, eternal, incomprehensible,
unchangeable, without quality, without quan
tity, without form, impalpable, self-moving,
eternally moving, with free-will, self-power
ful, All-powerful (even though all that is of
the Spirit is referable to the First Cause, just
as is all that .is of the Only-begotten); Life
and Lifegiver ; Light and Lightgiver ; absol
ute Good, and Spring of Goodness ; the Right,
the Princely Spirit ; the Lord, the Sender,
the Separator ; Builder of His own Temple ;
leading, working as He wills ;
distributing
His own Gifts ; the Spirit of Adoption, of
Truth, of Wisdom, of Understanding, of
Knowledge, of Godliness, of Counsel, of Fear
(which are ascribed to Him •) by Whom the
Father is known and the Son is glorified ; and
by Whom alone He is known ; one class, one
service, worship, power, perfection, sanctification. Why make a long discourse of it ?
All that the Father hath the Son hath also,
except the being Unbegotten ; and all that
the Son hath the Spirit hath also, except the
Generation.
And these two matters do not
divide the Substance, as 1 understand it, but
rather are divisions within the Substance.0

X. Are you labouring to bring forth objec
Well, so am I to get on with my dis
tions ?
Honour the Day of the Spirit ; re
course.
strain your tongue if you can a little.
It is
the time to speak of other tongues-reverence
them or fear them, when you see that they are
To-day let us teach dogmatically ;
of fire.
to-morrow we may discuss.
us
keep the feast ; to-morrow will be time enough
to behave ourselves unseemly-the first mysti
cally, the second theatrically ; the one in the
Churches, the other in the marketplace ; the
one among the sober, the other among the
drunken ; the one as befits those wrho vehe
mently desire, the other, as among those who

To-day let

a 2 Tim. ii. 5.

^ The Constanttnopolitan followers of Maeedonius at the period
were noted for their strict asceticism. The attempt to revive the
Night Office among the secular Clergy of the Diocese brought
great odium on S. John Chrysostoin a few years later.

a i.e., by Isaiah.
0 lob xxxvhi. 4, Ps. v. lo. xxxvi., exxxix. 7-15. cxlii., Isa. xi. 13. xlvtii. 16. Mai. iii. 6, Wisd. i. a, John i.
iii. 24, XV. 26,
xvi. 14. 15, Acts xiii. 2, Rom. iv. 17, xv. _l6, 19, 1 Cor.li. 10, vu
19, viii. 2, 2 Cor. iii. 1, 6, xhi. 4. 2 Thess. iii. 5, 1 Tim. yi. 10, Heb.
ix. 14.

14,

ON PENTECOST.

make a joke of the Spirit.
Having then put
an end to the element that is foreign to us,
let us now thoroughly furnish our own friends.
XI. He wrought first in the heavenly and
angelic powers, and such as are first after God
and around God.
For from no other source
flows their perfection and their brightness, and
the difficulty or impossibility of moving them
And next,
to sin, but from the Holy Ghost.
in the Patriarchs and Prophets, of whom the
former saw Visions of God, or knew Him,
and the latter also foreknew the future, having
their master part moulded by the Spirit, and
being associated with events that were yet fut
ure as if present, for such is the power of the
And next in the Disciples of Christ
Spirit.
(for I omit to mention Christ Himself,
in
Whom He dwelt, not as energizing, but as
accompanying His Equal), and that in three
ways, as they were able to receive Him, and
on three occasions ; before Christ was glori
fied by the Passion, and after He was glorified
by the Resurrection ; and after His Ascen
sion, or Restoration, or whatever we ought to
call it, to Heaven. Now the first of these
manifests Him-the healing of the sick and
casting out of evil spirits, which could not
be apart from the Spirit ; and so does that
breathing upon them after the Resurrection,
which was clearly a divine inspiration ; and
so too the present distribution of the fiery
tongues, which we are now commemorating.
But the first manifested Him indistinctly, the
second more expressly, this present one more
perfectly, since He is no longer present only
in energy, but as we may say, substantially,
associating with us, and dwelling in us.
For
it was fitting that as the Son had lived with
us in bodily form-so the Spirit too should
appear in bodily form ; and that after Christ
had returned to His own place, He should
have come down to us- Coining because He
is the Lord ; Sent, because He is not a rival
For such words no less manifest the
God.
Unanimity than they mark the separate Indi
viduality.

XII. And therefore He came after Christ,
that a Comforter should not be lacking unto
us; but Another Comforter, that you might
acknowledge His co-equality.
For this word
Another marks an Alter Ego, a name of equal
Lordship, not of inequality.
For Another is
not said, I know, of different kinds, but of
And He came in the
things consubstantial.
form of Tongues because of His close relation
to the Word.
And they were of Fire, per
haps because of His purifying Power (for our
Scripture knows of a purifying fire, as anyone

who wishes can find out), or else because of
His Substance.
For our God is a consuming
Fire, and a Fire" burning up the ungodly ; 3
though you may again pick a quarrel over
these words, being brought into difficulty by
the Consubstantiality. And the tongues were
cloven, because of the diversity of Gifts ;
and they sat to signify His Royalty and Rest
among the Saints, and because the Cherubim
are the Throne of God. And it took place
in an Upper Chamber (I hope I am not seem
ing to any one over tedious), because those
who should receive it were to ascend and be
raised above the earth ; for also certain upper
chambers'' are covered with Divine Waters,^ by
which the praise of God are sung. And Jesus
Himself in an Upper Chamber gave the Com
munion of the Sacrament to those who were
being initiated into the higher Mysteries, that
thereby might be shewn on the one hand that
God must come down to us, as I know He
did of old to Moses ; and on the other that
we must go up to Him, and that so there
should come to pass a Communion of God
I with men, by a coalescing of the dignity.
For as long as either remains on its own foot
ing, the One in His Glory « the other in his
lowliness, so long the Goodness of God can
not mingle with us, and His lovingkindness
is incommunicable, and there is a great gulf
between, which cannot
crossed ; and
which separates not only the Rich Man from
Lazarus and Abraham's Bosom which he longs
for, but also the created and changing natures
from that which is eternal and immutable.

be

XIII. This was proclaimed by the Prophets
in such passages as the following : -The Spirit
of the Lord is upon me ; ( and, There shall rest
upon Him Seven Spirits ; and The Spirit of the
Lord descended and led them ; » and The spirit
of Knowledge filling Bezaleel,* the Masterbuilder of the Tabernacle; and, The Spirit
provoking to anger ; * and the Spirit carrying
away Elias in a chariot,* and sought in double
measure by Elissaus ; and David led and
strengthened by the Good and Princely Spirit.**
And He was promised by the mouth of Joel
first, who said, And it shall be in the last days
that I will pour out of My Spirit upon all
flesh (that is, upon all that believe), and
upon your sons and upon your daughters,1' and

y Ps. civ. 3.

0 Dent. iv. 24

a Heb. xii. 20.
6 Ps. cxlviii. 4.
c cVi wcptoinjc : Uillins renders 11 In specula sua," " On His
watch tower,1' and the meaning is admissible, but the context seems
rather to point to the passive sense of Majesty or Glory. The
word is not in the Lexicon, and Suicer does not notice it ; but the
corresponding adjective has only the passive sense.
Specula,
however, is used in the sense of Eminence, but apparently only
C Isa. lxi. 1.
geographically.
9 Exod. xxxi. 3.
ft Ps. li. 12 ; cxliii. 10.

1) lb. xi. a ; Ixiii. 14.
A 2 Kgs. ii. 11.

<c Isa. Ixiii. 10.
v Joel ii. 28.

^

3«4

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

the rest ; and then afterwards by Jesus, being
glorified by Him, and giving back glory to
Him, as He was glorified by and glorified the
Father." And how abundant was this Promise.
He shall abide for ever, and shall remain with
you, whether now with those who in the sphere
of time are worthy, or hereafter with those
who are counted worthy of that world, when
we have kept Him altogether by our life here,
and not rejected Him in so far as we sin.

XIV. This Spirit shares with the Son in
working both the Creation and the Resurrec
tion, as you may be shewn by this Scripture ;
By the Word of the Lord were the heavens
made, and all the power of them by the breath
of His Mouth ; t and this, The Spirit of God
that made me, and the Breath of the Almighty
that teacheth me ; * and again, Thou shalt send
forth Thy Spirit and they shall be created, and
Thou shalt renew the face of the earth.4 And
He is the Author of spiritual regeneration.
Here is your proof : -None can see or enter
into the Kingdom, except he be born again
of the Spirit,' and be cleansed from the first
birth, which is a mystery of the night, by a
remoulding of the day and of the Light, by
which every one singly is created anew.
This
Spirit, for He is most wise and most loving,S
if He takes possession of a shepherd makes
him a Psalmist, subduing evil spirits by his
song,' and proclaims him King ; if he possess
a goatherd and scraper* of sycamore fruit,* He
makes him a Prophet.
Call to mind David
If He possess a goodly youth, He
and Amos.
makes him a Judge of Elders,* even beyond his
years, as Daniel testifies, who conquered the
lions in their den.'1
If He takes possession of
Fishermen, He makes them catch the whole
world in the nets of Christ, taking them up
in the meshes of the Word.
Look at Peter
and Andrew and the Sons of Thunder, thund
ering the things of the Spirit.
If of Public
ans, He makes gain of them for discipleship,
and makes them merchants of souls ; witness 1
a Publican, today an
Matthew, yesterday
Evangelist.
If of zealous persecutors, He
changes the current of their zeal, and makes
them Pauls instead of Sauls, and as full of
And
piety as He found them of wickedness.
He is the Spirit of Meekness, and yet is pro
Let us therefore
voked by those who sin.

f Wisd. i. 6.

« John iii. 3.

0 Ps. xxxiii. 6.

Y Job xxxiii. 4.

a Tohn xiv. 16.
ij 1 Sam. xvi. 23.
6 Ps. civ. 30.
0 The Hebrew word means " a cultivator of sycamores." The
LXX. rendering is due to the process of maturing the fruit, which
grows on the stem of the trunk, and is made to mature by punctur
ing it with an iron instrument, when after three days the fruit is
fit to eat. The Hebrew word occurs only this once in the Bible;
Aquila renders it bv " Looking for;'' Symmachus by "propping
ft Dan. vt. 22.
with stakes."

K Amos vii. 14.

A Susannah.

make proof of Him as gentle, not as wrathful,
by confessing His Dignity ; and let us not
desire to see Him implacably wrathful.
He
too it is who has made me today a bold her
ald to you;-if without rest to myself, God
be thanked ; but if with risk, thanks to Him
nevertheless ; in the one case, that He may
spare those that hate us; in the other, that
He may consecrate us, in receiving this reward
of our preaching of the Gospel, to be made
perfect by blood.

But they heard.

Did they each hear in

XV. They spoke with strange tongues, and
not those of their native land ; and the wonder
was great, a language spoken by those who
had not learnt it.
And the sign is to them
that believe not," and not to them that believe,
that it may be an accusation of the unbeliev
ers, as it is written, With other tongues and
other lips will I speak unto this people, and
not even so will they listen to Me^saith the
Lord.
Here stop a little
and raise a question, how you are to divide
the words.
For the expression has an am
biguity, which is to be determined by the
punctuation.
their
own dialect » so that if I may so say, one
sound was uttered, but many were heard ; the
air being thus beaten and, so to speak, sounds
being produced more clear than the original
sound ; or are we to put the stop after " they
Heard," and then to add "them speaking in
their own languages ' ' to what follows, so that
it would be speaking
their
own to the hearers, which would be foreign
to the speakers ?
I prefer to put it this latter
way ; for on the other plan the miracle would
be rather of the hearers than of the speakers ;
whereas in this it would be on the speakers'
side; and it was they who were reproached
for drunkenness, evidently because they by
the Spirit wrought a miracle in the matter of
the tongues.

languages

in

XVI. But as the old Confusion of tongues
was laudable, when men who were of one lan
guage in wickedness and impiety, even as
some now venture to be, were building the
Tower ; 8 for by the confusion of their language
the unity of their intention was broken up,
and their undertaking destroyed ; so much
more worthy of praise is the present miracu
lous one.
For being poured from One Spirit
upon many men, it brings them again into
harmony.
And there is a diversity of Gifts,
which stands in need of yet another Gift to

0 Isa. xxviii. 11.
a t Cor. xiv. 22.
yThe actual order of the words in the Greek of Acts ii. 6 is.
his own dialect them speak

They heard each individual in
ing : so that the position of the comma affects the meaning,

o Geu. xi. 7.

THE LAST FAREWELL.

discern which is the best, where all are praise
worthy.
And that division also might be
called noble of which David says, Drown O
Lord and divide their tongues." Why? Be
cause they loved all words of drowning, the
deceitful tongue.? Where he all but expressly
arraigns the tongues of the present day *
which sever the Godhead.
Thus much upon
this point.

XVII. Next, since it was to inhabitants of
Jerusalem, most devout Jews, Parthians, Medes,
and Elamites, Egyptians, and Libyans, Cret
ans too, and Arabians, and Mesopotamians,
and my own Cappadocians, that the tongues
spake, and to Jews (if any one prefer so to
understand it), out of every nation under
heaven thither collected ;
it is worth while to
see who these were and of what captivity.
For the captivity in Egypt and Babylon was
circumscribed, and moreover had long since
been brought to an end by the Return ; and
that under the Romans, which was exacted
for their audacity against our Saviour, was
not yet come to pass, though it was in the
It remains then to understand it
near future.
of the captivity under Antiochus, which hap
pened not so very long before this time.
But if any does not accept this explanation,
as being too elaborate, seeing that this cap
tivity was neither ancient nor widespread
over the world, and is looking for a more
reliable-perhaps the best way to take
it
would be as follows.
The nation was re
moved many times, as Esdras related ; and
some of the Tribes were recovered, and some
were left behind ; of whom probably (di
spersed as they were among the nations) some
would have been present and shared the
miracle.

XVIII. These questions have been examined
before by the studious, and perhaps not with
out occasion ; and whatever else any one may
contribute at the present day, he will be
joined with us.
But now it is our duty to
dissolve this Assembly, for enough has been
said.
But the Festival is never to be put an
end to ; but kept now indeed with our bodies ;
but a little
later on altogether spiritually
there, where we shall see the reasons of these
things more purely and clearly, in the Word
Himself, and God, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
the True Festival and Rejoicing of the Saved
-to Whom be the glory and the worship,
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, now and
for ever.

Amen.

a Ps. lv. 9.

B lb. lii 4.

y Arians, Macedonians, and kindred sects.
as

INTRODUCTION TO ORATION XLII.

" The Last Farewell."

This Oration was delivered during the Second
OZcumenical Council, held at Constantinople
a.d. 381.
Historical as well as personal mo
tives render the occasion of the deepest inter
est. The audience consisted of the one hundred
and fifty Bishops of the Eastern Church who
took part in the Council, and of the speaker's
own flock, the orthodox Christians of Constan
tinople. He had by his own exertions gathered
that flock together, after it had been ravaged
by heretical teachers.
He had won the admi
ration and affection of its members, by his
courageous championship of the Faith, his
lucid teaching, and his fatherly care for -their
He had been, against his
spiritual needs.
will, enthroned with acclamation in the highest
ecclesiastical position in the Eastern Church,
and called to preside over the Synod of its
assembled Bishops.
Finding himself unable
to guide the deliberations of the Council in re
gard to a question of the highest importance,
and perceiving that he himself and his posi
tion were made by some of the pishops a fresh
cause of dissension, he felt bound to resign
his high office, and endeavour by this personal
sacrifice to restore peace to the Church.
His
language is worthy of the occasion.
Obliged
to deal with the topics which had caused dis
sension, he handles them with gentle and dis
criminating tact ; he speaks with great selfrestraint in his own defence; he sets forth
with tenderest feeling the common experiences
of himself and his flock : he gives with dig
nity and clearness his last public exposition
of the Faith ; and finally, in language of
exquisite beauty, spoken with the quivering
tones of an aged man, he bids a tender fare
well to his flock, his cathedral, and his throne,
with all their affecting associations.
It was
an occasion whose pathos is unsurpassed in
history.
Orator and audience were alike
deeply moved, and the emotion has been re
newed in all those who have read his words,
and realised the scene of their delivery.

"The Last Farewell" in the Presence
of the One hundred and fifty
Bishops.

1. What think ye of our affairs, dear shep
herds and fellow-shepherds : whose feet are
beautiful, for you bring glad tidings of peace

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

and of the good things* with which ye have
come ; beautiful again in our eyes, to whom
ye have come in season, not to convert a
wandering sheep/ but to converse with a pil
grim shepherd ? What think ye of this our
pilgrimage? And of its
fruit, or rather of
that of the Spirit > within us,8 by Whom we
are ever
moved,* and specially have now
been moved, desiring to have, and perhaps
having, nothing of our own ?
Do you of
yourselves understand and perceive-and are
you kindly critics of our actions ? Or must
we, like those from whom a reckoning is de
manded as to their military command, or civil
government, or administration of the excheq
uer, publicly and in person submit to you
the accounts of our administration ?
Not in
deed that we are ashamed of being judged,
for we are ourselves judges in turn, and both
with the same charity.
But the law is an
ancient one : for even Paul communicated to
the Apostles his Gospel : f not for the sake of
ostentation, for the Spirit is far removed from
all ostentation, but in order to establish his
success and correct his failure, if indeed there
were any such in his words or actions, as he
declares when writing of himself.
Since even
the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
prophets,' according to the order of the Spirit
who regulates and divides all things well.
And do not wonder that, while he rendered
his account privately and to some, I do so
publicly, and to all.
For my need is greater
than his, of being aided by the freedom of my
censors, if I am proved to have failed in my
duty, lest I should run, or have run, in vain.9
And the only possible mode of self-defence is
speech in the presence of men who know the
facts.

2. What then is my defence ? '

If it be
false, you must convict me, but if true, you on
behalf of whom * and in whose presence I
speak, must bear witness to it.
For you are
my defence, my witnesses, and my crown of
rejoicing/ if I also may venture to boast my
self a little in the Apostle's language.
This
flock was, when it was small and poor, as far
as appearances went, nay, not even a flock,
but a slight trace and relic of a flock, without
order, or shepherd, or bounds, with neither
right to pasturage, nor the defence of a fold,
wandering upon the mountains and in caves
and dens of the earth,'' scattered and dispersed

0 S. Matt, xviii. 12.

a Isai. Hi. 7 ; Rom. x. is.
S 2 Tim. i. 14.
« Acts xvii. aS.
0 Gal. ii. a.
17 1 Cor. xiv. 32.
k On behalf of, i.e., the Christians of Constantinople, whose
A 1 Thess. ii. 19.

11 Cor. ix. 3.
Pastor he had been, who were present at the time in the church.

p Hcb. xi. 38.

y GaL v. aa.

£ Gal. ii. 3.

hither and thither as each one could find
shelter or pasture, or could gratefully secure
its own safety ; like that flock which was har
assed by lions, dispersed by tempest, or scat
tered in darkness, the lamentation of prophets
who compared it to the misfortunes of Israel,'"
given up to the Gentiles ; over which we also
lamented, so long as our lot was worthy of
For in very deed we also were
lamentation.
thrust out and cast off, and scattered u|wn
every mountain and hill, from the need of a
shepherd : P and a dreadful storm fell upon the
Church, and fearful beasts assailed her, who do
not even now, after the calm, spare us, but with
out being ashamed of themselves, wield a greater
power than the time should allow ; while a
gloomy darkness, far more oppressive than the
ninth plague of Egypt, the darkness which
might be felt,* enveloped and concealed every
thing, so that we could scarcely even see one
another.

3. To speak in a more feeling strain, trust
ing in Him Who then forsook me, as in a
Father, " Abraham has been ignorant of us,
Israel has acknowledged us not, but Thou art
our Father, and unto Thee do we look ; 4 be
side Thee we know none else, we make mention
of Thy name."'
Therefore, says Jeremiah,
I will plead with Thee, I will reason the cause
with Thee.* We are become as at the begin
ning, when Thou barest not rule* over us, and
Thou hast forgotten Thy holy covenant, and
Therefore we,
shut up Thy mercies from us.
j the worshippers of the Trinity, the perfect sup
pliants of the perfect Deity, became a reproach
to Thy Beloved, neither daring to bring down
to our own level any of the things above us,
nor in such wise to rise up against the godless
tongues which fought against God, as to make
His Majesty a fellow servant with ourselves ;
but, as is plain, we were delivered up on ac
count of our other sins, and because our conduct
had been unworthy of Thy commandments,
and we had walked after our own evil mind.
For what other reason can there be for our
being delivered up to the most unrighteous
and wicked men of all the dwellers upon the
earth?
First Nebuchadnezzar* afflicted us,'
possessed during the Christian era with an
anti-Christian rage, hating Christ just because
he had through Him gained salvation, and
having bartered the sacred books for sacrifices
to those who are no gods.
He devoured me,
he tore me in pieces, a slight darkness envel
oped me/ if I may even in my lamentation
P lb. xxxiv. 6.
y Exoil. x. at.
c lb. xxvi. 13 (LXX.).
6 Nebuchadntzztxr, i.e., Julian.
« Ps. lv. 6 (LXX.).

a F.zek. xxxi. ii.
6 Isai. Ixiii. 16.
if Isai. Ixiii. 19.
1 Jer. Ii. 34.

£ Icr. xii. 1.

keep to the language of Scripture.
If the Lord
had not helped me," and righteously delivered
him to the hands of the lawless, by casting
him off (such are the judgments of God) to
the Persians, by whom his blood was right
eously shed for his unholy sheddings of blood,
since in this case alone justice could not afford
even to be longsuffering, my soul had shortly
dwelt in the grave. P The second » no more
kindly, if he were not even more grievous
still, for while he bore the name of Christ, he
was a false Christ, and at once a burden and
a reproach to the Christians, for, while to obey
him was ungodly, to suffer at his hands was
inglorious, since they did not even seem to be
wronged, nor to gain by their sufferings the
glorious title of martyr, inasmuch as the truth
was in this case perverted, for while they suf
fered as Christians, they were supposed to be
punished as heretics.
Alas ! how rich we
were in misfortunes, for the fire consumed the
beauties of the world.4 That which the palmerworm left did the locust eat, and that which
the locust left did the caterpillar eat : then
came the cankerworm,* then, what next I knownot, one evil springing up after another.
But
for what purpose should I give a tragic de
scription of the evils of the time, and of the
penalty exacted from us, or, if I must rather
call it so, the testing and refining we endured ?
At any rate, we went through fire and water,f
and have attained a place of refreshment by
the good pleasure of God our Saviour.

4. To return to my original startingpoint.
This was my field, when it was small and poor,
unworthy not only of God, Who has been, and
is cultivating the whole world with the fair
seeds and doctrines of piety, but, apparently,
even of any- poor and needy man of slender
means.
Nay it did not deserve to be called
a field, requiring neither barn nor threshingfloor, and not even worthy of the sickle ;
with neither heap nor sheaves, or small and
untimely sheaves, like those on the housetop,
which do not fill the hand of the reaper, nor
call forth a blessing from them which go by.1"
Such was my field, such my harvest ; great
and well-eared and fat in the eyes of Him
Who beholdeth hidden things, and becoming
such a husbandman, its abundance springing
from the valleys of souls well tilled with the
Word : unrecognized however in public, and
not collected together, but gathered in frag
ments, as an ear gleaned in the stubble,9 as
gleaning-grapes in the vintage, where there

a Ps. xciv. 17.

i Joel i. 19.
H lb. exxix. 6 sqq.

0 lb. xciv. 17.

c lb. i. 4.

y The second, i.e., Valcns,
£ Ps. Ixvi. la.
» Mic. vii. 1 (LXX.J.

is no cluster left.
I think I may add, only
too appropriately, I found Israel like a figtree
in the wilderness," and like one or two ripe
grapes in an unripe cluster, preserved as a
blessing from the Lord/ and a consecrated
firstfruit, though small as yet and scanty,
and not filling the mouth of the eater : and as
an ensign on a hill,* and as a beacon on a
mountain, or any other solitary thing visible
only to few.
Such was its former poverty
and dejection.

5. But since God, Who maketh poor and
maketh rich, Who killeth and maketh alive ; 4
Who maketh and transformed all things ;
Who turneth night into day,' winter into
spring, storm info calm, drought into abun
dance of rain ; and often for the sake of the
prayers ( of one righteous man i sorely perse
cuted ; Who lifteth up the meek on high, and
bringeth the ungodly down to the ground ; *
since God said to Himself, I have surely seen
the affliction of Israel ; ' and they shall no
longer be further vexed with clay and brickmaking ; and when He spake He visited, and
in His visitation He saved, and led forth His
people with a mighty hand and outstretched
arm," by the hand of Moses and Aaron/ His
chosen-what is the result, and what wonders
Those which books
have been wrought ?
and monuments contain.
For besides all the
wonders by the way, and that mighty roar,
to speak most concisely, Joseph came into
Egypt alone,'1 and soon after six hundred
What more
thousand depart from Egypt."
marvellous than this ? What greater proof
of the generosity of God, when from men
without means He wills to supply the means
for public affairs ? And the land of promi.se
is distributed through one who was hated,
and he who was sold f dispossesses nations,
and is himself made a great nation, and that
small
vine,"
so great that it reaches to the river, and
is stretched out to the sea," and spreads from
j border to border, and hides the mountains
with the height of its glory and is exalted
above the cedars, even the cedars of God,
whatever we are to take these mountains and
cedars to be.

offshoot becomes a

luxuriant

6. Such then was once this flock, and such
it is now, so healthy and well grown, and if
it be not yet in perfection, it
is advancing
towards it by constant increase, and I pro-

a Hos. ix. 10 (I.XX.).
6 1 Sam. ii. 6 sqq.
ij S. James v. 16, 17.
x Ps. exxxvi. 12.
v Exod. xii. 37.
o Hos. x. x.

0 Isai. lxv. 8.
e Amos v._ P.
0 Ps. cxlvii. 6.
A lb. lxxvii. 20.

y lb. xxx. 17.
f r Kings xviii. 4a.
1 Kxod. ill. 7.
11 Gen. xxxvii. 28.

f Gen. xlix. 27.
it Ps. Uxx. 8 et seq.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

phesy that it will advance.
This is foretold
me by the Holy Spirit, if I have any prophetic
instinct and insight into the future.
And
from what has preceded I am able to be con
fident, and recognize this by reasoning, being
the nursling of reason.
For it was much more
improbable that, from that condition, it should
reach its present development, than that, as ,
it now is, it should attain to the height of re
nown.
For ever since it began to be gathered
together, by Him Who quickeneth the dead,"
bone to its bone, joint to joint, and the Spirit
of life and regeneration was given to it in
their dryness/ its entire resurrection has been,
I know well, sure to be fulfilled : so that the
rebellious should not exalt themselves,* and
that those who grasp at a shadow, or at a
dream when one awaketh,5 or at the dispers
ing breezes, or at the traces of a ship in the
water,' should not think that they have any
thing.
Howl, firtree, for the cedar is fallen ! t
Let them be instructed by the misfortunes of
others, and learn that the poor shall not alway be forgotten,* and that the Deity will not
refrain,
as Habakkuk says, from striking
through the heads of the mighty ones9 in His
fury-the Deity, Who has been struck through
and impiously divided into Ruler and Ruled,
in order to insult the Deity in the highest de
gree by degrading It, and oppress a creature
by equality with Deity.

7.

with everlasting mercy I

I seem indeed to hear that voice, from
Him Who gathers together those who are
En
broken, and welcomes the oppressed :
large thy cords, break forth on the right hand
and on the left, drive in thy stakes, spare
I have given thee up, and
not thy curtains.'
In a little wrath I smote
1 will help thee.
will
thee, but
glorify thee.* The measure of His kindness
exceeds the measure of His discipline.
The
former things were owing to our wicked
ness, the present things to the adorable Trin
ity : the former for our cleansing, the present
for My glory, Who will glorify them that
will move to jealousy
glorify Me,* and I
Behold
them that move Me to jealousy.
is
this
But
the indissoluble
thou didst surround thyself with walls and
tablets and richly set stones, and long por
ticos and galleries, and didst
shine and
sparkle with gold, which thou didst, in part
pour forth like water, in part treasure up like
sand ; not knowing that better is faith, with
6 Kzek. xxxvii. 7, 10.
« Wisd. v. 9 sqq.
8 Hab. iii. 13.

is sealed up with Me,* and this

y Ps. lxvi. 7.
1 Isai. liv. 2.

law of recompense.

£ Zech. xl. 2.

a Rom. iv. 17.
8 Ps. Ixxiii. so.
nPs. ix. 18.
x lb. liv. 8.

fi Deut. xxxti. 21, 34.

A 1 Sam. ii. 30.

no other roof but the sky to cover it, than
impiety rolling in
wealth, and that three
gathered together in the Name of the Lord "
count for more with God than tens of thou
sands of those who deny the Godhead.
Would you prefer the whole of the Canaanites
to Abraham alone?*3 or the men of Sodom to
Lot ?>or the Midianites to Moses,4 when each
of these was a pilgrim and a stranger? How
do the three hundred men with Gideon, who
bravely lapped,* compare with the thousands
who were put to flight ? Or the servants of
Abraham, who scarcely exceeded them in
number, with the many kings and the army
of tens of thousands whom, few as they were,
they overtook and defeated ?5 Or how do you
understand the passage that though the num
ber of the children of Israel be as the sand of
the sea, a remnant shall be saved ? * And
again, I have left me seven thousand men,
who have not bowed the knee to Baal?9
This is not the case ; it is not? God has not
taken pleasure in numbers.

8. Thou countest tens of thousands, God
counts those who are in a state of salvation ;
thou countest the dust which is without num
ber, I the vessels of election.
For nothing is
so magnificent in God's sight as pure doctrine,
and a soul perfect in all the dogmas of the
truth. -For there is nothing worthy of Him
Who made all things, of Him by Whom are
all things, and for Whom are all things,' so
that it can be given or offered to God : not
merely the handiwork or means of any indi
vidual, but even if we wished to honour Him,
by uniting together all the property and handi
work of all mankind.
fill heaven
and earth?" saith the Lord ! and what house
will ye build Me? or what is the, place of My
But, since man must needs fall short of
rest ? x
what is worthy, I ask of you, as approaching it
most nearly, piety, the wealth which is com
mon to all and equal in My eyes, wherein the
poorest may, if he be nobleminded, surpass
the most illustrious.
For this kind of glory
depends upon purpose, not upon affluence.
These things be well assured, I will accept at
your hands.'' To tread ' My courts ye shall
not proceed, but the feet of the meek f shall
tread them, who have duly and sincerely
acknowledged Me, and My only-begotten
Word, and the Holy Spirit. How long will
ye inherit My holy Mountain?0 How long

Do not I

0 Gen. xii. 6 : xiii. 12.
fjudg. vii. 5.

« S. Matt, xviii. 20.
2 Exod. ii. 15.
n Isai. x. 22 ; Rom. ix. 27.
ft lb. i. 12.
t 1 Cor. viii. 6.
v To tread, etc. The Arians lor a time had been in possession
f Isai. xxvi. 6 (LXX.).

y lb. xix. x.
$ 1 King* xix. 18 ; Rom xi. 4.

« Ter. xxiii. 24.
of the churches of Constantinople,

0 lb. Ivii. 13 : lxv. 9.

£Gen. xiv. 14.

k Isai. lxvi. 1.

shall My ark be among the heathen ? * Now
for a little longer ye indulge yourselves in
that which belongs to others, and gratify your
For as ye have devised to reject Me,
desires.
so will
also reject you,'' saith the Lord
Almighty.

9. This I seemed to hear Him say, and to
see Him do, and besides, to hear Him shouting
to His people, which once were few and
scattered and miserable, and have now become
many, and compact enough and enviable, Go
through v My gates 8 and be ye enlarged. Must
you always be in trouble and dwell in tents,
while those who vex you rejoice exceedingly?
And to the presiding Angels, for I believe, as
John teaches me in his Revelation, that each
Church has its guardian,' Prepare ye the way
of My people, and cast away the stones from
the way,f that there may be no stumblingblock
or hindrance for the people 1 in the divine road
and entrance, now, to the temples made with
hands,6 but soon after, to Jerusalem above,' and
the Holy of holies there," which will, I know,
be the end of suffering and struggle to those
who here bravely travel on the way. Among
whom are ye also called to be Saints,* a people
of possession, a royal priesthood,'1 the most ex
cellent portion of the Lord, a whole river from
a drop, a heavenly lamp from a spark, a tree
from a grain of mustard seed," on which the
birds come and lodge.

10. These we present to you, dear shep
herds, these we offer to you, with these we
welcome our friends, and guests, and fellow
pilgrims. We have nothing fairer or more
splendid to offer to you, for we have selected
the greatest of all our possessions, that you may
see that, strangers as we are, we are not in
want, but though poor are making many rich.f
If these things are small and unworthy of
notice, I would fain learn what is greater and
of more account.
For, if it be no great thing
to have established and strengthened with
wholesome doctrines a city which is the eye
of the universe, in its exceeding strength by
sea and land, which is, as it were, the link be
tween the Eastern and Western shores, in
which the extremities of the world from every
side meet together, and from which, as the
common mart of the faith, they take their
rise, a city borne hither and thither on the
eddying currents of so many tongues, it will
be long ere anything be considered great or

0 Hos. iv. 6.
churches to the orthodox by Theodosius, Jan. 10, A.v, 381.
c Gal. iv. 26.

This passage refers to the restoration of the

£Isai. Ixii. 10.

a 1 Sam. vi. t.
y Go through, etc.
8 Isai. Ixii
10.
i) lb. lvii. 14.
ft 1 Pet. ii. 9.

e Rev. ii. 1.
0 Acts vii. 48.
f S. Matt. xiii. at.

k Heb, ix. 3, 74.

( 2 Cor. vi. to.

A Rom. i. 6.

worthy of esteem.
But if it be indeed a sub
ject for praise, allow to us some glory on this
account, since we have contributed in some
portion to these results which ye see.

11. Lift up thine eyes round about, and see,"
thou critic of my words !
See the crown
which has been platted in return for the
hirelings of Ephraim P and the crown of inso
lence ; see the assembly of the presbyters,
. honoured for years and wisdom, the fair order
of the deacons, who are not far from the
same Spirit, the good conduct of the readers,
the people's eagerness for teaching, both of
men and women, who are equally renowned
for virtue : the men, whether philosophers or
simple folk, being alike wise in divine things,
whether rulers or ruled, being all in this re
spect duly under rule ; whether soldiers or
nobles, students or men of letters, being all
soldiers v of God, though in all other respects
meek, ready to fight for the Spirit, all rever
encing the assembly above, to which we ob
tain an entrance, not by the mere letter, but
by the quickening Spirit, all in very deed
being men of reason, and worshippers of Him
Who is in truth the Word : the women, if
married, being united by a Divine rather than
by a carnal bond; if unwedded and free,
being entirely dedicated to God ; whether
young or old, some honourably advancing
towards old age, others eagerly striving to re
main immortal, being renewed by the best of
hopes.

12. To those who platted this crown-that
which I speak, I speak it not after the Lord,4
nevertheless I will say it-I also have given
assistance.
Some of them are the result of
my words, not of those which we have ut
tered at random, but of those which we have
loved-nor again of those which are mere
tricious, though the language and manners of
the harlot have been slanderously attributed to
me, but of those which are most grave.
Some
of them are the offspring and fruit of my
Spirit, as the Spirit can beget those who rise
superior to the body. To this I have no
doubt that those who are kindly among you,
nay all of you, will testify, since I have been
the husbandman of all : and my sole reward is
For we neither have, nor
your confession.
have had, any other object.
For virtue, that
it may remain virtue, is without reward, its
eyes fixed alone on that which is good.

13. Would you have me say something
still more venturesome ? Do you see the
tongues of. the enemy made gentle, and those

a Isai. Ix. 4.
Y 2 Tim. ii. 3.

0 lb. xxviii. 1 (LXX.).
£ 2 Cor. xi. 17.

as

pursuers, or

who made war upon the Godhead against me
This also is the result of our
tranquillised ?
Spirit, of our husbandry.
For we are not un
disciplined in our exercise of discipline, nor
do we hurl insults, as many do, who assail not
the argument but the speaker, and sometimes
strive by their invective to hide the weakness
of their reasoning ; as the cuttlefish are said
to cast forth ink before them, in order to
themselves
escape from
their
to hunt others when unperceived.
But we
show that our warfare is in behalf of Christ
by fighting
peaceable and
Christ, the
meek,a Who has borne our infirmities, fought. 0
Though peaceable, we do not injure the word
of truth, by yielding a jot, to gain a reputa
tion for reasonableness ; for we do not pursue
that which is good by means of ill : and we
are peaceable by the legitimate character of
to our own
our warfare, confined as
limits, and the rules of the Spirit.
Upon
these points, this is my decision, and I lay
down the law for all stewards of souls and dis
pensers of the Word : neither to exasperate
others by their harshness, nor to render them
arrogant by submissiveness :
but to be of
good words in treating of the Word, and in
neither direction to overstep the mean.

it

is

14. But you are perhaps longing for me to
give an exposition of the faith, in so far as I
am able.
For I shall myself be sanctified by
the effort of memory, and the people also will
be benefited, by its special delight in such
discussions, and you will fully acknowledge
it-unless we are the objects of groundless
envy, as the rivals, in the manifestation of the
truth, of those whom we do not excel.
For
as, of deep waters, some in the depths are
utterly hidden, some foam against any ob
struction, and hesitate a while before breaking
(as they promise to our ears), some do actu
ally break ; so also, of those who are profess
ors of the Divine philosophy-setting aside
the utterly misguided-some keep their piety
entirely secret and hidden within themselves,
some are not far from the birth pangs, avoid
ing impiety, yet not speaking out their piety,
either from cautious reserve in their teach
ing, or under pressure of fear, being themselves
sound, as they say, in mind, but not making
sound their people, as if they had teen en
trusted with the government of their own
souls, but not of those of others ; while there
are some who make public their treasure, un
able to restrain themselves from giving birth
to their piety, and not considering. that to be

a S. Matt. xi. 39.

fi lb. viii. 17 ; lsai. liii. 4.

I salvation which saves themselves alone, with
out bestowing upon others the overflow of
; their blessings. Among these would I range
J myself, and all who by my side have nobly

dared to confess the truth.

is.

is not but in what it

15. One concise proclamation of our teach
ing, an inscription intelligible {o all, is this
people, which so sincerely worships the Trin
ity, that it would sootier sever anyone from
this life, than sever one of the three from the
Godhead : of one mind, of equal zeal, and
I united to one another, to us and to the Trin
ity by unity of doctrine.
Briefly to run over
its details: That which is without beginning,
I and is the beginning, and is with the begining, is one God.
For the nature of that
which is without beginning does not consist
in being without beginning or being unbegotten, for the nature of anything lies, not in
what it
It is the
assertion of what is, not the denial of what is
not.
And the Beginning is not, because it is
a beginning, separated from that which has
For its beginning is not its
no beginning.
nature, any more than the being without be
ginning is the nature of the other.
For these
are the accompaniments of the nature, not
the nature itself.
That again which is with
that which has no beginning, and with the
beginning, is not anything else than what they
Now, the name of that which has no
beginning is the Father, and of the Beginning
the Son, and of that which is with the Beginj ning, the Holy Ghost, and the three have
one Nature-God.
And the union is the
Father from Whom and to Whom the order
of Persons runs its course, not so as to be
confounded, but so as to be possessed, with
out distinction of time, of will, or of power.
For these things in our case produce a plural
ity of individuals, since each of them is separ
ate both from every other quality, and from
every other individual possession of the same
But to Those who have a simple
quality.
nature, and whose essence is the same, the
term One belongs in its highest sense.

! are.

16. Let us then bid farewell to all con
tentious shiftings and balancings of the truth
on either side, neither, like the Sabellians,
assailing the Trinity in the interest of the
Unity, and so destroying the distinction by
a wicked confusion ; nor, like the Arians,
assailing the Unity in the interest of the
Trinity, and by an impious distinction over
throwing the Oneness.
For our object is not
to exchange one evil for another, but to en
sure our attainment of that which is good.
These are the playthings of the Wicked One,

THE LAST FAREWELL.

who is ever swaying our fortunes towards the
evil.
But we, walking along the royal road
which lies between the two extremes, which
is the seat of the virtues, as the authorities
say, believe in the Father, the Son and the
Holy Ghost, of one Substance and glory ; in
Whom also baptism has its perfection, both
nominally and really (thou knowest who hast
been initiated ! ) ; being a denial of atheism
and a confession of Godhead ; and thus we are
regenerated, acknowledging the Unity in the
Essence and in the undivided worship, and
the Trinity in the Hypostases or
Persons
(which term some prefer.) And let not those
who are contentious on these points utter
their scandalous taunts, as if our faith de
pended on terms and not on realities.
For
what do you mean who assert the three Hypo
stases? Do you imply three Essences by the
I am assured that you would loudly
term ?
shout against those who do so.
For you teach
that the Essence of the Three is One and
the same.
What do you mean, who assert the
Three Persons ? Do you imagine a single
compound sort of being, with three faces,"
or of an entirely human form?
Perish the
thought ! You too will loudly reply that he
who thinks thus, will never see the face of
What is the
God, whatever it may be.
meaning of the Hypostases of the one party,
of the Persons of the other, to ask this fur
ther question? That They are three, Who are
distinguished not by natures, but by proper
How could men agree
ties. 0
and harmonize better than you do, even if
there be a difference between the syllables
you use? You see what a reconciler I am,
bringing you back from the letter to the sense,
as we do with the Old and New Testaments.

Excellent.

17. But, to resume: let us speak of the
Unbegotten, the Begotten, and the Proceed
ing, if anyone likes to create names : for we
shall have no fear of bodily conceptions at
taching to Those who are not embodied, as
the calumniators of the Godhead think.
For
the creature must be called God's, and this is
for us a great thing, but God never.
Other
wise I shall admit that God is a creature, if I
become God, in the strict sense of the term.
For this is the truth.
If God, He is not a
creature ; for the creature ranks with us who
And if a creature, he is not
are not Gods.
God, for he had a beginning in time.
And
there was a time when he who had a begin
And that of which non-existning was not.

vpiatiHTov which is used in theology in the sense of Person.

« With three faces (or masks). A play upon the word
0 Froferties,

Cf. xliii. 30, note.

ence was its prior condition, has not being in
the strict sense of the term. And how can
that, which strictly has not being, be God ?
Not one single one, then, of the Three is
a creature, nor, what is worse, came into being
for my sake ; for in that case he would be not
only a creature, but inferior in honour to us.
For, if I am for the glory of God, and he is
for my sake, as the tongs for the waggon, the
saw for the door, I am his superior in causal
ity.
For in whatever degree God is superior
to creatures, in the same degree is he, who
came into being for my sake, inferior to me
who exist for God's sake.

1 8. Moreover, the Moabites and Ammonites
must not even be allowed to enter0 into the
Church of God, I mean those sophistical,
mischievous arguments which enquire curi
ously into the generation and inexpressible
procession of God, and rashly set themselves
in array against the Godhead : as if it were
necessary that those things which it is beyond
the power of language to set forth, must either
be accessible to them alone, or else have no
they have not compre
existence because
hended them.
We however, following the
Divine Scriptures, and removing out of the
way of the blind the stumbling blocks con
tained in them, will cling to salvation, daring
any and every thing rather than arrogance
against God.
As for the evidences, we leave
them to others, since they have been set forth
by many, and by ourselves also with no little
care. And indeed, it would be a very shame
ful thing for me at this time to be gathering
together proofs for what has all along been
believed.
is not the best order of
things, first to teach and then to learn, even in
matters which are small and of no conse
quence, and much more in those which are
Divine and of such great importance.
Nor,
it proper to the present occasion to
again, is
explain and disentangle
the difficulties of
Scripture, a task requiring fuller and more
careful consideration than our present purpose
Such then, to sum up, is our
will allow.
teaching.
I have entered into these details,
with no intention of contending against the
adversaries : for I have already often, even if it
be imperfectly, fought out the question with
them : but in order that 1 might exhibit to
you the character of my teaching, that you
might see whether I have not a share in the
defence of your own, and do not take my
stand on the same side, and opposed to the
same enemies as yourselves.

For it

a Deut. xxiii. 3.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

19. You have now, my friends, heard the
defence of my presence here :
if it be deserv
ing of praise, thanks are due for it to God,
and to you who called me ; if it has fallen
below your expectation, I give thanks even on
this behalf.
For I am assured that it has not
been altogether deserving of censure, and am
Have we
confident that you also admit this.
at all made a gain a of this people ?
Have we
consulted at all our own interests, as I see is
most often the case ?
Have we caused any
vexation to the Church ? To others possibly,
with whose idea that they had gained judg
ment against us by default, we have joined
issue in our argument ; but in no wise, as far
as I am aware, to you.
I have taken no ox
of yours, ' says the great Samuel, in his conten
tion against Israel on the subject of the king,
nor any propitiation for your souls, the Lord
is witness among you, nor this, nor that, pro
ceeding at greater length, that I may not
count up every particular ; but I have kept the
priesthood pure and unalloyed. And if I
have loved power, or the height of a throne,
or to tread Kings' courts, may I never possess
any distinction, or if I gain it, may I be
hurled from it.

20. What then do I mean ?

I am no pro
ficient in virtue without reward, having not
Give
attained to so high a degree of virtue.
me the reward of my labours.
What reward ?
Not that which some, prone to any suspicion
would suppose, but that which it is safe for me
to seek.
Give me a respite from my long
labours ; give honour to my foreign service ;
elect another in my place, the one who is be
ing eagerly sought on your behalf, someone
who is clean of hands, someone who is not
unskilled in voice, someone who is able to
gratify you on all points, and share with you
the ecclesiastical cares ; for this is especially
the time for such.
But behold, I pray you,
the condition of this body, so drained by time,
by disease, by toil. What need have you of a
timid and unmanly old man, who is, so to
speak, dying day by day, not only in body,
but even in powers of mind, who finds it
difficult to enter into these details before you?
Disobey not the voice of your teacher : for
indeed you have never yet disobeyed it.
am weary of being charged with my gentle
ness.
I am weary of being assailed in words
and in envy by enemies, and by our own.
Some aim at my breast, and are less success
ful in their effort, for an open enemy can lie
Others lie in wait for my
guarded against.

a 2 Cor. xii. 17.

0 1 Kings xu. 2.

back, and give greater pain, for the unsus
pected blow is the more fatal.
If again I have
been a pilot, I have been one of the most
skilful ; the sea has been boisterous around us,
I boiling about the ship, and there has been con
siderable uproar among the passengers, who
have always been fighting about something or
another, and roaring against one another and
the waves.
What a struggle I have had,
seated at the helm, contending alike with the
sea and the passengers, to bring the vessel safe
to land through this double storm ? Had they
in every way supported me, safety would have
; been hardly won, and when they were opposed
' to me, how has it been possible to avoid mak1 ing shipwreck ?

21. What more need be said?

But how
can I bear this holy war ?
For there has
been said to be a holy, as well as a Persian,
war." How shall I unite and join together
the hostile occupants of sees, and hostile pas
tors, and the people broken up along with,
j and opposed to them, as if by some chasms
caused by earthquakes between neighbour
pesti
ing and adjoining places ; or as, in
lential diseases,
befalls servants and mem
bers of the family, when the sickness readily
attacks in succession one after another ; and
besides the very quarters of the globe are af-
| fected by the spirit of faction, so that East
and West are arrayed on opposite sides, and
bid fair to be severed in opinion no less than
in position. How long are parties to be mine
and yours, the old and the new, the more
the more
rational and the more spiritual,
noble and the more ignoble, the more and the
less numerous ?
I am ashamed of my old age,
when, after being saved by Christ, I am called
by the name of others.

22.C I cannot bear your horse races and
theatres, and this rage for rivalry in expense
and party spirit. We unharness, and harness
ourselves on the other side, we neigh against
I each other, we almost beat the air, as they do,
! and fling the dust towards heaven, like those
which are excited ; and under other masks
satisfy our own rivalry, and become evil ar
biters of emulation, and senseless judges of
affairs.
To-day sharing the same thrones and
opinions, if our leaders thus carry us along ;
to-morrow hostile alike in position and opin
ion, if the wind blows in the contrary direc
tion.
Amid the variations of friendship and
hatred, our names also vary : and what is most

a A Holy War. That against the Phocians to avenge their sac
rilege at Delphi.
3 § 22 is a comparison of Ecclesiastical partisanship to the emu
lation and party spirit connected with the horse races in the amphi
theatre.

THE LAST FAREWELL.

terrible, we are not ashamed to set forth con
trary doctrines to the same audience ; nor are
we constant to the same objects, being ren
dered different at different times by our con
They are like the ebb and flow
tentiousness.
of some narrow strait.0
For as when the
children are at play in the midst of the mar
ket place, it would be most disgraceful and
unbecoming for us to leave our household
business, and join them ; for children's toys
are not becoming for old age : so, when others
are contending, even if I am better informed
than the majority, I could not allow my
self to be one of them, rather than, as I now
do, enjoy the freedom of obscurity.
For, be
sides all this, my feeling is that I do not, on
most points, agree with the majority, and can
not bear to walk in the same way.
Rash and
stupid though it may be, such is my feeling.
That which is pleasant to others causes pain
to me, and I am pleased with what is painful
to others.
So that I should not be surprised
if I were even imprisoned as a disagreeable
man, and thought by most men to be out of my
senses, as. is said to have been the case with
one of the Greek philosophers, whose modera
tion exposed him to the charge of madness,
because he laughed at everything, since he sawthat the objects of the eager pursuit of the ma
jority were ridiculous ; or even be thought fiill
of new wine as were in later days the disciples
of Christ, because they spoke with tongues/
since men knew not that it was the power of
the Spirit, and not a distraction of mind.

23. Now, consider the charges laid against
us.
You have been ruler of the church, it is
said, for so long, and favoured by the course
of time, and the influence of the sovereign, a
What change have
most important matter.
we been able to notice? How many men
have in days gone by used us outrageously ?
What sufferings have we failed to undergo?
Ill-usage? Threats? Banishment? Plunder?
Confiscation ? The burning v of priests at sea ?
The desecration of temples by the blood of
the saints, till, instead of temples, they became
charnel-houses ? The public slaughter of aged
Bishops, to speak more accurately, of Patri
The denial of access to every place
archs ?
in the case of the godly alone ?
In fact
any kind of suffering which could be men
tioned ? And for which of these have we re
quited the wrongdoers ?
For the wheel of
fortune gave us the power of rightly treating
those who so treated us, and our persecutors
Apart from
ought to have received a, lesson.

a Narrow strait, lit. Euripus.
y Th* burning, etc., ct This was by order of Valens.

0 Acts ii. 4.

all other things, speaking only of our experi
ences, not to mention your own, have we
not been persecuted, maltreated, driven from
churches, houses, and, most terrible of all,
even from the deserts ? Have we not had to
endure an enraged people, insolent governors,
the disregard of Emperors and their decrees ?
What was the result ? We became stronger, and
our persecutors took to flight. That was actually
the case.
The power to requite them seemed
to me a sufficient vengeance on those who
had wronged us.
These men thought other
wise ; for they are exceedingly exact and just
in requiting: and accordingly they demand"
what the state of things permits.
What gov
ernor, they say, has been fined ? What popu
lace chastised ? What ringleaders of the pop
ulace ? What fear of ourselves have we been
able to inspire for the future ?

24. Perhaps^ we may be reproached, as we
have been before, with the exquisite character
of our table, the splendour of our apparel, the
officers who precede us, our haughtiness to
I was not aware that we
those who meet us.
ought to rival the consuls, the governors, the
most illustrious generals, who have no oppor
tunity of lavishing their incomes ; or that our
belly ought to hunger for the enjoyment of
the goods of the poor, and to expend their
necessaries on superfluities, and belch forth
over the altars.
I did not know that we ought
to ride on splendid horses, and drive in mag
nificent carriages, and be preceded by a pro
cession and surrounded by applause, and have
everyone make way for us, as if we were wild
beasts, and open out a passage so that our ap
proach might be seen afar.
If these sufferings
have been endured, they have now passed
Elect an
away : Forgive me this wrong.*
other who will please
and
give me my desert, my country life, and my
God, Whom alone I may have to please, and
shall please by my simple life.
It is a painful
thing to be deprived of speeches and confer
ences, and public gatherings, and applause
like that which now lends wings to my
thoughts, and relatives, and .friends and hon
ours, and the beauty and grandeur of the city,
and its brilliancy which dazzles those who
look at the surface without investigating the
inner nature of things ; but yet not so pain
ful as being clamoured against and besmirched
amid public disturbances and agitations, which
For
trim their sails to the popular breeze.
they seek not for priests, but for orators, not
After all these persecutions, some thought S.
Gregory ought to have used his influence with Theodosius to re
quite or punish the former persecutors of the orthodox.

the majority :

a Demand.

fi Perhaps, an ironical passage.

y a Cor. xii. 13-

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

for stewards of souls, but for treasurers of
money; not for pure offerers of the sacrifice,
but for powerful patrons.
I will say a word
in their defence : we have thus trained them,
by becoming all things to all men," whether to
save or destroy all, I know not.

25. What say you ?

Are you persuaded,
have you been overcome by my words ?
Or
must I use stronger terms in order to persuade
you?
Yea by the Trinity Itself, Whom you
and I alike worship, by our common hope,
and for the sake of the unity of this people,
grant me this favour ; dismiss me with your
prayers ; let this be the proclamation of my
contest; give me my certificate of retirement,
as sovereigns do to their soldiers ; and, if you ,
will, with a favourable testimony, that I may
enjoy the honour of it ; if not, just as you
please ; this will make no difference to me, un
til God sees what my case really is. What suc
cessor then shall we elect ? God will pro
vide Himself 3 a shepherd for the office, as He
once provided a lamb for a burnt-offering.
only make this further request,-let him be
one who is the object of envy, not the object
of pity ; not one who yields everything to all,
but one who can on some points offer resist
ance for the sake of what is best :
for though
the one is most pleasant, the other is most
So do you prepare for me your
profitable.
addresses of dismissal :
I will now bid you
farewell.

26. Farewell my Anastasia,* whose name
is redolent of piety : for thou hast raised up
for us the doctrine which was in contempt:
farewell, scene of
our common victory,
modern Shiloh,8 where the tabernacle was
first fixed, after being carried about in its
wanderings for forty years in the wilderness.
Farewell likewise, grand and renowned tem
ple, our new inheritance, whose greatness -is
now due to the Word, which once wast a I
Jehus,* and hast now been made by us a Jeru
Farewell, all ye others, inferior only to
salem.
this in beauty, scattered through the various
parts of the city, like so many links, uniting
together each your own neighbourhood, which
have been filled with worshippers of whose
existence we had despaired, not by me, in
my weakness, but by the grace which was
with me.i Farewell, ye Apostles, 1 noble set
tlers here, my masters in the strife; if I have I

0 Gen. xxii. 8.

a i Cor. ix. 72.
yAttastalia. The littie church "of the Resurrection" in
which the orthodox Christians worshipped with S. Gregory at
first on his arrival, while the churches of the city were held by the
heretics.
t 1 Chron. xi. 4.
stantius translated the relics of SS. Andrew, Luke and Timothy.

6 Josh, xviii. x.
n AfOMtltM. The Church of the Holy Apostles, to which Con-

f 1 Cor. xv. 10.

not often kept festival with you, it has been
possibly due to the Satan" which I, like S.
Paul,0 who was one of you, carry about in my
body for my own profit, and which is the
cause of my now leaving you.
Farewell, my
throne, envied and perilous height ; farewell
assembly of high priests, honoured by the
dignity and age of its
priests, and all ye
others ministers of God round the holy table,
drawing nigh to the God Who draws nigh
to you.v
Farewell, choirs of Nazarites, har
monies of the Psalter, night-long stations, ven
erable virgins, decorous matrons, gatherings
of widows and orphans, and ye eyes of the
poor, turned towards God and towards me.
Farewell, hospitable and Christ-loved dwell
Farewell, ye
ings, helpers of my infirmity.
lovers of my discourses,
in your eagerness
and concourse, ye pencils seen and unseen,
and thou balustrade, pressed upon by those who
thrust themselves forward to hear the word.
Farewell, Emperors, and palace, and minis
ters and household of the Emperor, whether
faithful or not to him, I know not, but
for the most part, unfaithful to God.
Clap
your hands, shout aloud, extol your orator
This pestilent and garrulous
to the skies.
tongue has ceased to speak to you.
Though
it will not utterly cease to speak : for it will
fight with hand and ink : but for the present
we have ceased to speak.

27. Farewell, mighty Christ-loving city.'
I will testify to the truth, though thy zeal be
not according to knowledge.* Our separation
Approach the truth :
renders us more kindly.
Honour God
be converted at this late hour.
more than you have been wont to do.
It is
no disgrace to change, while it
is fatal to
Farewell, East and West, for
cling to evil.
whom and against whom I have had to fight ;
He is witness, Who will give you peace, if
but a few would imitate my retirement.
For
those who resign their thrones will not also
lose God, but will have the seat on high,
which is far more exalted and secure.
Last
of all, and most of all, I will cry,-farewell
ye Angels, guardians of this church, and of
my presence and pilgrimage, since our affairs
Farewell, O Trin
are in the hands of Godity, my meditation, and my glory.
Mayest
Thou be preserved by those who are here,
and preserve them, my people : for they are
mine, even if I have my place assigned else
where ; and may I learn that Thou art ever
extolled and glorified in word and conduct.

S. Gregory's case serious ill health.

aSa/iH, i.e., "Thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan "-in
y S. James iv. 8.
j8 Cor. xvii. 7.

£ Rom. x. a.

My children, keep, I pray you, that which
is committed to your trust." Remember my
stonings.P The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
be with you all.

Amen.

INTRODUCTION TO ORATION XLIII.

The Panegyric on S. Basil.

Basil.

S. Basil died January i, a.d. 379. A se
rious illness, in addition to other causes, pre
vented S. Gregory from being present at his
funeral (Epist. 79).
Benoit holds that an
expression (Epitaph, cxix. 38) in which S.
Gregory says that his "lips are fettered"
proves that he was still in retirement at Seleucia.
In
This is an unwarranted deduction.
this Oration, § 2, the Saint, alluding to his
illness in disparaging terms, alleges his la
bours at Constantinople as a more pressing
reason for his ateence : and says that he un
dertook the task according to the judgment
of S.
This implies that S. Gregory
went to Constantinople before the death of
S. Basil, or that he had then been influenced
by his friend's advice and was on the point of
setting out-more probably the former, as we
may be sure that, if S. Gregory had been still
at Seleticia, no reason but physical incapacity
would have kept him from his friend's side.
His pressing duties at Constantinople and the
difficulties of the long journey were the " other
causes " of his letter to S. Gregory of Nyssa :
and we know that he suffered from serious ill
ness at Constantinople (Carm. xi. 887.
Orat.
xxiii. 1).
S. Gregory left Constantinople in
June, a.d. 381, and Tillemont places the date
of this Oration soon after his return to NaziBenoit thinks that it was probably
anzus.
delivered on the anniversary of S.
Basil's
The Oration, as all critics are agreed,
death.
is one of great power and beauty.
Its length
(62 pages folio), the physical weakness of the
speaker, and the limits of the endurance of
even an interested audience, incline us to sup
pose that it -was not spoken in its present
form. We cannot well set aside expressions
which clearly point to actual delivery, but it
may have been amplified later.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil,
Bishop of C/E.sarea in Cappadocia.

1.

It has then been ordained that the great
Basil, who used so constantly to furnish me with
subjects for my discourses, of which he was

a 1 Tim. vi. 20.

0 Col. iv. 18.

quite as proud as any other man of his own,
should himself now furnish me with the grand
est subject which has ever fallen to the lot of
For I think that if anyone de
an orator.
sired, in making trial of his powers of elo
quence, to test them by the standard of that
one of all his subjects which he preferred (as
painters do with epoch-making pictures), he
would choose that which stood first of all
others, but would set aside this as beyond the
powers of human eloquence.
So great a task
is the praise of such a man, not only to me,
who have long ago laid aside all thought of
emulation, but even to those who live for elo
quence, and whose sole object is the gaining
of glory by subjects like this.
Such is my
opinion, and, as I persuade myself, with perfect
justice.
But I know not what subject I can
treat with eloquence, if not this ; or what great
er favour I can do to myself, to the admirers
of virtue, or to eloquence itself, than express
To me it is
our admiration for
the discharge of a most sacred debt.
And
our speech is a debt beyond all others due to
those who have been gifted, in particular,
with powers of speech.
To the admirers of
virtue a discourse is at once a pleasure and an
incentive to virtue. For when a I have learned
the praises of men, I have a distinct idea of
their progress : now, there is none of us all,
within whose power it is not to attain to any
point whatsoever in that progress.
As for
eloquence itself, in either case, all must go
For, if the discourse be almost
well with it.
worthy of its subject -eloquence will have
given an exhibition of its power: if it fall far
short of it, as must be the case when the
praises of Basil are being set forth, by an
actual demonstration of its incapacity, it will
have declared the superiority of the excel
lences
to all expression in
words.

of its subject

this man.

2. These are the reasons which have urged
me to speak, and to address myself to this con
test.
And at my late appearance, long after
his praises have been set forth by so many,
who have publicly and privately done hira
honour, let no one be surprised.
Yea, may
I be pardoned by that divine soul, the object
of my constant reverence !
And as, when he
was amongst us, he constantly corrected me
in many points, according to the rights of a
friend and the still higher law ; for I am not
ashamed to say this, for he was a standard of
virtue to us all ; so now, looking down upon
me from above, he will treat me with indul-

a For when, etc.

difficult sentence.

This seems to be the sense of an admittedly

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

*

For it

sacred duties before

gence.
I ask pardon too of any here who are
among his warmest admirers, if indeed any
one can be warmer than another, and we
are not all abreast in our zeal for his good
fame.
is not contempt which has
caused me to fall short of what might have
been expected of me : nor have I been so re
gardless of the claims of virtue or of friend
ship ; nor have I thought that to praise him
befitted any other more than me.
No ! my
first reason was, that I shrunk from this task,
for I will say the truth, as priests • do, who
being
approach their
In the
cleansed both in voice and mind.
second place, I remind you, though you know
it well, of the task 0 in which I was engaged
on behalf of the true doctrine, which had
been properly forced upon me, and had carried
me from home, according, as I suppose, to the
will of God, and certainly according to the
judgment of our noble champion of the truth,
the breath of whose life was pious doctrine
alone, such as promotes the salvation of the
As for my bodily health, I
whole world.
ought not, perhaps, to dare to mention it,
when my subject is a man so doughty in his
conquest of the body, even before his removal
hence, and who maintained that no powers of
the soul should suffer hindrance from this our
fetter. v
I do not
So much for my defence.
think I need labour it further, in speaking of
him to you who know so clearly my affairs.
I must now proceed with my eulogy, com
mending myself to his God, in order that my
commendations may not prove an insult to
the man, and that I may not lag far behind all
others ; even though we all equally fall as far
short of his due, as those who look upon the
heavens or the rays of the Sun.

3. Had I seen him to be proud of his
birth, and the rights of birth, or any of those
infinitely little objects of those whose eyes are
on the ground, we should have had to inspect
What details
a new catalogue of the Heroes.
as to his ancestors might I not have laid under
contribution ! Nor would even history have
had any advantage over me, since I claim
this advantage, that his celebrity depends, not
upon fiction or legend, but upon actual facts
attested by many witnesses.
On his father's
side Pontus offers to me many details, in no
wise inferior to its wonders of old time, of
which all history and poesy are full ; * there

temples."
churches for the ablutions of intending worshippers.
nople.

a As priests^ or, more generally, " as those who approach our
In the K. there were Iavers at the entrance to the
0 Of the ttistc, i.e., of restoring the orthodox faith in Constanti
0 History andfioesy, e.g., Xenophon, Polybius and Apollonius.

7 Fetter, i.e., the body.

are many others concerned with this my na
tive land, of illustrious men of Cappadocia,
renowned for its youthful progeny," no less
Accordingly we match
than for its horses.
with his father's family that of his mother.
What family owns more numerous, or more
illustrious generals and governors, or court
officials, or again, men of wealth, and lofty
honours, and oratori
thrones, and public
cal renown ?
If it were permitted me to
wish to mention them, I would make noth
ing of the
Pelopidae and Cecropidae, the
Alcmseonids, the -^Eacidse, and Heracleidae,
and other most noble families : inasmuch as
they, in default of public merit in their house,
betake themselves to the region of uncertainty,
claiming demigods and divinities,
merely
mythical personages, as the glory of their
ancestors, whose most vaunted details are in
credible, and those which we can believe are
an infamy.

4. But since our subject is a man who has
maintained that each man's nobility is to be
judged of according to his own worth, and
that, as forms and colours, and likewise our
most celebrated and most infamous horses,
are tested by their own properties, so we too
ought not to be depicted in borrowed plumes ;
after mentioning one or two traits, which,
though inherited from his ancestors, he made
his own by his life, and which are specially
likely to give pleasure to my hearers, I will
then proceed to deal with the man himself.
Different families and individuals have differ
ent points of distinction and interest, great
or small, which, like a patrimony of longer or
shorter descent, come down to posterity : the
distinction of his family on either side was
piety, which I now proceed to display.

5. There was a persecution, the most fright
ful and severe of all ; I mean, as you know,
the persecution of Maximinus, which, follow
ing closely upon those which immediately
preceded it, made them all seem gentle, by
its excessive audacity, and by its eagerness to
win the crown of violence in -impiety.
It
was overcome by many of our champions,
who wrestled with it to the death, or wellnigh to the death, with only life enough left
in them to survive their victory, and not
pass away in the midst of the struggle ;
remaining to be trainers* in virtue, living
witnesses, breathing trophies, silent exhor
tations, among whose numerous ranks were
found Basil's paternal ancestors, upon whom,

a Renoivned, etc.
ft Trainers, lit.

Cf. Homer, Od. ix. 37.

11 anointers "-those who physically and by

their advice prepared athletes for their exercises.

THE PANEGYRIC ON S. BASIL.

in their practice of every form of piety, that
period bestowed many a fair garland.
So
prepared and determined were they to bear
readily all those things on account of which
Christ crowns those who have imitated His
struggle on our behalf.

them

6. But since their strife must needs be law
ful, and the law of martyrdom alike forbids
us voluntarily to go to meet it (in considera
tion for the persecutors, and for the weak) or
to shrink from it if it comes upon us ; for the
former shows foolhardiness, the latter coward
ice ; in this respect they paid due honour to
the Lawgiver ; but what was their device, or
rather, to what were they led by the Provi
dence which guided
in all things?
They betook themselves to a thicket on the
mountains of Pontus, of which there are many
deep ones of considerable extent, with very
few comrades of their flight, or attendants
upon their needs.
Let others marvel at the
length of time, for their flight was exceed
ingly prolonged, to about seven years, or a
little more, and their mode of life, delicately
nurtured as they were, was straitened and
unusual, as may be imagined, with the dis
comfort of its exposure to frost and heat and
rain : and the wilderness allowed no fellow
ship or converse with friends: a great trial
to men accustomed to the attendance and
honour of a numerous retinue. " But I will
proceed to speak of what is still greater and
more extraordinary : nor will anyone fail to
credit it, save those who, in their feeble and
dangerous judgment, think little of perse
cutions and dangers for Christ's sake.

7. These noble men, suffering from the
lapse of time, and feeling a distaste for ordin
ary food, felt a longing for something more
appetising.
They did not indeed speak as
Israel did," for they were not murmurers^ like
them, in their afflictions in the desert, after
the escape from Egypt-that Egypt would
have been better for them than the wilderness,
in the bountiful supply of its flesh-pots, and
other dainties which they had left behind
them there, for the brickmaking and the clay
seemed nothing to them then in their follyFor
but in a more pious and faithful manner.
why, said they, is
it incredible that the God
of wonders, who bountifully fed? in the wilder
ness his homeless and fugitive people, raining
bread upon them, and abounding in quails,
nourishing them not only with necessaries,
but even with luxuries:
that He, Who di
vided the sea,8 and stayed the sun,' and parted

a Exod. xvi. a ct scq.
& lb. xiv. 91.

0 1 Cor. x. to.

y Kxod. xvi. 13.

« Josh. iii. 16: x. 13.

praises of God's many wonders :

the river, with all the other things that He
1 has done : for under such circumstances the
I mind is wont to recur to history, and sing the
that He,
! they went on, should feed us champions of
piety with dainties to-day?
Many animals
which have escaped the tables of the rich,
j have their lairs in these mountains, and many
eatable birds fly over our longing heads, any
of which can surely be caught at the mere fiat
of Thy will ! At these words, their quarry
lay before them, with food come of its own
accord, a complete banquet prepared without
effort, stags appearing all at once from some
How splendid they were !
place in the hills.
how fat ! how ready for the slaughter !
It
might almost be imagined that they were an
noyed at not having been summoned earlier.
Some of them made signs to draw others after
! them, the rest followed their lead. Who pur
sued and drove them ? No one. What riders ?
What kind of dogs, what barking, or cry,
1 or young men who had occupied the exits
They
according to the rules of the chase?
were the prisoners of prayer and righteous
petition. Who has known such a hunt among
men of this, or any day?

I ing.

Such is my history.

8. O what a wonder ! They were themselves
stewards of the chase ; what they would, was
caught by the mere will to do so ; what was
left, they sent away to the thickets, for another
meal.
The cooks were extemporised, the
dinner exquisite, the guests were grateful for
And
this wonderful foretaste of their hopes.
hence they grew more earnest in their struggle,
in return for which they had received this blessAnd do thou, my
persecutor, in thy admiration for legends, tell
of thy huntresses," and Orions, and Actseons,
those ill-fated hunters, and the hind substituted
! for the maiden,0
if any such thing rouses thee
I to emulation, and if we grant that this story
The sequel of the tale is too
. is no legend.
For what is the benefit of the
' disgraceful.
exchange, if a maiden is saved to be taught to
murder her guests, and learn to requite hu
manity with inhumanity ?
Let this one in
stance, such as it is. chosen out of many, repre
sent the rest, as far as I am concerned.
have not related it to contribute to his repu
tation : for neither does the sea stand in need
of the rivers which flow into it, many and
great though they be, nor does the present
subject of my praises need any contributions
No ! my object is to exhibit
to his fair fame.

Orion and Actason.

a Huntresses, esp. Artemis, a passion for whom was fatal to
0 The maiden, Iphiirenia, daughter of Agamemnon.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

the character of his ancestors, and the exam
ple before his eyes, which he so far excelled.
For if other men find it a great additional ad
vantage to receive somewhat of their honour
from their forefathers, it is a greater thing for
him to have made such an addition to the
original stock that the stream seems to have
run uphill.

9. The union of his parents, cemented as it
was by a community of virtue, no less than
by cohabitation, was notable for many rea
sons, especially for generosity to the poor, for
hospitality, for purity of soul as the result of
self-discipline, for the dedication to God of a
portion of their property, a matter not as yet
so much cared for by most men, as it now
has grown to be, in consequence of such pre
vious examples, as have given distinction to
it, and for all those other points, which have
been published throughout Pontus and Cappadocia, to the satisfaction of many : in my
opinion, however, their greatest claim to dis
tinction is the excellence of their children.
Legend indeed has its instances of men whose
children were many and beautiful, but it
is
practical experience which has presented to us
these parents, whose own character, apart from
that of their children, was sufficient for their
fair fame, while the character of their children
would have made them, even without their
own eminence in virtue, to surpass all men
by the excellence of their children.
For the
attainment of distinction by one or two of
their
their offspring might be ascribed to
nature ; but when all are eminent, the honour
is clearly due to those who brought them up.
This is proved by the blessed roll of priests
and virgins, and of those who, when married,
have allowed nothing in their union to hinder
them from attaining an equal repute, and so
have made the distinction between them to
consist in the condition, rather than in the
mode of their life.

10. Who has not known Basil, our arch
bishop's father, a great name to everyone,
who attained a father's prayer, if anyone, I
will not say as no one, ever did ?
For he
surpassed all in virtue, and was only prevented
by his son from gaining the first prize. Who
has not known Emmelia, whose name was a
forecast of what she became, or else whose life
was an exemplification of her name ?
For she
had a right to the name which implies grace
fulness, and occupied, to speak concisely, the
same place among women, as her husband
among men. So that, when it was decided that
he, in whose honour we are met, should be given
to men to submit to the bondage of nature, as

anyone of old has been given by God for the
common advantage, it was neither fitting that
he should be born of other parents, nor that they
should possess another son : and so the two
things suitably concurred. 1 have now, in obe
dience to the Divine law which bids us to pay
all honour to parents, bestowed the firstfruits of
my praises upon those whom I have commem
orated, and proceed to treat of Basil himself,
premising this, which I think will seem true
to all who knew him, that we only need his
own voice to pronounce his eulogium.
For
he is at once a brilliant subject for praise, and
the only one whose powers of speech make
him worthy of treating it.
Beauty indeed and
strength and size, in which I see that most
men rejoice, I concede to anyone who willnot that even in these points he was inferior
to any of those men of small minds who busy
themselves about the body, while he was still
young, and had not yet reduced the flesh by
austerity-but that I may avoid the fate of
unskilful athletes, who waste their strength in
vain efforts after minor objects, and so are
worsted in the crucial struggle, whose results
are victory and the distinction of the crown.
The praise, then, which I shall claim for him is
based upon grounds which no one, I think,
will consider superfluous, or beyond the scope
of my oration.

11. I take it as admitted by men of sense,
that the first of our advantages is education ;
and not only this our more noble form of it,
rhetorical ornaments and
which disregards
glory, and holds to salvation, and beauty in
the objects of our contemplation : but even
that external culture which many Christians
ill-judgingly abhor, as treacherous and dan
For
gerous, and keeping us afar from God.
as we ought not to neglect the heavens, and
earth, and air, and all such things, because
some have wrongly seized upon them, and
honour God's works instead of God : but to
reap what advantage we can from them for our
life and enjoyment, while we avoid their dan
gers; not raising creation, as foolish men do,
in revolt against the Creator, but from the
works of nature apprehending the Worker,*
and, as the divine apostle says, bringing into
captivity every thought to Christ : * and again,
as we know that neither fire, nor food, nor
iron, nor any other of the elements, is of itself
most useful, or most harmful, except accord
ing to the will of those who use it ; and as we
have compounded healthful drugs from certain
of the reptiles ; so from secular literature we

a Rom. L 20, 25.

0 2 Cor. x. 5.

THE PANEGYRIC ON S. BASIL.

have received principles of enquiry and specu
lation, while we have rejected their idolatry,
terror, and pit of destruction.
Nay, even
these have aided us in our religion, by our
perception of the contrast between what is
worse and what is
better, and by gaining
strength for our doctrine from the weakness
of theirs. We must not then dishonour educa
tion, because some men are pleased to do so,
but rather suppose such men to be boorish
and uneducated, desiring all men to be as
they themselves are, in order to hide them
selves in the general, and escape the detection
But come now,
of their want of culture.
and, after this sketch of our subject and these
admissions, let
life of
Basil.

us contemplate the

*

12. In his earliest years he was swathed
and fashioned, in that best and purest fashion
ing which the Divine David speaks of as pro
ceeding day by day," in contrast with that of
the night, under his great father, acknow
ledged in those days by Pontus, as its common
Under him then, as life
teacher of virtue.
and reason grew and rose together, our illus
trious friend was educated : not boasting of a
Thessalian mountain cave, as the workshop of
his virtue, nor of some braggart Centaur,? the
tutor of the heroes of his day : nor was he
taught under such tuition to shoot hares, and
run down fawns, or hunt stags, or excel in
war, or in breaking colts, using the same per
son as teacher and horse at once ; nor nour
ished on the fabulous marrows of stags and
lions, but he was trained in general education,
and practised in the worship of God, and, to
speak concisely, led on by elementary instruc
tions to his future perfection.
For those who
are successful in life or in letters only, while
deficient in the other, seem to me to differ in
nothing from one-eyed men, whose loss
is
great, but their deformity greater, both in
their own eyes, and in
those of others.
While those who attain eminence in both
alike, and are ambidextrous, both possess per
fection, and pass their life with the blessedness
of heaven.
This is what befell him, who had
at home a model of virtue in well-doing, the
very sight of which made him excellent from
the first.
As we see foals and calves skipping
beside their mothers from their birth, so he
too, running close beside his father in foal
like wantonness, without being left far behind
in his lofty impulses toward virtue, or, if you
will, sketching out and showing traces of the
future beauty of his virtue, and drawing the

a Ps. exxxix. 16.
0 Centaur.

Alluding to Chiron, the tutor of Achilles.

outlines of perfection before the time of per
fection arrived.

His subsequent life

13. When sufficiently trained at home, as
he ought to fall short in no form of excellence,
and not be surpassed by the busy bee, which
gathers what is most useful from every flower,
he set out for the city of Cffisarea," to take his
place in the schools there, I mean this illus
trious city of ours, for it was the guide and
mistress of my studies, the metropolis of let
ters, no less than of the cities which she excels
and reigns over : and if any one were to de
prive her of her literary power, he would
rob her of her fairest and special distinction.
Other cities take pride in other ornaments, of
ancient or of recent date, that they may have
something to be described or to be seen.
Letters form our distinction here, and are our
badge, as if upon the field of arms or on the
stage.
let those detail
who trained him, or enjoyed his training, as
to what he was to his masters, what he was to
his classmates, equalling the former, surpass
ing the latter in every form of culture, what
renown he won in a short time from all, both
of the common people, and of the leaders of
the state ; by showing both a culture beyond
his years, and a steadfastness of character be
yond his culture. An orator among orators,
even before the chair of the rhetoricians, f a
philosopher among philosophers, even before
the doctrines of philosophers : highest of all a
priest among Christians even before the priest
So much deference was paid to him
hood.
in every respect by all.
Eloquence was his
by-work, from which he culled enough to
make it an assistance to him in Christian
philosophy, since power of this kind is needed
to set forth the objects of our contemplation.
For a mind which cannot express itself is like
the motion of a man in a lethargy.
His pur
suit was philosophy, and breaking from the
world, and fellowship with God, by concern
ing himself, amid things below, with things
above, and winning, where all is unstable and
fluctuating, the things which are stable and
remain.

14. Thence to Byzantium, the imperial city
of the East, for it was distinguished by the emi
nence of its rhetorical and philosophic teach
ers, whose most valuable lessons he soon assimi
lated by the quickness and force of his powers :
thence he was sent by God, and by his gener
ous craving for culture, to Athens the home of
Athens, which has been to me, if to
letters.
a Casarea. the Cappa<locian city, as seems plain from the con
Yet Tillcmont and Killius incline to think Ca:sarea in Pales
0 Chair, etc., Before he had studied rhetoric and philosophy.

text.
tine is meant.

4QO

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

any one, a city truly of gold, and the pa
troness of all that is good.
For it brought me
to know Basil more perfectly, though he had
not been unknown to me before ; and in my
pursuit of letters,
I attained to happiness ;
and in another fashion had the same experi
ence as Saul," who, seeking his father's asses,
found a kingdom, and gained incidentally
what was of more importance than the object
which he had in view.
Hitherto my course
has been clear, leading me in my encomiums
along a level and easy, in fact, a king's high
way : henceforth I know not how to speak or
whither to turn : for my task is becoming ar
duous.
For here I am anxious, and seize
this opportunity to add from my own experi
ence somewhat to my speech, and to dwell a
little upon the recital of the causes and cir
cumstances which originated our friendship,
or to speak more strictly, our unity of life and
nature.
For as our eyes are not ready to
turn from attractive objects, and, if we violent
ly tear them away, are wont to return to
them again ; so do we linger in our descrip
I am afraid
tion of what is most sweet to us.
of the difficulty of the undertaking.
I will
try, however, to use all possible moderation.
And if I am at all overpowered by my regret,
pardon this most righteous of all feelings, the
absence of which would be a great loss, in the
eyes of men of feeling.

15. We were contained by Athens, like two
branches of some river -stream, for after leaving
the common fountain of our fatherland, we had
been separated in our varying pursuit of cul
ture, and were now again united by the im
pulsion of God no less than by our own
agreement.
I preceded him by a little, but
he soon followed me, to be welcomed with
great and brilliant hope.
For he was versed
in many languages, before his arrival, and it
was a great thing for either of us to outstrip
the other in the attainment of some object of
our study. And I may well add, as a seasoning
to my speech, a short narrative, which will be
a reminder to those who know it, a source of
information to those who do not.
Most of the
young men at Athens in their folly are mad
after rhetorical skill-not only those who are
ignobly born and unknown, but even the noble
and illustrious, in the general mass of young
men difficult to keep under control.
They
are just like men devoted to horses and exhi
bitions, as we see, at the horse-races ; they
leap,^ they shout, raise clouds of dust, they

a t Sam. ix. 3.
(5 They leap, etc.

This passage refers to the spectators who
unite in sympathy with, and imitate as far as possible, in their ex
citement, the actions of, those who drive the chariots in the races.

drive in their seats, they beat the air, (instead
of the horses) with their fingers as whips, they
yoke and unyoke the horses, though they are
none of theirs : they readily exchange with
one another drivers, horses, positions, leaders :
and who are they who da this ?
Often poor
and needy fellows, without the means of sup
port for a single day.
This is just how the
students feel in regard to their own tutors,
and their rivals, in their eagerness to increase
their own numbers and thereby enrich them.
The matter is absolutely absurd and silly.
Cities, roads, harbours, mountain tops, coast
lines, are seized upon-in short, every part of
Attica, or of the rest of Greece, with most of
the inhabitants ;
for even these they have
divided between th^ rival parties.

16. Whenever any newcomer arrives, and
falls into the hands of those who seize upon
him, either by force or willingly, they ob
serve this Attic law, of combined jest and
He is first conducted to the house
\ earnest.
of one of those who were the first to receive
j him, or of his friends, or kinsmen, or country
men, or of those who are eminent in debating
power, and purveyors of arguments, and there
fore especially honoured among them ; and their
reward consists in the gain of adherents. He is ,
next subjected to the raillery of any one who)
will, with the intention I suppose, of check
ing the conceit of the newcomers, and reduc
ing them to subjection at once.
The raillery
is of a more insolent or argumentative kind,
according .to the boorishness or refinement of
the railer : and the performance, which seems
i very fearful and brutal to those who do not
know it, is to those who have experienced it
very pleasant and humane : for its threats are
Next, he is con
feigned rather than real.
ducted in procession through the market place
to the bath.
The procession is formed by
those who are charged with it in the young
man's honour, who arrange themselves in two
ranks separated by an interval, and precede
him to the bath.
But when they have ap
proached it, they shout and leap wildly, as if
possessed, shouting that they must not ad
vance, but stay, since the bath will not admit
them ; and at the same time frighten the
1 youth by furiously knocking at the doors :
I then allowing him to enter, they now present
him with his freedom, and receive him after
the bath as an equal, and one of themselves.
This they consider the most pleasant part of
the ceremony, as being a speedy exchange
and relief from annoyances. On this occasion
I not only refused to put to shame my friend
the great Basil, out of respect for the gravity of

THE PANEGYRIC ON S. BASIL.

his character, and the ripeness of his reasoning
powers, but also persuaded all the rest of the
students to treat him likewise, who happened
For he was from the first
not to know him.
respected by most of them, his reputation
having preceded him.
The result was that
he was the only one to escape the general
rule, and be accorded a greater honour than
belongs to a freshman's position.

17. This was the prelude of our friendship.
This was the kindling spark of our union :
thus we felt the wound of mutual love. Then
something of this kind happened, for I think
I find the
it right not to omit even this.
Armenians to be not 'a simple race, but very
crafty and cunning.
At this time some of
his special comrades and friends, who had
been intimate with him even in the early
days of his father's instruction, for they were
members of his school, came up to him under
the guise of friendship, but with envious, and
not kindly intent, and put to him questions
of a, disputatious rather than rational kind,
trying to overwhelm him at the first onset,
having known his original natural endow
ments, and unable to brook the honour he
had then received.
For they thought it a
strange thing that they who had put on their
gowns, and been exercised in shouting, should
not get the better of one who was a stranger
and a novice.
I also, in my vain love for
Athens, and trusting to their professions with
out perceiving their envy, when they were
giving way, and turning their backs, since I
was indignant that in their persons the repu
tation of Athens should be destroyed, and so
speedily put to shame, supported the young
men, and restored the argument ; and by the
aid of my additional weight, for in such cases
a small addition makes all the difference, and,
as the poet says, " made equal their heads in
the fray." 0
But, when I perceived the secret
motive of the dispute, which could no longer
be kept under, and was at last clearly exposed,
I at once drew back, and retired from their
ranks, to range myself on his side, and made
the victory decisive.
He was at once de
lighted at what had happened, for his sagacity
was remarkable, and being filled with zeal, to
describe him fully in Homer's language, he
pursued in confusion 0 with argument those
valiant youths, and, smiting them with syllo
gisms, only ceased when they were utterly
routed, and he had distinctly won the hon
ours due to his power.
Thus was kindled
again, no longer a spark, but a manifest and
conspicuous blaze of friendship.

a Homer II. xi. 72.

0 lb. xi. 496.

they

such

18. Their efforts having thus proved fruit
less, while they severely blamed their own
rashness,
annoyance
cherished
against me that it broke out into open hos
tility, and a charge of treachery, not only
to them, but to Athens herself: inasmuch
as they had been confuted and put to shame
at the first onset, by a single student, who
had not even had time to gain confidence.
He moreover, according to that human feel
ing, which makes us, when we have all at
once attained to the high hopes which we
have cherished, look upon their results as in
ferior to our expectation, he, I say, was dis
pleased and annoyed, and could take no de
light in his arrival.
He was seeking for what
he had expected, and called Athens an empty
happiness.
I however tried to remove his an
noyance, both by argumentative encounter,
and by the enchantments of reasoning ; alleg
ing, as is true, that the disposition of a man
cannot at once be detected, without a long
time and more constant association, and that
culture likewise is not made known to those
who make trial of her, after a few efforts and
in a short time.
In this way I restored his
cheerfulness, and by this mutual experience,
he was the more closely united to me.

as time

19. And when,

went on, we
acknowledged our mutual affection, and that
philosophy" was our aim, we were all in all
to one another, housemates, messmates, inti
mates, with one object in life, or an affection
for each other ever growing warmer and
stronger.
Love for bodily attractions, since
its objects are fleeting, is as fleeting as the
flowers of fspring.
For the flame cannot sur
vive, when the fuel is exhausted, and departs
! along with that which kindles it, nor does de
sire abide, when its incentive wastes away.
I But love which is godly and under restraint,
since its object is stable, not only is more
lasting, but, the fuller its vision of beauty
grows, the more closely does it bind to itself
and to one another the hearts of those whose
This is the
love has one and the same object.
I feel that I am
law of our superhuman love.
! being unduly borne away, and I know not
how to enter upon this point, yet I cannot
restrain myself from describing it.
For if 1
have omitted anything, it seems, immediately
afterwards, of pressing importance, and of
more consequence than what I had preferred
And if any one would carry me
to mention.
tyrannically forward, I become like the polyps,
which when they are being dragged from their
holes, cling with their suckers to the rocks,
a Philosophy^ here, a truly Christian life.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

and cannot be detached, until the last of these
has had exerted upon it its necessary share of
force.
If then you give me leave, I have my
request, if not I must take it from myself.

20. Such were our feelings for each other,
when we had thus supported, as Pindar" has
it, our "well-built chamber with pillars of
gold," as we advanced under the united in
fluences of God's grace and our own affec
tion. Oh ! how can I mention these things
without tears.

We were impelled by equal hopes, in a pur
suit especially obnoxious to envy, that of let
Yet envy we knew not, and emulation
ters.
was of service to us. We struggled, not each
to gain the first place for himself, but to yield
it to the other ; for we made each other's
reputation to be our own. We seemed to
have one soul, inhabiting two bodies. And
if we mast not believe those whose doctrine is
" All things 0 are in all ; " yet in our case it
was worthy of belief, so did we live in and
with each other.
The sole business of both
of us was virtue, and living for the hopes to
come, having retired from this world, before
our actual departure hence.
With a view to
this, were directed all our life and actions, un
der the guidance of th"e commandment, as we
sharpened upon each other our weapons of
virtue ; and if this is not a great thing for me
to say, being a rule and standard to each
other, for the distinction between what was
right and what was not.
Our associates were
not the most dissolute, but the most sober of
our comrades ; not the most pugnacious, but
the most peaceable, whose intimacy was most
profitable : knowing that it is more easy to be
tainted with vice, than to impart virtue; just
as we can more readily be infected with a
Our most cherdisease, than bestow health.
' ished studies were not the most pleasant, but
I the most excellent ; this being one means of
forming young minds in a virtuous or vicious
mould.

21. Two ways were known to us, the first
of greater value, the second of smaller consequence: the one leading to our sacred build
ings and the teachers there, the other to secu
All others we left to those
lar instructors.
who would pursue them-to feasts, theatres,
meetings, banquets.
For nothing is in my
opinion of value, save that which leads to vir
tue and to the improvement of its devotees.
Different men have different names, derived
from their fathers, their families, their pur
suits, their exploits: we had but one great

)
f

o Olymp. Od. vi. 1.
0 Ail things, elc, i.e. Empcdocles and Anaxagoras.

business and name-to be and to be called
Christians-of which we thought more than
Gyges ■ of the turning of his ring, if this is not
a legend, on which depended his Lydian sov
ereignty :
or than Midas P did of the gold
through which he perished, in answer to his
prayer that all he had might turn to goldanother Phrygian legend.
For why should
I speak of the arrow of the Hyperborean
Abaris,* or of the Argive Pegasus,4 to whom
flight through the air was not of such conse
quence as was to us our rising to God, through
the help of, and with each other ?
Hurtful as
Athens was to others in spiritual things, and
this is of no slight consequence to the pious,
for the city is richer in those evil riches-idols
-than the rest of Greece, and it is hard to
avoid being carried along with their devotees
and adherents, yet we, our minds being closed
up and fortified against this, suffered no in
jury.
On the contrary, strange as it may
seem, we were thus the more confirmed in the
faith, from our perception of their trickery
and unreality, which led us to despise these
divinities in the very home of their worship.
And if there is, or is believed to be, a river*
flowing with fresh water through the sea, or
an animal f which can dance in fire, the con
sumer of all things, such were we among all
our comrades.

22. And, best of all, we were surrounded
by a far from ignoble band, under his instruc
tion and guidance, and delighting in the same
objects, as we ran on foot beside that Lydian
car,1' his own course and disposition : and
so we became famous, not only among our
own teachers and comrades, but even through
out Greece, and especially in the eyes of its
most distinguished men. We even passed be
yond its boundaries, as was made clear by the
evidence of many.
For our instructors were
known to all who knew Athens, and all who
knew them, knew us, as the subject of conver
sation, being actually looked upon, or heard
of by report, as an illustrious pair.
Orestes
and Pylades6 were in their eyes nothing to

a Gyges is said to have had a ring by means of which he could
make himself invisible, and by thus using it was able to scire on
the Kingdom of Lydia.
ti Midas, said to have had the power granted of turning every
thing he touched to gold. Accordingly, as this power took effect on
his food, he died of hunger.
y Abarix, a Hyperborean priest of Apollo. v,h^ was said to have
given him an arrow, on which he rode through the air.
5 Pegasus, called Argive, because caught near to Argos, the
winged horse, by the aid of which bcllerophon was said to have
destroyed the Chimajra-

e A river, etc- The Alphcus, a river of Arcadia.
£ Animal- The salamander, a lizard said to be impervious to
Piin. N. H. x. 67.
n Lydian car, proverbial expression for anything whose speed
B Orestes and Pylades, types of close comradeship in Greek

the action of fire.
distances all competitors.
tragedies.

THE PANEGYRIC ON S. BASIL.

us, or the sons of Molione,a the wonders of
the Homeric scroll, celebrated for their union
in misfortune, and their splendid driving, as
But I
they shared in reins and whip alike.
have been unawares betrayed into praising
myself, in a manner I would not have allowed
in another.
is no wonder that I
gained here in some advantage from his friend
ship, and that, as in life he aided me in virtue,
so since his departure he has contributed to
my renown.
But I must return to my proper
course.

And it

23. Who possessed such a degree of the
prudence of old age, even before his hair was
gray ?
Since it is by this that Solomon de
fines old age.0 Who was so respectful to both
old and young, not only of our contempo
raries, but even of those who long preceded
Who, owing to his character, was
him ?
less in need of education ?
Yet who, even
with his character, was so imbued with learn
ing? What branch of learning did he not
traverse ; and that with unexampled success,
as no one else passed
passing through all,
through any one of them : and attaining such
eminence in each, as if it had been his sole
study ?
The two great sources of power in
the arts and sciences, ability and application,
For, because
were in him equally combined.
of the pains he took, he had but little need
of natural quickness, and his natural quickness
made it unnecessary for him to take pains ;
and such was the cooperation and unity of
both, that it was hard to see for which of the
two he was more remarkable. Who had such
power in Rhetoric, which breathes » with the
might of fire, different as his disposition was
from that of rhetoricians ? Who in Gram
mar, which perfects our tongues in Greek and
compiles history, and presides over metres
and legislates for poems? Who in Philos
ophy, that really lofty and high reaching
science, whether practical and speculative, or
in that part of it whose oppositions and
struggles are concerned with logical demon
strations ; which is called Dialectic, and in
which it was more difficult to elude his verbal
toils, if need required, than to escape from
Of Astronomy, Geome
the Labyrinths?4
try, and numerical proportion he had such a
grasp, that he could not be baffled by those
who are clever in such sciences : excessive
application to them he despised, as useless to

a Sons of Afo/ione, Eurytus and Ctcatus. Horn. II. ii. 621. Their
y Which breathes, a phrase used Horn. II.
182 of the
& Labyrinths, the mythical mazes of Crete, the home of the

0 Wisd. iv. 8.
vi.

father was Actor.
Chimacra.
Minotaur.

those whose desire is godliness : so that it is
possible to admire what he chose more than
what he neglected , or what he neglected more
Medicine, the result of
than what he chose.
philosophy and laboriousness, was rendered
necessary for him by his physical delicacy,
and his care of the sick.
From these begin
nings he attained to a mastery of the art, not
only in its empirical and practical branches,
but also in its theory and principles.
But
what are these, illustrious though they be,
compared with the moral discipline of the
man ? To those who have had experience of
him, Minos and Rhadamanthus" were mere
trifles, whom the Greeks thought worthy of
the meadows of Asphodel and the Elysian
plains, which are their representations of our
Paradise, derived from those books of Moses
which are also ours, for though their terms
are different, this is what they refer to under
other names.

24. Such was the case, and his galleon
was laden with all the learning attainable by
the nature of man ; for beyond Cadiz 0 there
is no passage.
There was left no other need
but that of rising to a more perfect life, and
grasping those hopes upon which we were
agreed.
The day of our departure was at
hand, with its attendant speeches of farewell,
and of escort, its invitations to return, its
lamentations, embraces and tears.
For there
is nothing so painful to any one, as is separa
tion from Athens and one another, to those
who have been comrades there. On that oc
casion was seen a piteous spectacle, worthy
of record.
Around us were grouped our fel
low students and classmates and some of our
teachers, protesting amid entreaties, violence,
and persuasion, that, whatever happened, they
would not let us go ; saying and doing every
thing that men in distress could do.
And
here I will bring an accusation against my
self, and also, daring though it be, against that
For he, by
divine and irreproachable soul.
detailing the reasons of his anxiety to return
home, was able to prevail over their desire to
retain him, and they were compelled, though
with reluctance, to agree to his departure.
But I was left behind at Athens, partly, to
say the truth, because I had been prevailed
on-partly because he had betrayed me, hav
ing been persuaded to forsake and hand over
to his captors one who refused to forsake him.
For
A thing incredible, before it happened.

a Minos and Rhadamanthus, Kings of Crete and Lycia,
fabled tn have been made judges in the lover world because of
their justice when on earth.
13 lieyond Cadiz. The Atlantic Ocean teyond Cadiz was re
puted impassable by the ancient*.

it was like cutting one body into two, to the
destruction of either part, or the severance of
two bullocks who have shared the same 'man
ger and the same yoke, amid pitiable bellowings- after one another in protest against
the separation.
However, my loss was not of
long duration, for I could not long bear to be
seen in piteous plight, nor to have to account
to every one for our separation : so, after a
brief stay at Athens, my longing desire made
me, like the horse in Homer, to burst the
bonds of those who restrained me, and pranc
ing o'er the plains, rush to my mate.

25. Upon our return, after a slight indul
gence to the world and the stage, sufficient to
gratify the general desire, not from any in
clination to theatrical display, we soon be
came independent, and, after being promoted
from the rank of beardless boys to that of
men, made bold advances along the road of
philosophy, for though no longer together,
since envy would not allow this, we were
united by our eager desire.
The city of
Caesarea took possession of him, as a second
founder and patron, but in course of time he
was occasionally absent, as a matter of neces
sity due to our separation, and with a view to
our determined course of philosophy.
Duti
ful attendance on my aged parents, and a suc
cession of misfortunes kept me apart from him,
perhaps without right or justice, but so it was.
And to this cause I am inclined to ascribe all
the inconsistency and difficulty which have be
fallen my life, and the hindrances in the way
of philosophy, which have been unworthy of
my desire and purpose.
But as for my fate,
let it lead whither God pleases, only may its
course be the better for his intercessions.
As
regards himself, the manifold love of God to
ward man,a and His providential care for our
race did, after shewing forth his merits under
many intervening
circumstances with ever
greater brilliancy, set him up as a conspicu
ous and celebrated light for the Church, by
advancing him to the holy thrones of the
priesthood, to blaze forth, through the single
city of Caesarea, to the whole world.
And in
what manner?
Not by precipitate advance
ment, nor by at once cleansing and making
him wise, as is the wont of many present can
didates for preferment : but bestowing upon
him the honour in the due order of spiritual
advancement.

26. For I do not praise the disorder and
irregularity which sometimes exist among us,
even in those who preside over the sanctuary.

private,

' I do not venture, nor is it just, to accuse them
all.
I approve the nautical custom, which
first gives the oar to the future steersman, and
afterward leads him to the stern, and entrusts
him with the command, and seats him at the
helm, only after a long course of striking the
As is the case
sea and observing the winds.
again in military affairs :
captain,
This order is the best and most ad
general.
vantageous for their subordinates.
And if it
were so in our case, it would be of great ser
vice.
But, as it is, there is a danger of the
holiest of all offices being the most ridiculous
For promotion depends not upon
among us.
virtue, but upon villany ; and the sacred
thrones fall not to the most worthy, but to the
most powerful.
Samuel, the seer into futu
rity, is among the prophets : but Saul, the re
Rehoboam, the
jected one, is also there.
son of Solomon, is among the kings, but so
also
is Jeroboam, the slave and apostate.
And there is not a physician, or a painter who
has not first studied the nature of diseases, or
mixed many colours, or practised drawing :
but a prelate is easily found, without laborious
training, with a reputation of recent date,
being sown and springing up in a moment, as
the legend ■ of the giants goes. We manu
facture those who are holy in a day, and bid
those to be wise, who have had no instruction,
and have contributed nothing before to their
dignity, except the will.
So one man is con
tent with an inferior position, and abides in
his low estate, who is worthy of a lofty one,
and has
meditated much on the inspired
words, and has reduced the flesh by many
laws into subjection to the spirit : while the
other haughtily takes precedence, and raises
his eyebrow over his betters, and does not
tremble at his position, nor is he appalled at
the sight, seeing the disciplined man beneath
him ; and wrongly supposes himself to be his
superior in wisdom as well as in rank, having
lost his senses under the influence of his posi
tion.

27. Not so our great and illustrious Basil.
In this grace, as in all others, he was a public
example.
For he first read to the people the
sacred books, while already able to expound
them, nor did he deem himself worthy of this
rank > in the sanctuary, and thus proceeded to
praise the Lord in the seat of the Presbyters, *
and next in that of the Bishops, attaining the
office neither by stealth nor by violence, in
stead of seeking for the honour, being sought

a Tit. iii. 4.

a The legend, i.e., of Cadmus who sowed at Thebes the
y Ps. cvii. 32.

dragon's teeth from which sprung giants.
0 This rank) i.e., the office of lector, or Reader.

THE PANEGYRIC ON S. BASIL.

for by it, and receiving it not as a human
favour, but as from God and divine.
The ac
count of his bishopric must be deferred : over
his subordinate ministry let us linger a while,
for indeed it had almost escaped me, in the
midst of my discourse.

28. There arose a disagreement between
him and his predecessor a in the rule over this
its source and character it is best to
Church :
pass over in silence, yet it arose.
He was a
man in other respects far from ignoble, and
admirable for his piety, as was proved by the
persecution of that time, and the opposition
to him, yet his feeling against Basil was one
to which men are liable.
For Momus seizes
not only upon the common herd, but on the
best of men, so that it belongs to God alone
to be utterly uninfluenced by and proof against
All the more eminent and wise
such feelings.
portion of the Church was roused against him,
if those are wiser than the majority who have
separated themselves from the world and con
secrated their life to God. I mean the Nazaritesp of our day, and those who devote them
selves to such pursuits.
They were annoyed
that their chief v should be neglected, in
sulted, and rejected, and they ventured upon a
most dangerous proceeding. They determined
to revolt and break off from the body of the
Church, which admits of no faction, severing
along with themselves no small fraction of the
people, both of the lower ranks, and of those
This was most easy, owing to
of position.
In the first place,
three very strong reasons.
the man was held in repute, beyond any other,
I think, of the philosophers of our time, and
able, if he wished, to inspire with courage the
conspirators.
Next, his opponent 8 was sus
pected by the city, in consequence of the tu
mult which accompanied his institution, of
having obtained his preferment in an arbitrary
manner, not according to the laws and canons.
Also there were present some of the bishops *
of the West, drawing to themselves all the
orthodox members of the Church.

29. What then did our noble friend, the dis
ciple of the Peaceable One ?
It was not his
habit to resist his traducers or partisans, nor
was it his part to fight, or rend the body of
the Church, which was from other reasons the
subject of attack, and hardly bestead, from

y Their chi.-f. i.e . Basil.

a /fis predecessor, Euscbius, Archbishop of Otsarea.
3 Wnzarites, i.e.. the monks.
6 His opponent, lit. " the man who was vexing him," i.e.. Eusc
bius.
Clemcncct
c Bishops. It is uncertain who these bishops were.
thinks they were Lucifer and Kusebius of Vcrcellar.
Hut a sepa
ration had ere this Liken place between them in consequence of
Nor is tt certain that Kusebius
Lucifer's rash action at Antioch.
had not already returned to Italy.

the great power of the heretics. With my ad
vice and earnest encouragement on the point,
he set out from the place with me into Pontus,
and presided over the abodes of contemplation
there.
He himself too founded one • worthy
of mention, as he welcomed the desert to
gether with Elijah and John,*9 those professors
of austerity ; thinking this to be more profit
able for him than to form any design in refer
ence to the present juncture unworthy of his
philosophy, and to ruin in a time of storm the
straight course which he was making, where
the surges of disputation were lulled to a calm.
Yet wonderfully philosophic though his re
tirement was, we shall find his return still
more wonderful.

For thus it was.

30. While we were thus engaged, there sud
denly arose a cloud full of hail, with destruc
tive roar, overwhelming every Church upon
which it burst and seized : an Emperor,* most
1 fond of gold and most hostile to Christ, in-
' fected with these two most serious diseases,
insatiate avarice and blasphemy ; a persecu
tor in succession to the persecutor, and, in
succession to the apostate, not indeed an apos
tate, though no better to Christians, or rather,
I to the more devout and pure party of Chris-
| tians, who worship the Trinity, which I call
1 the only true devotion and saving doctrine.
1 For'we do not measure out the Godhead into
portions, nor banish from Itself by unnatural
estrangements the one and unapproachable
Nature ; nor cure one evil by another, de
stroying the godless confusion of Sabellius by
a more impious severance and division ; which
was the error of Arius, whose name declares .

j his madness,5 the disturber and destroyer of
a great part of the Church.
For he did not
honour the Father, by dishonouring His off
spring with his unequal degrees of Godhead.
But we recognize one glory e of the Father,
the equality of the Only-begotten ; and one
i glory of the Son, that of the Spirit. And we
hold that, to subordinate any of the Three, is
to destroy the whole.
For we worship and
acknowledge Them as Three in their proper
ties,f but One in their Godhead. He how
ever had no such idea, being unable to look

y An JZtnfieror, Valcns.

this day in Eastern monasteries. Cf. *} 34.

a One, * monastery. The rule of S. Basil is widely observed to
B John, Saint John Itaptist.
i Madness, cf. ii. 37. Note.
« Glory. The word &>fa means both 11 doctrine " and 14 glory.**
Petav. de Trin. iv. Proem. $2 gives
f Properties. _ iiiOrnTcc.
( S.
other Greek equivalent terms. The Latin terms are " notiones
Thorn. Aq. Snmma. I. xxxit. qu. 2), " proprietates" or relationes.
They denote those relative "attributes ad intra ** which distinguish
I the Persons, if thev do not actually constitute the Personality of
j each of the Three Divine Persons. They are ivc in number, Unhegottennrss. Paternity, Filiation, active ano passive Spirabon.
Perhaps the neaiest English equivalent is " characteristic (or dis-

• tinctivc) relations.*'-CfOrat. xlii. 15.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

up, but being debased by those who led him,
he dared to debase along with himself even
the Nature of the Godhead, and became a
wicked creature reducing Majesty to bondage,
and aligning with creation the uncreated and
timeless Nature..

31. Such was his mind, and with such im
piety he took the field against us.
For we
must consider it to be nothing else than a bar
baric inroad which, instead of destroying walls,
cities and houses, and other things of little
worth, made with hands and capable of res
toration, spent its ravages upon men's souls.
A worthy army joined in his assault, the evil
rulers of the Churches, the bitter governors
of his world-wide Empire.
Some of the
Churches they now held, some they were as
saulting, others they hoped to gain by the
already exercised influence of the Emperor,
and the violence which he threatened.
But
in their purpose of perverting our own, their
confidence was specially based on the smallness of mind of those whom I have mentioned,
the inexperience of our prelate, and the in
firmities which prevailed among us.
The
struggle would be fierce : the zeal of numer
ous troops was far from ignoble, but their
array was weak, from the want of a leader and
strategist to contend for them with the might
of the Word and of the Spirit.
What then
did this noble and magnanimous and truly
Christ-loving soul ? No need of many words
to urge his presence and aid.
At once when
he saw me on my mission, for the struggle on
behalf of the faith was common to us both, he
yielded to my entreaty ; and decided by a
most excellent distinction, based on spiritual
reasons, that the time for punctiliousness (if
indeed we may give way to such feelings at
all) is a time of security, but that forbearance
is required in
the hour of necessity. He
immediately returned with me from Pontus,
and as a zealous volunteer took his place in
the fight for the endangered truth, and de
voted himself to the service of his mother, the
Church.

32. Did then his actual efforts fall short of
his preliminary zeal ?
Were they directed by
courage, but not by prudence, or by skill,
wrhile he shrank from danger?
Or, in spite
of their unexampled perfection on all these
points, was there left in him some trace of ir
ritation ?
He was at once com
pletely reconciled, and took part in every
plan and effort.
He removed all the thorns
and stumbling blocks which were in our way,
upon which tjie enemy relied in their attack
Hi.\ took hold of one, grasped an
upon us.

Far from it.

other, thrust away a third. He became to
some a stout wall and rampart,0 to others an
axe breaking the rock in pieces,^ or a fire
among the thorns,» as the divine Scripture
says, easily destroying those fagots who were
insulting the Godhead.
And if his Barnabas,
who speaks and records these things, was of
service to Paul in the struggle, it is to Paul
that thanks are due, for choosing and making
him his comrade in the strife.

33. Thus the enemy failed, and, base men
as they were, for the first time were then
basely put to shame and worsted, learning not
to be ready to despise the Cappadocians, of all
men in the world, whose special qualities are
firmness in the faith, and loyal devotion to
the Trinity ; to Whom is due their unity and
strength, and from Whom they receive an
even greater and stronger assistance than they
are able to give.
Basil's next business and
purpose was to conciliate the prelate, to allay
suspicion, to persuade all men that the irri
tation which had been felt was due to the
temptation and effort of the Evil one, in his
envy of virtuous concord : carefully comply
ing with the laws of obedience and spiritual
Accordingly he visited him, with in
order.
struction and advice.
While obedient to his
wishes, he was everything to him, a good
counsellor, a skilful assistant, an expounder of
the Divine Will, a guide of conduct, a staff
for his old age, a support of the faith, most
trusty of those within, most practical of those
without, in a word, as much inclined to good
will, as he had been thought to hostility.
And so the power of the Church came into
his hands almost, if not quite, to an equal de
gree with the occupant of the see.
For in
return for his good-will, he was requited with
authority.- And their harmony and combina
tion of power was wonderful.
The one was
the leader of the people, the other of their
leader, like a lion-keeper, skilfully soothing
For, having been re
the possessor of power.
cently installed in the see, and still somewhat
under the influence of the world, and not yet
furnished with the things of the Spirit, in the
midst of the eddying tide of enemies assault
ing the Church, he was in need of some one
to take him by the hand and sup]X>rt him.
Accordingly he accepted the alliance, and
imagined himself the conqueror of one who
had conquered him.

34. Of his care for and protection of the
Church, there are many other tokens ; his
boldness towards the governors and other

a Jer. i. 18.

0 lb. xxiii. 39.

Y Ps. cxviii. 12.

\

THE PANEGYRIC ON S. BASIL.

famine,

There was a

most powerful men in the city : the decisions
of disputes, accepted without hesitation, and
made effective by his simple word, his in
clination being held to be decisive : his sup
port of the needy, most of them in spiritual,
not a few also in physical distress : for this
also often influences the soul and reduces it to
subjection by its kindness ; the support of the
poor, the entertainment of strangers, the care
of maidens ; legislation a written and unwrit
ten for the monastic life : arrangements of
prayers,0 adornments of the sanctuary, and
other ways in which the true man of God,
working for God, would benefit the people :
one being especially important and note
the most
worthy.
severe one ever recorded.
The city was in
distress, and there was no source of assistance,
For maritime
or relief for the calamity.
cities are able to bear such times of need
without difficulty, by an exchange of their
own products for what is imported : but an
inland city like ours can neither turn its
superfluity to profit, nor supply its need, by
either disposing of what we have, or import
ing what we have not: but the hardest part
of all such distress is, the insensibility and in
satiability of those who possess supplies.
For
they watch their opportunities, and turn the
distress to profit, and thrive upon misfortune :
heeding not that he who shows mercy to the
poor, lendeth to the Lord,v nor that he that
withholdeth
curse
him : 5 nor any other of the promises to the
philanthropic, and threats against the inhu
man.
But they are too insatiate, in their illjudged policy ; for while they shut up their
bowels against their
fellows, they shut up
those of God against themselves, forgetting
that their need of Him is greater than others'
need of them.
Such are the buyers and
sellers of corn, who neither respect their fel
lows, nor are thankful to God, from Whom
are
conies what they have, while
straitened.

the people

others

corn,

shall

35. He indeed could neither rain bread
from heaven by prayer,' to nourish an es
caped people in the wilderness,i nor supply
fountains of food without cost from the depth
of vessels which are filled by being emptied,1
and so, by an amazing return for her hospital
ity, support one who supported him ; nor
feed thousands of men with five loaves whose
very fragments were a further supply for many

Cf. §30.
a Legislation.
d Pr ayers. The liturgy of S. Hasil together with that of S.
Chrysnstom are
still the authorized liturgies of the Eastern
y Prov. xix. ij.
Church.
« Exod. xvi. 15.

1 Kings xvii. 14.

£ Pa. Ixxviii. 24.

6 lb. xi. 26.

rj

tables."
These were the works of Moses and
Elijah, and my God, from Whom they too de
rived their power.
Perhaps also they were
characteristic of their time and its circum
stances : since signs are for unbelievers not for
those who believe.P But he did devise and exe
cute with the same faith things which corre
spond to them, and tend in the same direction.
For by his word and advice he opened the
stores of those who possessed them, and so,
according to the Scripture dealt food to the
hungry,'!' and satisfied the poor with bread,5
and fed them in the time of dearth,' and filled
the hungry souls with good things. f And in
what way ? for this is no slight addition to
his praise. He gathered together the victims
of the famine with some who were but slightly
recovering from it, men and women, infants,
old men, every age which was in distress, and
obtaining contributions of all sorts of food
which can relieve famine, set before them
basins of soup and such meat as was found
preserved among us, on which the poor live.
Then, imitating the ministry of Christ, Who,
girded with a towel, did not disdain to wash
the disciples' feet, using for this purpose the
aid of his own servants, and also of his fellow
servants, he attended to the bodies and souls
of those who needed it, combining personal
respect with the supply of their necessity, and
so giving them a double relief.

36. Such was our young furnisher of corn,
and second Joseph : though of him we can
For the one made a
say somewhat more.
gain from the famine, and bought up Egypt i
in his philanthropy, by managing the time
of plenty with a view to the time of famine,
turning to account the dreams of others for
But the other's services were
that purpose.
gratuitous, and his succour of the famine
gained no profit, having only one object, to
win kindly feelings by kindly treatment, and
to gain by his rations of corn the heavenly
Further he provided ' the nourish
blessings.
ment of the Word, and that more perfect
bounty and distribution, which is really heav
enly and from on high-if the word be that
bread of angels,9 wherewith souls are fed and
given to drink, who are a hungered for God,'
and seek for a food which does not pass away
or fail, but abides forever.
This food he,
who was the poorest and most needy man
whom I have known, supplied in rich abun
dance to the relief not of a famine of bread,

a S. Matt. xiv. to.
6 Ps. cxxxii. 15.
£ lb. cvii. g ; S. Luke i. 53.
0 Ps. Ixxviii. 35.

& 1 Cor. xiv. 22.

e lb. xxxiii. 10.

y Iv^i. Iviii. 7.
n Gen. xli. 1 et seq.

t lb. Ixiii. 1 ; S. Matt. v. 6.

4o8

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

nor of a thirst for water, but a longing for that
Word a which is really lifegiving and nourish
ing, and causes to grow to spiritual manhood
him who is duly fed thereon.

37. After these and similar actions-why
need I stay to mention them all ?-when the
prelate whose name 0 betokened his godliness
had passed away, having sweetly breathed his
last in Basil's arms, he was raised to the lofty j
throne of a Bishop, not without difficulty or
without the envious struggles of the prelates of
his native land, on whose side were found the
greatest scoundrels of the city.
But the Holy
Spirit must needs win the day-and indeed
For He brought
the victory was decisive.
from a distance, to anoint him, men v illus
trious and zealous for godliness, and with
them the new Abraham, our Patriarch, I
mean my father, in regard to whom an extra
For, failing as he
ordinary thing happened.
was from the number of his years, and worn
away almost to his last breath by disease, he
ventured on the journey to give assistance by
his vote, relying on the aid of the Spirit.
In
brief, he was placed in his litter, as a corpse
is laid in its tomb, to return in the freshness
and strength of youth, with head erect, hav
ing been strengthened by the imposition of
hands and unction, and, it is not too much to
say by the head of him who was anointed.
This must be added to the instances of old
time, which prove that labour bestows health,
zealous purpose raises the dead, and old age
leaps up when anointed by the Spirit.

38. Having thus been deemed worthy of
the office of prelate, as it is seemly that men
should who have lived such a life, and won
such favour and consideration, he did not
disgrace, by his subsequent conduct, either
his own philosophy, or the hopes of those
who had trusted him.
But he ever so far
surpassed himself as he has been shown hither
to to have surpassed others, his ideas on this
point being most excellent and philosophic.
For he held that, while it is virtuous in a
private individual to avoid vice, and be to
some extent good, it is a vice in a chief and
ruler, especially in such an office, to fail to
surpass by far the majority of men, and by
constant progress to make his virtue corre
spond to his dignity and throne :
is
difficult for one in high position to attain the
mean, and by his eminence in virtue raise up
his people to the golden mean.
Or rather
to treat this question more satisfactorily, I
think that the result is the same as I see in

for it

aAmos viii. II.
y Men. Eusebius of Samosaba and S. Gregory the Elder.

flNtztnt, Eusebius. i.e., "pious," "godly."

the case of our Saviour, and of every specially
wise man, I fancy, when He was with us in
that form which surpassed us and yet is ours.
For He also, the gospel says, increased in
wisdom and favour, as well as in stature,* not
that these qualities in Him were capable of
growth : for how could that which was per
fect from the first become more perfect, but
that they were gradually disclosed and dis
So I think that the virtue of Basil,
played ?
without being itself increased, obtained at
this time a wider exercise, since his power
provided him with more abundant material.

time, join

39. He first of all made it plain that his
office had been bestowed upon him, not by
This
human favour, but by the gift of God.
will also be shown by my conduct.
For in
what philosophic research did he not, about
that
with me? So every one
thought that I should run to meet him after
what had happened, and show my delight at
it (as would, perhaps, have been the case
with any one else) and claim a share in his
authority, rather than rule beside him, ac
cording to the inferences they drew from our
friendship.
But, in my exceeding anxiety to
avoid the annoyance and jealousy of the time,
and specially since his position was still a
painful and troubled
one, I remained at
home, and forcibly restrained my eager de
sire, while, though he blamed me, Basil ac
cepted my excuse.
And when, on my subse
quent arrival, I refused, for the same reason
the honour of this chair, and a dignified
position ' among the Presbyters, he kindly
refrained from blaming, nay he praised me,
preferring to be charged with pride by a
small clique, in their ignorance of our policy,
rather than do anything contrary to reason
And indeed, how
and his own resolutions.
could a man have better shown his soul to be
superior to all fawning and flattery, and his
single object to be the law of right, than by
thus treating me, whom he acknowledged as
among the first of his friends and associates ?
40. His next task was to appease, and allay
by magnanimous treatment, the opposition to
himself : and that without any trace of flattery
or servility, but in a most chivalrous and
magnanimous way ; with a view, not merely
to present exigencies, but also to the fostering
of future obedience.
For, seeing that, while
tenderness leads to laxity and slackness, sever
ity gives rise to stubbornness and self-will, he
was able to avoid the dangers of each course

a S. T.ukc ii. 52.
^ Dignified position, known later as that of Vicar General.

Thomassin. Disc Eccl. L ii. 7. $ 3.

THE PANEGYRIC ON S. BASIL.

by a combination of both, blending his cor
rection
with consideration, and gentleness
with firmness, influencing men in most cases
principally by his conduct rather than by
argument : not enslaving them by art, but
winning them by good nature, and attracting
them by the sparing use, rather than by the
constant exercise, of his power.
And, most
important of all, they were brought to recog
nize the superiority of his intellect and the
inaccessibility of his virtue, to consider their
only safety to consist in being on his side and
under his command, their sole danger to be in
opposition to him, and to think that to differ
from him involved estrangement from God.
Thus they willingly yielded and surrendered,
submitting themselves, as if in a thunder-clap,
and hastening to anticipate each other with
their excuses, and exchange the intensity of
their hostility for an equal intensity of good
will, and advance in virtue, which they found
to be the one really effective defence.
The
few exceptions to this conduct were passed by
and neglected, because their ill-nature was
incurable, and they expended their powers in
wearing out themselves, as rust consumes itself
together with the iron on which it feeds.

41. Affairs at home being now settled to
his mind, in a way that faithless men who did
not know him would have thought impos
sible, his designs became greater and took a
loftier range.
For, while all others had their
eyes on the ground before them, and directed
attention to their own immediate concerns,
and, if these were safe, troubled themselves no
further, being incapable of any great and
chivalrous design or undertaking ; he, moder
ate as he was in all other respects, could not
be moderate in this, but with head erect, cast
ing his mental eye about him, took in the
whole world over which the word of salvation
has made its way.
And when he saw the
great heritage of God, purchased by His own
words and laws and sufferings, the holy na
tion, the royal priesthood," in such evil plight
that it was torn asunder into ten thousand
opinions and errors : and the vine brought
out of Egypt and transplanted,3 the Egypt of
which had
impious and dark
grown to such beauty and boundless size that
the whole earth was covered with the shadow
of it, while it overtopped mountains and
cedars, now being ravaged by that wicked
wild boar, the devil, he could not content
himself with quietly lamenting the misfortune,
and merely lifting up his hands to God, and

ignorance,

« 1 PeL ii. 9-

seeking from Him the dispersion of the press
ing misfortunes, while he himself was asleep,
but felt bound to come to her aid at some
expense to himself.

42. For what could be more distressing
than this calamity, or call more loudly on one
whose eyes were raised aloft for exertions on
behalf of the common weal ?
The good or
ill success of an individual is of no conse
quence to the community, but that of the
community involves of necessity the like con
dition of the individual.
With this idea and
purpose, he who was the guardian and patron
of the community (and, as Solomon says
with truth, a perceptive heart is a moth to
the bones," unsensitiveness is cheerily confi
dent, while a sympathetic disposition is a
source of pain, and constant consideration
wastes away the heart), he, I say, was conse
quently in agony and distress from many
wounds ; like Jonah and David, he wished
in himself to die 3 and gave not sleep to his
eyes, nor slumber to his eyelids,? he expend
ed what was left of his flesh upon his reflec
tions, until he discovered a remedy for the
evil : and sought for aid from God and man,
to stay the general conflagration, and dissipate
the gloom which was lowering over us.

43. One of his devices was of the greatest
service.
After a period of such recollection as
was possible, and private spiritual conference,
in which, after considering all human argu
ments, and penetrating into all the deep things
of the Scriptures, he drew up a sketch of pious
doctrine, and by wrestling with and attacking
their opposition he beat off the daring assaults
of the heretics : overthrowing in hand to
hand struggles by word of mouth those who
came to close quarters, and striking those at a
distance by arrows winged with ink, which is
in no wise inferior to inscriptions on tablets ;
not giving directions for one small nation only
like that of the Jews, concerning meats and
drinks, temporary sacrifices, and purifications
of the flesh ; 8 but for every nation and part of
the world, concerning the Word of truth, the
source of our salvation.
Again, since unrea
soning action and unpractical reasoning are
alike ineffectual, he added to his reasoning
the succour which comes from action ; he paid
visits,
in
structed, reproved, rebuked,' threatened, re
proached, undertook the defence of nations,
cities and individuals, devising every kind of
succour, and procuring from
every source
a second Bezaleel, an
specifics for disease:

messages, gave interviews,

sent

"

• Prov. xiv. 30 (LXX).

y Ps. cxxxii. 4.

i Hcb. ix. to.

3 Jonah iv. 8.

e 2 Time iv. 3.

4io

architect of the Divine tabernacle," applying
every material and art to the work, and com
bining all in a harmonious and surpassing
beauty.

44. Why need I enter into further detail ?
We were assailed again by the Anti-Christian
Emperor/ that tyrant of the faith, with more
abundant impiety and a hotter onset, inas
much as the dispute must be with a stronger
antagonist, like that unclean and evil spirit,
who when sent forth upon his wanderings from
man, returns to take up his abode in him
again with a greater number of spirits, as we
This spirit he
have heard in the Gospels.'*
imitated, both in renewing the contest in
which he had formerly been worsted, and in
adding to his original efforts.
He thought
that it was a strange and insufferable thing
that he, who ruled over so many nations and
had won so much renown, and reduced under
the power of impiety all those round about
him, and overcome every adversary, should be
publicly worsted by a single man, and a single
city, and so incur the ridicule not only of
those patrons of ungodliness by whom he was
led, but also, as he supposed, of all men.

45. It is said that the King5 of Persia, on
his expedition into Greece, was not only
urged to immoderate threats, by elation at
the numbers of every race of men which in
his wrath and pride he was leading against
them : but thought to terrify them the more,
by making them afraid of him, in consequence
of his novel treatment of the elements. A
strange land and sea were heard of, the work
of the new creator ; and an army which sailed
over the dry land, and marched over the
ocean, while islands were carried off, and the
sea was scourged, and all the other mad pro
ceedings of that army and expedition, which,
though they struck terror into the ignoble,
were ridiculous in the eyes of men of brave
and steadfast
There was no need
of anything of this kind in the expedition
against us, but what was still worse and more
harmful, this was what the Emperor was re
ported to say and do. He stretched forth
his mouth unto heaven, speaking blasphemy
against the most High, and his tongue went
through the world."
Excellently did the in
spired David before our days thus describe
him who made heaven to stoop to earth, and
reckoned with the creation that supermun
dane nature, which the creation cannot even
contain, even though in kindness to man it
did to some extent come among us, in order

hearts.

a Exod. xxxi. 2. \
4 King.

3 F.tttptror.

Xifrxes.

Valens.

y S. Luke xi. 24.

• Ps. lxxiii. 9.

\

to draw to itself us who were lying upon the
ground.

What shall

46. Furious indeed were his

first acts of
wantonness, more furious still his final efforts
against us.
I speak of first ?
Exiles, banishments, confiscations, open and
secret plots, persuasion, where time allowed,
violence, where persuasion was impossible.
Those who clung to the orthodox faith, as
we did, were extruded from their churches ;
others were intruded, who agreed with the
Imperial soul-destroying doctrines, and begged
for testimonials of impiety, and subscribed to
Burnings «
statements still harder than these.
of Presbyters at sea, impious generals, not
those who conquered the Persians, or sub
dued the Scythians, or reduced any other bar
baric nation, but those who assailed churches,
and danced in triumph upon altars, and de
filed the unbloody sacrifices with the blood of
man and victims, and offered insult to the
modesty of virgins.
With what object ? The
extrusion of the Patriarch Jacob,3 and the in
trusion in his place of Esau, who was hated,»
even before his birth.
This is the description
of his first acts of wantonness, the mere re
collection and mention of which even now,
rouses the tears of most of us.

47. Accordingly, when, after passing through
all quarters, he made his attack in order to en
slave this impregnable and formidable mother
of the Churches, the only still remaining unquenched spark of the truth, he discovered
that he had been for the first time ill advised.
For he was driven back like a missile which
strikes upon some stronger body, and recoiled
like a broken hawser.
Such was the prelate
of the Church that he met with, such was the
bulwark by which his efforts were broken and
dissipated.
Other particulars may be heard
from those who tell and recount them, from
their own experience-and none of those who
recount them is destitute of this full experi
But all must be filled with admiration
ence.
who are aware of the struggles of that time,
the assaults, the promises, the threats, the
commissioners sent before him to try to pre
vail upon us, men of judicial and military
rank, men from the harem, who are men
among women, women among men, whose
only manliness consisted
their impiety,
and being incapable of natural licentiousness,
the only way they
commit fornication in
the chief cook
can, with

their tongues ;

in

a Buntings. a.t>. 370.

Fiehtv ecclesiastic*, sent on a mission to
Valens at Nice-media, were by nis orders sent to sea off the coast
of Bithynia, and. ihe vessel bcin^ set on fire, were hiirnl to death.

0 Jttco6, i.e., Athanasius.

Esau = George.

yR0m.1x.11.

4ii

Nebuzaradan," who threatened us with the
weapons of his art, and was despatched by his
own fire.
But what especially excites my
wonder, and what I could not, even if I
would, pass by, I will describe as concisely as
possible.

48. Who has not heard of the prefect3 of
those days, who, for his own part, treated us
with such excessive arrogance, having himself
been admitted, or perhaps committed, to bap
tism by the other party ; and strove by ex
ceeding the letter of his instructions, and
gratifying his master in every particular, to
guarantee and preserve his own possession of
power.
Though he raged against the Church,
and assumed a lion-like aspect, and roared like
a lion till most men dared not approach him,
yet our noble prelate was brought into or
rather entered his court, as if bidden to a
feast, instead of to a trial. How can I fitly de
scribe, either the arrogance of the prefect or
the prudence with which it was met by the
Saint.
" What is the meaning, Sir Basil,"
he said, addressing him by name, and not as
yet deigning to term him Bishop, " of your
daring, as no other dares, to resist and oppose
so great a potentate ? "
"In what respect ? ' '
said our noble champion, " and in what does
For this I have yet to
my rashness consist ?
" In refusing to respect the religion
learn."
others have
of your Sovereign, when all
yielded and submitted themselves?"
"Be
cause," said he, " this is not the will of my
real Sovereign ; nor can I, who am the creature
of God, and bidden myself to be God, submit
to worship any creature."
" And what do
we," said the prefect, "seem to you to be?
Are we, who give you this injunction, nothing
Is it not
at all ? What do you say to this ?
a great thing to be ranged with us as your
associates?"
"You are, I will not deny
it," said he, "a prefect, and an illustrious
one, yet not of more honour than God. And
to be associated with you is a great thing,
certainly ; for you are yourself the creature of
God ; but so it is to be associated with any
other of my subjects.
For faith, and not per
sonal importance, is the distinctive mark of
Christianity."

49. Then indeed the prefect became ex
cited, and rose from his seat, boiling with
rage, and making use of harsher language.
" What? " said he, " have you no fear of my
"Fear of what ? " said Basil,
authority?"
' ' How could i t affect me?" "Of what ? Of

a Ncbuznradnn. Pemostheres, a creature of Valens, sent to
3 Preftct.

persuade Basil to yield 10 the Emperor.
Modeltus.

" Confiscation,

any one of the resources of my power."
" What are these? " said Basil, " pray, inform
me."
banishment, torture,
" Have you no other threat ? " said
death."
he,
" for none of these can reach me."
"How indeed is that?" said the prefect.
"Because," he replied, "a man who has
nothing, is beyond the reach of confiscation ;
unless you demand my tattered rags, and the
few books, which are my only possessions.
Banishment is impossible ior me, who am con
fined by no limit of place, counting my own
neither the land where I now dwell, nor all of
that into which I may be hurled ; or, rather,
counting it all God's, whose guest and depend
ent I am.
As for tortures, what hold can
they have upon one whose body has ceased to
Unless you mean the first stroke, for
be?
Death is my
this alone is in your power.
benefactor, for it will send me the sooner to
God, for Whom I live, and exist, and have all
but died, and to Whom I have long been has
tening."

50. Amazed at this language, the prefect
said, " No one has ever yet spoken thus, and
with such boldness, to Modestus. "
" Why,
perhaps," said Basil, " you have not met with
a Bishop, or in his defence of such interests
he wrould have used precisely the same lan
guage.
For we are modest in general, and
submissive to every one, according to the pre
cept of our law. We may not treat with
haughtiness even any ordinary person, to say
But where
nothing of so great a potentate.
the interests of God are at stake, we care for
nothing else, and make these our sole object.
Fire and sword and wild beasts, and rakes
which tear the flesh, we revel in, and fear
them not. You may further insult and threat
en us, and do whatever you will, to the full
extent of your power.
The Emperor him
self may hear this-that neither by violence
nor persuasion will you bring us to make com
mon cause with impiety, not even though
your threats become still more terrible."

51. At the close of this colloquy, the pre
fect, having been convinced by the attitude of
Basil, that he was absolutely impervious to
threats and influence, dismissed him from the
court, his former threatening manner being re
placed by somewhat of respect and deference.
He himself with all speed obtained an audi
ence of the Emperor, and said: "We have
been worsted, Sire, by the prelate of this
Church. He is superior to threats, invincible
in argument, uninfluenced by persuasion. We
must make trial of some more feeble charac
ter ; and in this case resort to open violence,

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

or submit to the disregard of our threatenings."
Hereupon the Emperor, forced by
the praises of Basil to condemn his own con
duct (for even an enemy can admire a man's
excellence), would not allow violence to be
used against him: and, like iron, which is
softened by fire, yet still remains iron, though
turned from threatening to admiration, would
not enter into communion with him, being
prevented by shame from changing his course,
but sought to justify his conduct by the most
plausible excuse he could, as the sequel will
show.

52. For he entered the Church attended by
the whole of his train ; it was the festival of the
Epiphany, and the Church was crowded, and,
by taking his place among the people, he made
The occurrence is not
a profession of unity.
Upon his entrance
to be lightly passed over.
he was struck by the thundering roll of the
Psalms, by the sea of heads of the congrega
tion, and by the angelic rather than human
order which |)ervaded the sanctuary and its
precincts : while Basil presided over his peo
ple, standing erect, as the Scripture says of
Samuel,0 with body and eyes and mind undis
turbed, as if nothing new had happened, but
fixed upon God and the sanctuary, as if, so to
say, he had been a statue, while his ministers
stood around him in fear and reverence.
At
this sight, and it was indeed a sight unparal
leled, overcome by human weakness, his eyes
were affected with dimness and giddiness, his
This was as yet unnoticed
mind with dread.
by most people.
But when he had to offer
the gifts at the Table of God, which he must
needs do himself, since no one would, as usual,
assist him, because it was uncertain whether
Basil would admit him, his feelings were re
vealed.
For he was staggering, and had not
some one in the sanctuary reached out a hand
to steady his tottering steps, he would have
sunk to the ground in a lamentable fall.
So
much for this.

53. As for the wisdom of his conference
with the Emperor, who, in his quasi-communion with us entered within the veil to see
and speak to him, as he had long desired to
do, what else can I say but that they were in
spired words, which were heard by the cour
tiers and by us who had entered with them ?
This was the Ixjginning and first establishment
of the Emperor's kindly feeling towards us ;
the impression produced by this reception put
an end to the greater part of the persecution
which assailed us like a river.

What next ?

j with disease.

I have mentioned.

54. Another incident is not of less impor
The
tance than those
wicked were victorious, and the decree for his
banishment was signed, to the full satisfaction
of those who furthered it.
The night had
come, the chariot was ready, our haters were
exultant, the pious in despair, we surrounded
the zealous traveller, to whose honourable dis
It
grace nothing was wanting.
was undone by God.
For He Who smote the
first-born of Egypt," for its harshness towards
Israel, also struck the son of the Emperor
How great was the speed !
There was the sentence of banishment, here
the decree of sickness : the hand of the wick
ed scribe was restrained, and the saint was preI served, and the man of piety presented to us,
by the fever which brought to reason the arro
What could be more
gance of the Emperor.
just or more speedy than this ?
This was the
series of events : the Emperor's child was sick
The father was pained
and in bodily pain.
S for it, for what can the father do ? On all sides
he sought for aid in his distress, he summoned
the best physicians, he betook himself to inter
cessions with the greatest fervour, and flung
himself upon the ground.
Affliction humbles
even emperors, and no wonder, for the like
sufferings of David, in the case of his child are
recorded for us.0
But as no cure for the evil
could anywhere be found, he applied to the
faith of Basil, not personally summoning him,
j in shame for his recent ill treatment, but en
trusting the mission to others of his nearest
and dearest friends. On his arrival, without
the delay or reluctance which any one else
might have show n, at once the disease relaxed,
and the father cherished better hopes ; and
had he not blended salt water with the fresh,
by trusting to the heterodox at the same time
that he summoned Basil, the child would have
recovered his health and been preserved for
his father's arms.
This indeed was the con
viction of those who were present at the time,
and shared in the distress.

1 fallen the prefect.

55. The same mischance is said to have beHe also was obliged by
sickness to bow beneath the hands of the
Saint, and, in reality, to men of sense a visitaj tion brings instruction, and affliction is often
better than prosperity.
He fell sick, was in
tears, and in pain, he sent for Basil, and en
treated him, crying out, " I own that you
His
were in the right ; only save me 1 "
1 request was granted, as he himself acknowj ledged, and convinced many who had known

a t Sam. xix. 20.

a Kxod. xii. 29.

0 2 Sam. xii. 10.

THE PANEGYRIC ON S. BASIL.

nothing of it ; for he never ceased to wonder
at and describe the powers of the prelate.
Such was his conduct in these cases, such its
Did he then treat others in a different
result.
way, and engage in petty disputes about trifles,
or fail to rise to the heights of philosophy in
a course' of action which merits no praise and
is best passed over in silence? By no means.
He who once stirred up the wicked Hadad
against Israel," stirred up against him the pre
fect* of the province of Pontus ; nominally,
from annoyance connected with some poor
creature of a woman, but in reality as a part
of the struggle of impiety against the truth.
I pass by all his other insults against Basil,
is the same thing, against God ;
or, for it
is against Him and on Hie behalf
for
it
that the contest was waged.
One instance
of it, however, which brought special dis
grace upon the assailant, and exalted his ad
versary, if philosophy and eminence for it
be a great and lofty thing, I will describe at
length.

56. The assessor of a judge was attempting
to force into a distasteful marriage a lady of
high birth whose husband was but recently
dead.
At a loss to escape from this high
handed treatment, she resorted to a device no
She fled to the
less prudent than daring.
holy table, and placed herself under the pro
tection of God against outrage.
What, in
the Name of the Trinity Itself, if I may in
troduce into my panegyric somewhat of the
forensic style, .ought to have been done, I do
not say, by the great Basil, who laid down the
law for us all in such matters, but by any one
who, though far inferior to him, was a priest ?
Ought he not to have allowed her claim, to
have taken charge of, and cared for, her ; to
have raised his hand in defence of the kind
ness of God and the law which gives honour
to the altar ? Ought he not to have been will
ing to do and suffer anything, rather than take
part in any inhuman design against her, and
outrage at once the holy table, and the faith
in which she had taken sanctuary ? No ! said
the baffled judge, all ought to yield to my
authority, and Christians should betray their
The suppliant whom he demand
own laws.
ed, was at all hazards retained.
Accordingly,
in his rage, he at last sent some of the magis
trates to search the saint's bedchamber, with
the purpose of dishonouring him, rather than
the
from any necessity.
nouse of a man so free from passion, whom
the angels revere, at whom women do not

Search

What !

a 1 Kings xi. 14.

ft The prefect.

teusebius.

venture even to look ?
And, not content
with this, he summoned him, and put him on
his defence ; and that, in no gentle or kindly
Upon
manner, but as if he were a convict.
Basil's appearance, standing, like my Jesus,
before the judgment seat of Pilate, he pre
sided at the trial, full of wrath and pride.
Yet the thunderbolts did not fall, and the
glittered, and waited,
sword of God still
while His bow, though bent, was restrained.
Such indeed is the custom of God.

57. Consider another struggle between our
champion and his persecutor.
His ragged
pallium having been ordered to be torn away,
" I will also, if you wish it, strip off my coat,"
said he.
His fleshless form was threatened
with blows, and he offered to submit to be
torn with combs, and he said, " By such
laceration you will cure my liver, which, as
you see, is wearing me away."
Such was
their argument.
But when the city perceived
the outrage and the common danger of allfor each one considered this insolence a dan
ger to himself, it became all on fire with rage ;
and, like a hive roused by smoke, one after
another was stirred and arose, every race
and every age, but especially the men from the
small-arms factory and from the imperial weav
For men at work in these trades
ing-sheds.
are specially hot-tempered and daring, be
cause of the liberty allowed them.
Each man
was armed with the tool he was using, or
with whatever else came to hand at the
Torch in hand, amid showers of
moment.
ran and
stones,
ready,
cudgels
Anger
shouted together in their united zeal.
makes a terrible soldier or general.
Nor were
the women weaponless, when roused by~such
Their pins were their spears,
an occasion.
and no longer remaining women, they were
by the strength of their eagerness endowed
with masculine courage.
It is a short story.
They thought that they would share among
themselves the piety of destroying him, and
held him to be most pious who first laid
hands on one who had dared such deeds.
What then was the conduct of this haughty
and daring judge? He begged for mercy
in a pitiable state of distress, cringing before
them to an unparalleled extent, until the ar
rival of the martyr without bloodshed, who
had won his crown without blows, and now
restrained the people by the force of his per
sonal influence, and delivered the man who had
insulted him and now sought his protection.
This was the doing of the God of Saints, Who
worketh and changeth all things for the best,
who resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to

with

all

4H

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

the humble." And why should not He, Who
divided the sea and stayed the river, and
ruled the elements, and by stretching out set
up a trophy, to save His exiled people, why
should not He have also rescued this man
from his perils ?

58. This was the end and fortunate close, in
the Providence of God, of the war with the
But here
world, a close worthy of his faith.
at once is the beginning of the war with the
Bishops, and their allies, which involved great
disgrace, and still greater injury to their sub
jects.
For who could persuade others to be
temperate, when such was the conduct of
their prelates ?
For a long time they had
been unkindly disposed towards him, on three
grounds.
They neither agreed with him in
the matter of the faith, except in so far as
they were absolutely obliged to yield to the
majority of the faithful.
Nor had they al
together laid aside the grudge they owed him
for his election.
And, what was most griev
ous of all to them, though they would have
been most ashamed to own it-he so far out
shone them in reputation.
There was also a
further cause of dissension which stirred up
again the others.
When our country had
been divided into two provinces and metropolitical sees, and a great part of the former
was being added to the new one, this again
roused
The one P
thought it right that the ecclesiastical boun
daries should be settled by the civil ones : and
therefore claimed those newly added, as be
longing to him, and severed from their former
metropolitan.
The other * clung to the an
cient custom, and to the division which had
come down from our fathers.
Many painful
results either actually followed, or were strug
gling in the womb of the future.
Synods
were wrongfully gathered by the new metro
politan, and revenues
Some
of the presbyters of the churches refused obe
In conse
dience,
quence the affairs of the churches fell into a
sad state of dissension and division.
Novelty
indeed has a certain charm for men, and they
readily turn events to their own advantage,
and it is easier to overthrow something which
is already established, than to restore it when
overthrown.
What however enraged him
most was, that the revenues 4 of the Taurus,
which passed along before his eyes, accrued to
his rival, as also the offerings at Saint Ores-

others were won over.

seized upon.

factious

spirit.

their

a S. James iv. 6.
I The other, i.e.. Basil.

The one, i.e., Anthimus, Bishop of Tyana.
Revenues. The dues and offerings of the people of the dio-

tes',a of which he was greatly desirous to
reap the fruits.
He even went so far as, on
one occasion when Basil was riding along his
own road, to seize his mules by the bridle
and bar the passage with a robber band.
And
with how specious a pretext, the care of his
spiritual children and of the souls entrusted to
him, and the defence of the faith-pretexts
which veiled that most common vice, insati
able avarice-and further, the wrongfulness of
paying dues to heretics, a heretic being any
one who had displeased him.

59. The holy man of God however, metro
politan as he was of the true Jerusalem above,
was neither carried away with the failure of
those who fell, nor allowed himself to over
look this- conduct, nor did he desire any in
adequate remedy for the evil. Let us see how
great and wonderful it was, or, I would say,
how worthy of his soul. He made of the dis
sension a cause of increase to the Church, and
the disaster, under his most able management,
resulted in the multiplication of the Bisho[s
From this ensued three most
of the country.
desirable consequences ; a greater care for
souls, the management by each city of its own
affairs, and the cessation of the war in this
quarter.
I am afraid that I myself was treated
as an appendage to this scheme. By no other
term can I readily describe
the position.
Greatly as I admire his whole conduct, to an
extent indeed beyond my powers of expres
sion, of this single particular I find it impos
sible to approve, for I will acknowledge my
feelings in regard to it, though these are from
other sources not unknown to most of you.
mean the change and faithlessness of his treat
ment of myself, a cause of pain which even
is the
time has not obliterated.
source of all the inconsistency and tangle of my
life ;
it has robbed me of the practice, or at
least the reputation, of philosophy ; of small
moment though the latter be.
The defence,
which you will perhaps allow me to make for
him, is this ; his ideas were superhuman, and
having, before his death, become superior to
worldly influences,
his only interests were
those of the Spirit : while his regard for
friendship was in no wise lessened by his
readiness then, and then only, to disregard
its claims, when they were in conflict with his
paramount duty to God, and when the end
he had in view was of greater importance than
the interests he was compelled to set aside.

For this

60. I am afraid that, in avoiding the impu
tation of indifference at the hands of those

a Orestes, A chapel dedicated to S. Orestes at the foot of Mu

Taurus, where the offerings were collected.

THE PANEGYRIC ON S. BASIL.

4i5

who desire to know all that can be said about
him, I shall incur a charge of prolixity from
those whose ideal is the golden mean.
For
the latter Basil himself had the greatest re
spect, being specially devoted to the adage
'■In all things the mean a is the best," and
acting upon it throughout his life.
Neverthe
less, disregarding alike those who desire un
due conciseness or excessive prolixity, I pro
ceed thus with my speech.
Different men
attain success in different ways, some applying
themselves to one alone of the many forms of
excellence, but no one, of those hitherto known
to me, arriving at the highest eminence in all
respects ; he being in my opinion the best,
who has won his laurels on the widest field,
or gained the highest possible renown in some
single particular.
Such however was the
height of Basil's fame, that he became the
pride of human kind.
Let us consider the
matter thus.
Is any one devoted to poverty
and a life devoid of property, and free from
superfluity ?
What did he possess besides his
body, and the necessary coverings of the flesh ?
His wealth was the having nothing, and he
thought the cross, with which he lived, more
precious than great riches.
For no one, how
ever much he may wish, can obtain possession
of all things, but anyone can learn to despise, J
and so prove himself superior to, all things, j
Such being his mind, and such his life, he
had no need of an altar and of vainglory, nor
of such a public announcement as " Crates f
sets Crates the The ban free."
For his aim
was ever to be, not to seem, most excellent.
Nor did he dwell in a tub,? and in the midst
of the market-place, and so by luxuriating in
publicity turn his poverty into riches: but
was poor and unkempt, yet without ostenta
tion : and taking cheerfully the casting over
board of all that he ever had, sailed lightly
across the sea of life.

61. A wondrous thing is temperance, and
fewness of wants, and freedom from the domin
ion of pleasures, and from the bondage of that
cruel and degrading mistress, the telly. Who
was so independent of food, and, without exag
geration, more free from the flesh ? For he flung
away all satiety and surfeit to creatures desti
tute of reason, whose life is slavish and debas
ing.
He paid little attention to such things
as, next to the appetite, are of equal rank, but,
as far as possible, lived on the merest necessa
ries, his only luxury being to prove himself not

luxurious, and not, in consequence, to have
greater needs :
but he looked to the lilies and
the birds," whose beauty is artless, and their
food casual, according to the important advice
of my Christ, who made Himself poor P in the
flesh for our sakes, that we might enjoy the
riches of His Godhead. Hence came his single
coat and well worn cloak, and his bed on the
bare ground, his vigils, his unwashedness (such
were his decorations) and his most sweet food
and relish, bread, and salt, his new dainty,
and the sober and plentiful drink, with which
those who are free from
fountains supply
trouble.
The result, or the accompaniment,
of these things were the attendance on the sick
and practice of medicine, our common intel
lectual pursuit.
For, though inferior to him in
all other respects, I must needs be his equal in
distress.

62. A great thing is virginity, and celibacy,
and being ranked with the angels, and with
the single nature ; for I shrink from calling it
Christ's, Who, though He willed to be born for
our sakes who are born, by being born of a
Virgin, enacted * the law of virginity, to lead
us away from this life, and cut short the power
of the world, or rather, to transmit one world
to another, the present to the future. Who
then paid more honour to virginity, or had
more control of the flesh, not only by his per
sonal example, but in those under his care?
Whose are the convents, and the written reg
ulations, by which he subdued every sense,
and regulated every member, and won to the
real practice of virginity, turning inward the
view of beauty, from the visible to the invis
ible ; and by wasting away the external, and
withdrawing fuel from the flame, and revealing
the secrets of the heart to God, Who is the
only bridegroom of pure souls, and takes in
with himself the watchful souls, if they go to
meet him with lamps burning and a plentiful
Moreover he reconciled most
supply of oil ? {
excellently and united the solitary and the
community life.
These had been in many re
spects at variance and dissension, while neither
of them was in absolute and unalloyed pos
session of good or evil: the one being more
calm and settled, tending to union with God,
yet not free from pride, inasmuch as its virtue
lies beyond the means of testing or compari
son ; the other, which is of more practical
service, being not free from the tendency to
turbulence. He founded cells' for ascetics

Sages.
himself of all his possessions.

a The mean, etc. A saying of Cleobutus, one of the seven
£ Crates. He marie this proclamation when he had stripped
y In a tub, like Diogenes, the Cynic.

a S. Matt. vi. 26.
y Rnacttd by his religious rule, or as some say by a treatise on
Virginity.
This passage strongly favours the view of Clemenf Cells, etc.
cct that S. Gregory uses u.ovaarqpta in the literal sense of il the

8 S. Matt. xxv. 2.

^ a Cor. viii. 9.

4i6

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

and hermits, but at no great distance from his
cenobitic communities, and, instead of distin
guishing and separating the one from the
other, as if by some intervening wall, he
brought them together and united them, in
order that the contemplative spirit might not
be cut off from society, nor the active life be
uninfluenced by the contemplative, but that,
like sea and land, by an interchange of their
several gifts, they might unite in promoting
the one object, the glory of God.

63. What more ? A noble thing is philan
thropy, and the support of the poor, and the
assistance of human weakness. Go forth a lit
tle way from the city, and behold the new
city," the storehouse of piety, the common
treasury of the wealthy, in which the superflui
ties of their wealth, aye, and even their neces
saries, are stored, in consequence of his exhor
tations, freed from the power of the moth/ no
longer gladdening the eyes of the thief, and
escaping both the emulation of envy, and the
corruption of time : where disease is regarded
in a religious light, and disaster is thought a
blessing, and sympathy is put to the test.
Why should I compare with this work Thebes *
of the seven portals, and the Egyptian Thebes,
and the walls of Babylon, and the Carian
tomb of Mausolus, and the Pyramids, and the
bronze without weight of the Colossus, or the
size and beauty of shrines that are no more,
and all the other objects of men's wonder,
and historic record, from which their found
ers gained no advantage, except a slight meed
of fame. My subject is the most wonderful
of all, the short road to salvation, the easiest
ascent to heaven.
There is no longer before
our eyes that terrible and piteous spectacle of
men who are living corpses, the greater part
of whose limbs have mortified, driven away
from their cities and homes and public places
and fountains, aye, and from their own dear
est ones, recognizable by their names rather
than by their features : they are no longer
brought before us at our gatherings and meet
ings, in our common intercourse and union,
no longer the objects of hatred, instead of
pity on account of their disease ; composers
of piteous songs, if any of them have their
voice still left to them. Why should I try
to express in tragic style all our experiences,
when no language can be adequate to their
hard lot ? He however it was, who took the
lead in pressing upon those who were men,
that they ought not to despise their fellowabodes of solitaries," and that there is no great distinction be
tween KOivwvutoi &jid /iiytififf. Cf. ii. 29. xxi. 10-19.

a AVtm city-a hospital for the sick.
y Thebes^ etc. The " seven wonders of the world."

0 S. Matt. vi. 19.

men, nor to dishonour Christ, the one Head
of all, by their inhuman treatment of them ;
but to use the misfortunes of others as an op
portunity of firmly establishing their own lot,
and to lend to God that mercy of which they
stand in need at His hands. He did not
therefore disdain to honour with his lips this
disease, noble and of noble ancestry and brill
iant reputation though he was, but saluted
them as brethren, not, as some might suppose,
from vainglory, (for who was so far removed
from this feeling ?)
but taking the lead in
approaching to tend them, as a consequence
of his philosophy, and so giving not only a
speaking, but also a silent, instruction.
The
effect produced is to be seen not only in the
city, but in the country and beyond, and
even the leaders of society have vied with one
another in their philanthropy and magnanim
ity towards them.
Others have had their
cooks, and splendid tables, and the devices
and dainties of confectioners, and exquisite
carriages, and soft, flowing robes ;
Basil's
care was for the sick, and the relief of their
wounds, and the imitation of Christ, by
cleansing leprosy, not by a word, but in deed.
64. As to all this, what will be said by
those who charge him with pride and haughti
Severe critics they are of such con
ness?
duct, applying to him, whose life was a stan
dard, those who were not standards at all.
Is
it possible that he who kissed the lepers, and
humiliated himself to such a degree, could
treat haughtily those who were in health :
and, while wasting his flesh by abstinence,
puff out his soul with empty arrogance ?
Is
it possible to condemn the Pharisee, and ex
pound the debasing effect of haughtiness, to
know Christ, Who condescended to the form
of a slave, and ate with publicans, and washed
the disciples' feet, and did not disdain the cross,
in order to nail my sin to it: and, more in
credible still, to see God crucified, aye, along
with robbers also, and derided by the passers
by, impassible, and beyond the reach of suf
fering as He is ; and yet, as his slanderers
imagine, soar himself above the clouds, and
think that nothing can be on an equality with
Nay, what they term pride is, I fancy,
him.
the firmness and steadfastness and stability of
his character.
Such persons would readily,
it seems to me, call bravery rashness, and the
circumspect a coward, and the temperate mis
For indeed
anthropic, and the just illiberal.
this philosophic axiom is excellent, which
says that the vices" are settled close to the

a The vices-

This was the doctrine of Menander and Aristotle.

THE PANEGYRIC ON S. BASIL.

virtues, and are, in some sense, their nextdoor neighbours : and it
is most easy, for
those whose training in such subjects has been
defective, to mistake a man for what he is
not.
For who honoured virtue and castigated
vice more than he, or showed himself more
kind to the upright, more severe to
the
wrong doers? His very smile often amounted
to praise, his silence to rebuke, racking the
evil in the secret conscience.
And if a man
have not been a chatterer, and jester, and
gossip, nor a general favourite, because of
having pleased others by becoming all things
Is he not in the
to all men," what of that?
eyes of sensible men worthy of praise rather
than of blame?
is a fault in the
Unless it
lion that he is terrible and royal, and does
not look like an ape, and that his spring is
noble, and is valued for its wonderfulness :
while stage-players ought to win our admira
tion for their pleasant and philanthropic char
acters, because they please the vulgar, and
raise a laugh by their sounding slaps in the
And if this indeed be our object, who
face.
was so pleasant when you met him, as I know,
who have had the longest experience ? Who
was more kindly in his stories, more refined
in his wit, more tender in his rebukes?
His
reproofs gave rise to no arrogance, his relaxa
tion to no dissipation, but avoiding excess in
either, he made use of both in reason and
season, according to the rules of Solomon,
who assigns to every business a season. 0

65. But what are these to his renown for
eloquence, and his powers of instruction,
which have won the favour of the ends of the
world ?
As yet we have been compassing the
foot of the mountain, to the neglect of its
summit, as yet we have been crossing a strait,
paying no heed to the mighty and deep ocean.
For I think that if any one ever has become,
or can become, a trumpet, in his far sounding
resonance, or a voice of God, embracing the
universe, or an earthquake of the world, by
some unheard of miracle, it
is his voice and
intellect which deserve these titles, for sur
passing and excelling all men as much as we
surpass the irrational creatures.
Who, more
than he, cleansed himself by the Spirit, and
made himself worthy to set
forth divine
things? Who was more enlightened by the
light of knowledge, and had a closer in
sight into the depths of the Spirit, and by the
aid of God beheld the things of God ? Whose
language
intellectual
truth, without, as most men do, limping on

could better

express

one foot, by either failing to express his ideas,
or allowing his eloquence to outstrip his rea
soning powers?
In both respects he won a
like distinction, and showed himself to be his
own equal, and absolutely perfect.
To search
all things, yea, the deep things of God" is,
according to the testimony of S. Paul, the
office of the Spirit, not because He is ignorant
of them, but because He takes delight in their
contemplation.
Now all the things of the
Spirit Basil had fully investigated, and hence
he drew his instructions for every kind of
character, his lessons in the sublime, and his
exhortations to quit things present, and adapt
ourselves to things to come.

66. The sun is extolled by David for its
beauty, its greatness, its swift course, and its
power, splendid as a bridegroom, majestic as
a giant ; f while, from the extent of its circuit,
it has such power that it equally sheds its
light from one end of heaven to the other, and
the heat thereof is in no wise lessened by dis
tance.
Basil's beauty was virtue, his great
ness theology, his course the perpetual mo
tion reaching even to God by its ascents, and
his power the sowing and distribution of the
Word.
So that I will not hesitate to say even
this, his utterance went out into all lands,v and
the power of his words to the ends of the
world : as S. Paul says of the Apostles,* bor
rowing the words from David.
What other
charm is there in any gathering to-day ? What
pleasure in banquets, in the courts, in the
churches ? What delight in those in author
ity, and those beneath them ? What in the
hermits, or the cenobites? What in the lei
sured classes, or those busied in affairs ? What
in profane schools of philosophy or in our
There is one, which runs through all,
own ?
and is the greatest-his writings and labours.
Nor do writers require any supply of matter
besides his teaching or writings.
the
laborious studies of old days in the Divine
oracles are silent, while the new ones are in
everybody's mouth, and he is the best teacher
among us who has the deepest acquaintance
with his works, and speaks of them and ex
plains them in our ears.
For he alone more
than supplies the place of all others to those
who are specially eager for instruction.

All

67. I will only say this of him.

Whenever
I handle his Hexaemeron, and take its words
on my lips, I am brought into the presence of
the Creator, and understand the words of cre
ation, and admire the Creator more than be
fore, using my teacher as my only means of

a 1 Cor- ix. 23.

0 Eccles, iii. i.

a t Cor. ii. 10.
y Ps. xix. 5.

jj Ps. xix. 6.
5 Rom. x. i&

4i8

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

sight.
Whenever I take up his polemical
works, I see the fire of Sodom," by which the
wicked and rebellious tongues are reduced to
ashes, or the ' tower of Chalane,^ impiously
built,'' and righteously destroyed.
Whenever
I read his writings on the Spirit, I find the
God Whom I possess, and grow bold in my
utterance of the truth, from the support of his
His other trea
theology and contemplation.
tises, in which he gives explanations for those
who are shortsighted, by a threefold inscrip
tion on the solid tablets of his heart, lead me
on from a mere literal or symbolical interpre
tation to a still wider view, as I proceed from
one depth to another, calling upon deep8 after
deep, and finding light after light, until I at
tain the highest pinnacle.
When I study his
panegyrics on our athletes, I despise the body,
and enjoy the society of those whom he is
praising, and rouse myself to the struggle.
His moral and practical discourses purify soul
and body, making me a temple fit for God,
and an instrument struck by the Spirit, to
celebrate by its strains the glory and power of
God.
In fact, he reduces me to harmony and
order, and changes me by a Divine transfor
mation.

For it

68. Since I have mentioned theology, and
his most sublime treatises in this science, I
will make this addition to what I have already
said.
is of great service to the com
munity, to save them from being injured by
an unjustifiably low opinion of him. My re
marks are directed against those evil disposed
persons who shelter their own vices under
cover of their calumnies against others.
In
his defence of orthodox teaching, and of the
union and coequal divinity of the Holy
Trinity, to use terms which are, I think, as
exact and clear as possible, he would have
eagerly welcomed as a gain, and not a danger,
not only expulsion from his see, in which he
had originally no desire to be enthroned, but
even exile, and death, and its preliminary
This is manifest from his actual
tortures.
conduct and sufferings.
For when he had
been sentenced to banishment on behalf of the
truth, the only notice which he took of it was,
to bid one of his servants to take his writing
tablet and follow him. He held it necessary,
according to the divine David's advice, to
guide his words with discretion,* and to en
dure for a while the time of war, and the as
cendency of the heretics, until it should be
succeeded by a time of freedom and calm,
which would admit of freedom of speech.

a Gen. icix. \.
fl

y Gen. xi. 4.

0 Chalane. LXX. for Babel,

' Ps. Jclu. 8.

• lb. cxii. 5.

I The enemy were on the watch for the unquali-
: fied statement "the Spirit is God;" which,
although it
is true, they and the wicked pa
tron of their impiety imagined to be impious ;
so that they might banish him and his power
of theological instruction from the city, and
themselves be able to seize upon the church,
and make it the starting point and citadel,
from which they could overrun with their evil
doctrine the rest of the world.
Accordingly,
by the use of other terms, and by statements
t which unmistakably had the same meaning,
and by arguments necessarily leading to this
conclusion, he so overpowered his antagonists,
that they were left without reply, and in
volved in their own admissions, -the greatest
proof possible of dialectical power and skill.
His treatise on this subject makes it further
manifest, being evidently written by a pen
I borrowed from the Spirit's store. He post
poned for the time the use of the exact term,
begging as a favour from the Spirit Himself
and his earnest champions, that they would
not be annoyed at his economy,0 nor, byclinging to a single expression, ruin the whole
cause, from an uncompromising tem]>er, at a
crisis when religion was in peril. He assured
them that they would suffer no injury from a
slight change in their expressions, and from
teaching the same truth in other terms.
For
our salvation is not so much a matter of words
as of actions ; for we would not reject the
Jews, if they desired to unite with us, and yet
for a while sought to use the term " Anoint
ed" instead of "Christ: " while the comj munity would suffer a very serious injury, if
1 the church were seized upon by the heretics.
69. That he, no less than any other, ac
knowledged that the Spirit is God, is plain
from his often having publicly preached this
truth,
whenever opportunity offered, and
eagerly confessed it when questioned in pri
But he made it more clear in his convate.
! versations with me, from whom he concealed
nothing during our conferences upon this sub
ject.
Not content with simply asserting it, he
proceeded, as he had but very seldom done
1 before, to imprecate upon himself that most
terrible fate of separation from the Spirit, if
he did not adore the Spirit as consubstantial
and coequal with the Father and the Son.
And if any one would accept me as having
been his fellow labourer in this cause, I will
set forth one point hitherto unknown to most
Under the pressure of the difficulties
men.

a Economy. In refraining from the express assertion "ThcHolv
Ghost is God " -some have blamed S. Basil lor this : hut his con-

I duct has the approval of S. Athanasius. Ep. ad Palladium.

THE PANEGYRIC ON S. BASIL.

of the period, he himself undertook
the
economy, while allowing freedom of speech
to me, whom no one was likely to drag from
obscurity to trial or banishment, in order that
by our united efforts our Gospel might be
firmly established.
I mention this, not to
defend his reputation, for the man is stronger
than his assailants, if there are any such ; but
to prevent men from thinking that the terms
his writings are the utmost limit
found in
of the truth, and so have their faith weak
ened, and consider that their own error is
supported by his theology, which was the
joint result of the influences of the time and
of the Spirit, instead of considering the sense
of his writings, and the object with which
they were written, so as to be brought closer
to the truth, and enabled to silence the parti
sans of impiety.
At any rate let his theology
be mine, and that of all dear to me ! And
so confident am I of his spotlessness in this
respect, that 1 take him for my partner in
this, as in all else : and may what is mine be
attributed to him, what is his to me, both at
the hands of God, and of the wisest of men !
For we would not say that the Evangelists are
at variance with one another, because some
are more occupied with the human side of
the Christ, and others pay attention to His
Divinity ; some having commenced their his
tory with what is within our own experience,
others with what is above us; and by thus
sharing the substance of their message, they
have procured the advantage of those who
receive it, and followed the impressions of
the Spirit Who was within them.

70. Come then, there have been many men
of old days illustrious for piety, as lawgivers,
generals, prophets, teachers, and men brave
Let us compare
to the shedding of blood.
our prelate with them, and thus recognize his
merit. Adam was honoured by the hand of
God," and the delights of Paradise, and the
first legislation : y but, unless I slander the
reputation of our first parent, he kept not the
command.
Now Basil both received and
observed it, and received no injury from the
tree of knowledge, and escaped the flaming
sword, and, as I am well assured, has attained
Enos first ventured to call upon
to Paradise.
the Lord.4
Basil both called upon Him
himself, and, what is far more excellent,
preached Him to others.
Enoch was trans
lated,' attaining to his translation as the reward
of a little piety (for the faith was still in
shadow) and escaped the peril of the remain-

a Gen. i. 37.

& lb. iv. 36.

0 lb. ii. 8.

y lb. ii. 16.

c lb. v. ax.

der of life, but Basil's whole life was a trans
lation, and he was completely tested in a
complete life.
Noah was entrusted with the
ark,° and the seeds of a new world committed
to a small house of wood, in their preserva
tion from the waters.
Basil escaped the del
uge of impiety and made of his own city an
ark of safety, which sailed lightly over the
heretics, and afterwards recovered the whole
world.

71. Abraham was a great man, a patriarch,
the offerer of the new sacrifice,^ by presenting
to Him who had given it the promised seed,
as a ready offering, eager for slaughter.
But
Basil's offering was no slight one, when he
offered himself to God, without any equiva
lent being given in his stead, (for how could
that have been possible?) so that his sacrifice
was consummated.
Isaac was promised even
before his birth,v Basil promised himself, and
took for his spouse Rebekah, I mean the
Church, not fetched from a distance by the
mission of a servant,8 but bestowed upon and
entrusted to him by God close at home: nor
was he outwitted in the preference of his
children, but bestowed upon each what was
due to him, without any deception, according
to the judgment of the Spirit.
I extol the
ladder of Jacob,' and the pillar which he
anointed to God, and his wrestling with Him,
whatever it was; and, in my opinion, it was
the contrast and opposition of the human
stature to the height of God, resulting in the
tokens of the defeat $ of his race.
I ex
tol also his clever devices and success in cat
the twelve
tle-breeding, and his children,
[ Patriarchs, and the distribution of his bless
ings, with their glorious prophecy of the fu
ture.
But I still more extol Basil for the lad
der which he did not merely see, but which
he ascended by successive steps towards ex
cellence, and the pillar which he did not
anoint, but which he erected to God, by pil
lorying the teaching of the ungodly ; and the
wrestling with which he wrestled, not with
God, but, on behalf of God, to the overthrow
of the heretics ; and his pastoral care, where
by he grew rich, through gaining for himself
a number of marked sheep greater than that
of the unmarked, and his illustrious fruitfulness in spiritual children, and the blessing
with which he established many.

72. Joseph was a provider of corn,1' but in
Egypt only, and not frequently, and of bodily
Basil did so for all men, and at all
food.

a Gen. vi. 13.
2 lb. xxiv. 3.
f Defeat or " loss of generative power."

0 lb. xxii. i.

e lb. xxviii. 13.

y lb. xviii. 10.
n Gen. xli. 4a

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

times, and in spiritual food, and therefore, in
my opinion, his was the more honourable
Like Job, the man of Uz,a he was
function.
both tempted, and overcame, and at
the
close of his struggles gained splendid honour,
having been shaken by none of his many as
sailants, and having gained a decisive victory
over the efforts of the tempter, and put to
silence the unreason of his friends, who knew
not the mysterious character of his affliction.
1 ' Moses and Aaron among His priests. ' ' 0
Truly was Moses great, who inflicted the
plagues upon Egypt,* and delivered the people
among many signs and wonders, and entered
within the cloud, and sanctioned the double
law, outward in the letter, and inward in the
Spirit. Aaron was Moses' brother,8 both natur
ally and spiritually, and offered sacrifices and
prayers for the people, as the hierophant of
the great and holy tabernacle, which the
Lord pitched, and not man.* Of both of
them Basil was a rival, for he tortured, not
with bodily but with spiritual and mental
plagues, the Egyptian race of heretics, and
led to the land of promise t the people of pos
session, zealous of good works ; i he inscribed
laws, which are no longer obscure, but en
tirely spiritual, on tables 9 which are not broken
but are preserved ; he entered the Holy of
holies,' not once a year, but often, I may say
every day, and thence he revealed to us the
Holy Trinity ; and cleansed the people, not
with temporary sprinklings, but with eternal
purifications.
What is the special excellence
His generalship, and the distri
of Joshua?"
bution of the inheritance, and the taking pos
session of the Holy Land. And was not Basil
an Exarch ? x
Was he not a general of those
who are saved by faith?" Did he not assign
the different inheritances and abodes, accord
ing to the will of God, among his followers?
So that he too could use the words, " The
lot is fallen unto me in pleasant places ; " " and
"my fortunes are in Thy hands," ( fortunes
more precious than those which come to us on
earth, and can be snatched away.

73. Further, to run over the Judges, or
the most illustrious of the Judges, there is
"Samuel among those that call upon His
Name," 0 who was given to God before his
birth," and sanctified immediately after his
birth, and the anointer with his horn of kings
But was not Basil as an infant
and priests.*"

a Job i. 1.
nTit. ii. 14.
»i Eph. n. 8.

5 lb. xxix. 4x Josh. i. a.
o lb. cxix. 6.

0 a Cor. iii. 3.

0 Ps. xcix. 6.

« Heb. viii. a.

y Exod. vii. 8 et seq.
£ lb. xi. 9.
1 Exod. xxiv. 8 ; Heb. ix. 19.
A Kxarch or Metropolitan.
f lb. xxxi. 16.

v Ps. xvi. 6.
it t Sam. i. 30.

p lb. xvi. 13.

consecrated to God from the womb, and
offered with a coat a at the altar, and was he
not a seer of heavenly things, and anointed of
the Lord, and the anointer of those who are
perfected by the Spirit? Among the kings,
David is
celebrated, whose victories and
trophies 0 gained from the enemy are on
record, but his most characteristic trait was
his gentleness,? and, before his kingly office,
his power with the harp, able to soothe even
the evil spirit.
Solomon asked of God and
obtained breadth of heart,8 making the furth
est possible progress in wisdom and contem
plation, so that he became the most famous
Basil, in my opinion, was
man of his time.
in no wise, or but little inferior, to the one in
gentleness, to the other in wisdom, so that he
soothed the arrogance of infuriated sovereigns ;
and did not merely bring the queen of the
south from the ends of the earth, or any
other individual, to visit him because of his
renown for wisdom, but made his wisdom
known in all the ends of the world.
I pass
over the rest of Solomon's life.
Even if we
spare it, it is evident to all.

74. Do you praise the courage of Elijah * in
the presence of tyrants, and his fiery transla
tion ? ( Or the fair inheritance of Elisha, the
sheepskin mantle, accompanied by the spirit
of Elijah?' You must also praise the life of
Basil, spent in the fire.
I mean in the multi
tude of temptations, and his escape through
fire, which burnt, but did not consume, the
mystery of " the bush," 9 and the fair cloak of
skin from on high, his indifference to the
flesh.
I pass by the rest, the three young men
bedewed in the fire,' the fugitive prophet pray
ing in the whale's belly," and coming forth
from the creature, as from a chamber ; the
just man in the den, restraining the lions' rage,A
and the struggle of the seven Maccabees,*
who were perfected with their father and mo
ther in blood, and in all kinds of tortures.
Their endurance he rivalled, and won their
glory.

75. I now turn to the New Testament, and
comparing his life with those who are here
illustrious, I shall find in the teachers a source
of honour for their disciple. Who was the
John, the voice of the
forerunner of Jesus?"
Word,* the lamp of the Light,0 before Whom
he even leaped in the womb," and Whom he
preceded to Hades, whither he was despatched
by the rage of Herod," to herald even there

$ a Sam. v. 1.

a Cf. 1 Sam. ii. 19.
5 1 Kings iv. a9.
9 Exod. iii.
0 S. John v. 35 ;

t Dan. iii. 5.
1.
u a Mace. vii. 1.
i. 8.

c a Kings i. 1.

v S. Luke i. 76.
r S. Luke ii. 41.

fib. it- It.
x Jonah ii. I.

y Ps. cxxxii. r (LXX.).
1} lb. ii. 13, 15.
A D.in. vi. aa.
£ lb. iii. 4.
p b. Matt. xiv. to.

THE PANEGYRIC ON S. BASIL.

Him who was coming.
And, if my language
seems audacious to anyone, let me assure him
beforehand, that in making this comparison,
I neither prefer Basil, nor imply that he is
equal to him who surpasses all who are born
of women," but only show that he was stirred
to emulation, and possessed to some extent his
striking features.
For it is no slight thing for
the earnest to imitate the greatest of men,
even in a slight degree.
Is it not indeed
manifest that Basil was a copy of John's asce
ticism ? He also lived in the wilderness, and
wore in nightly watchings a ragged garb, dur
ing his shrinking retirement ; he also loved a
similar food, purifying himself for God by
abstinence ; he also was thought worthy to be
a herald, if not a forerunner, of Christ, and
there went out to him not only all the region
round about/ but also that which was beyond
its borders ; he also stood between the two
covenants, abolishing the letter of the one by
administering the spirit of the other, and
bringing about the fulfilment of the hidden
law through the dissolution of that which
was apparent.

76. He emulated the zeal of Peter,t the in
tensity of Paul, the faith of both these men of
name and of surname, the lofty utterance of
the sons of Zebedee, the frugality and sim
plicity of all the disciples.
Therefore he was
also entrusted with the keys of the heavens,4
and not only from -Jerusalem and round about
unto Illyricum,* but he embraces a wider circle
in the Gospel ; he is not named, but becomes,
a Son of thunder; and lying upon the breast
of Jesus, he draws thence the power of his
word, and the depth of his thoughts. He was
prevented from becoming a Stephen,i eager
though he was, since reverence stayed the
hands of those who would have stoned him. I
am able to sum up still more concisely, to
avoid treating in detail on these points of each
individual.
In some respects he discovered,
in some he emulated, in others he surpassed
In his many-sided virtues he ex
the good.
celled all men of this day.
I have but one
thing left to say, and in few words.

77. So great was his virtue, and the emi
nence of his fame, that many of his minor char
acteristics, nay, even his physical defects, have
been assumed by others with a view to no
toriety.
For instance his paleness, his beard,
his gait, his thoughtful, and generally medita
tive, hesitation in speaking, which, in the illjudged, inconsiderate imitation of many, took
And besides, the
the form of melancholy.

style of his dress, the shape of his bed, and
his manner of eating, none of which was to
him a matter of consequence, but simply the
So you might
result of accident and chance.
see many Basils in outward semblance, among
these statues in outline, for it would be too
much to call them his distant echo.
For an
echo, though it is the dying away of a sound,
at any rate represents it with great clearness,
while these men fall too far short of him to
satisfy even their desire to approach him.
•Nor was it a slight thing, but a matter with
good reason held in the highest estimation, to
chance to have met him or done him some
service, or to carry away the souvenir of some
thing which he had said or done in jest or in
earnest : as I know that I have myself often
taken pride in doing ; for his improvisations
were much more precious and brilliant than
the laboured efforts of other men.

78. But when, after he had finished his
course, and kept the faith," he longed to de
part, and the time for his crown was ap
proaching/ he did not hear the summons :
" Get thee up into the mountain and die," y but
"Die, and come up to us." And here again he
wrought a wonder in no wise inferior to these mentioned
before. For when he was almost dead, and breathless,
and had lost the greater part of his powers, he grew
stronger in his last words, so as to depart with the
utterances of religion, and, by ordaining the most ex
cellent of his attendants, bestowed upon them both his
hand and the Spirit : so that his disciples, who had
aided him in his priestly office, might not be defrauded
of the priesthood.
The remainder of my task I ap
proach, but with reluctance, as it would fall more fitly
for I
from the mouths of others than from my own.
cannot philosophise over my misfortune, even if
greatly longed to do so, when I recollect that the loss
is common to us all, and that the misfortune has be
fallen the whole world.

79. He lay, drawing his last breath, and awaited by
the choir on high, towards which he had long directed ,
his gaze.
Around him poured the whole city, unable
to bear his loss, inveighing against his departure, as if
it had been an oppression, and clinging to his soul, as
though it had been capable of restraint or compulsion
at their hands or their prayers.
Their suffering had
driven them distracted, all were eager, were it possible,
And when
to add to his life a portion of their own.
they failed, for it must needs be proved that he was a
man, and, with his last words " Into thy Hands I com
mend my spirit,"' he had joyfully resigned his soul to
the care of the angels who carried him away ; not with
out having some religious instructions and injunctions
for the benefit of those who were present-then oc
curred a wonder more remarkable than any which had
happened before.

80. The saint was being carried out, lifted high by
the hands of holy men, and everyone was eager, some
to seize the hem of his garment,' others only just to
touch the shadow, £ or the bier which bore his holy re
mains (for what could be more holy or pure than that
body), others to draw near to those who were carrying

a S. Matt. xi. 11.
6 S. Matt. xvi. x.

£ lb. iii. 5.
c Rom. xv. 1.

y Acts iv. 8.
£ Acts vii. 58.

a 2 Tim. iv. 7.
6 Ps. xxxi. 6.

0 Phil. i. 23.
c S. Luke viii. 44.

v Peut. xxxii. 49.
5 Acts v. 15.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

And even now I am admonished I

it, others only to enjoy the sight, as if even this were
beneficial.
Market places, porticos, houses of two or
three stories were tilled with people escorting, preced
ing, following, accompanying him, and trampling upon
eacll other; tens of thousands of every race and age,
beyond all previous experience. The psalmody was
overborne by the lamentations, philosophic resignation
sank beneath the misfortune.
Our own people vied
with strangers, Jews, Greeks, and foreigners, and they
with us, for a greater share in the benefit, by means
of a more abundant lamentation.
To close my story,
the calamity ended in danger ; many souls departed
along with him, from the violence of the pushing and
confusion, who have been thought happy in their end,
departing together with him, "funeral victims," peri
haps some fervid orator might call them.
The body
having at Inst escaped from those who would seize it,
and made its way through those who went before it,
was consigned to the tomb of his fathers, the high
priest being added to the priests, the mighty voice
which rings in my ears to the heralds, the martyr to
the martyrs.
And now he is in heaven, where, if I
mistake not, he is offering sacrifices for us, and pray
ing for the people, for though he has left us, he has
While I, Gregory, who am half
not entirely left us.
dead, and, cleft in twain, torn away from our great
union, and dragging along a life of pain which runs
not easily, as may be supposed, after separation from
him. know not what is to be my end now that I have
lost my guidance.
and instructed in nightly visions, if ever I fall short of
my duty.
And my present object is not so much to
mingle lamentations with my praises, or to portray the
public life of the man, or publish a picture of virtue
common to all time, and an example salutary to all
churches, and to all souls, which we may keep in view,
as a living law, and so rightly direct our lives as to
counsel you, who have been completely initiated into
his doctrine, to fix your eyes upon him, as one who
sees you and is seen by you, and thus to be perfected
by the Spirit.

81. Come hither then, and surround me, all ye
members of his choir, both of the clergy and the
laity, both of our own country and from abroad ; aid
me in my eulogy, by each supplying or demanding the
account of some of his excellences.
Regard, ye occu
pants of the bench, the lawgiver ; ye politicians, the
statesman ; ye men of the people, his orderliness ; ye
men of letters, the instructor ; ye virgins, the leader
of the bride ; ye who are yoked in marriage, the restrainer ; ye hermits, him who gave you wings ; ye
cenobitcs, the judge ; ye simple men, the guide; ye
contemplalives, the divine ; ye cheerful
ones, the
bridle ; ye unfortunate men, the consoler, the staff of
hoar hairs, the guide of youth, the relief of poverty,
the steward of abundance. Widows also will, I imag
ine, praise their protector, orphans their father, poor
men their friend, strangers their entertainer, brothers
the man of brotherly love, the sick their physician,
whatever be their sickness and the healing they need,
the healthy the preserver of health, and all men
him who made himself all things to all that he might
gain the majority, if not all,

82. This is my offering to thee, Basil, uttered by
the tongue which once was the sweetest of all to thee,
of him who was thy fellow in age and rank.
If it have
approached thy deserts, thanks are due to thee, for it
was from confidence in thee that I undertook to speak
But if it fall far short of thy expectations,
of thee.
what must be our feelings, who are worn out with age
and disease and regret for thee ?
Yet God is pleased,
when we do what we can.
Yet mayest thou gaze upon
us from above, thou divine and sacred person ; either

stay by thy entreaties our thorn in the flesh," given to
us by God for our discipline, or prevail upon us to
bear it boldly, and guide all our life towards that
which is most for our profit. And if we be translated,
do thou receive us there also in thine own tabernacle,
that, as we dwell together, and gaze together more
clearly and more perfectly upon the holy and blessed
Trinity, of Which we have now in some degree received
the image, our longing may at last be satisfied, by
gaining this recompense for all the battles we have
fought and the assaults we have endured.
Such are
our words on thy behalf : who will there be to praise
us, since we leave this life after thee, even if we of
fer any topic worthy of words or praise in Christ Jesus
our Lord, to Whom be glory forever? Amen.

INTRODUCTION TO THE SECOND
ORATION ON EASTER.

This Oration was not, as its title would perhaps
lead us to suppose, delivered immediately after the
first ; but an interval of many years elapsed between
them, and the two have no connection with each oth
Chronologically they are the first and last of S.
er.
Gregory's Sermons.
The Second was delivered in
the Church of Arianzus, a village near Nazianzus,
where he had inherited some property, to which hewithdrew after resigning the Archbishopric of Con
stantinople, and then, finding the administration even
of the little Bishopric of Nazianzus too much for
his advancing years and declining strength, he re
tired to Arianzus about the end of A.D. 383, dying
there in 389 or 393. "The exordium of this discourse
is quite in the style of the Bible ; the Orator here de
scribes and puts words into the mouth of the Angel of
His object is to show the impor
the Resurrection.
tance of the day's solemnities, and to explain allcgoricallv all the circumstances of the ancient Passover,
applying them to Christ and the Christian life. Two
passages are borrowed verbatim from the discourse on
the Nativity, preached at Constantinople" (Benoit).

The Benedictine Editors profess themselves unable
S.
to determine whether this
Gregory himself-or to the carelessness of some aman
uensis.

repetition is due to

ORATION XLV.

The Second Oration on Easter.

I.

I will stand upon my watch,9 saith the
venerable Habakkuk ; and I will take my post
beside him today on the authority and ob
servation which was given me of the Spirit ;
and I will look forth, and will observe what
shall lx; said to me.
Well, I have taken my
stand, and looked forth ; and behold a man
riding on the clouds and he is very high, and
his countenance is as the countenance of an
Angel,* and his vesture as the brightness of
piercing lightning ; and he lifts his hand to
ward the East, and cries with a loud voice.
His voice is like the voice of a trumpet ; and
round about Him is as it were a multitude of
the Heavenly, Host ; and he saith, Today is
salvation come unto the world, to that which
0 Hab. ii. j.

a 2 Cor- xii 7.

■> Jud. xm. 6.

THE SECOND ORATION ON EASTER.

visible, and to that which is

is
invisible.
Christ is risen from the dead, rise ye with
Christ is returned again to Himself,
Him.
Christ is freed from the tomb, be
return ye.
ye freed from the bond of sin.
The gates of
hell are opened, and death is destroyed, and
the old Adam is put aside, and the New is
fulfilled ; if any man be in Christ he is a new
Thus he speaks ;
creature ; 0 be ye renewed.
and the rest sing out, as they did before
when Christ was manifested to us by His
birth on earth, their glory to God in
the
highest, on earth, peace, goodwill among
And with them I also utter the same
men.P
words among you. And would that I might
receive a voice that should rank with the
Angel's, and should sound through all the
ends of the earth.

II. The Lord's Passover, the Passover, and
again I say the Passover to the honour of the
Trinity.
This is to us a Feast of feasts and a
Solemnity of solemnities v as far exalted above
all others (not only those which are merely
human and creep on the ground, but even
those which are of Christ Himself, and are
celebrated in His honour) as the Sun is above
the stars.
Beautiful indeed yesterday was our
splendid array, and our illumination, in which
both in public and private we associated our
selves, every kind of men, and almost every
rank, illuminating the night with our crowded
fires, formed after the fashion of that great
light, both that with which the heaven above
us lights its beacon fires, and that which is
above the heavens, amid the angels (the first
luminous nature, next to the first nature of
all, because springing directly from it), and
that which is in the Trinity, from which all
light derives its being, parted from the un
divided light and honoured.
But today's
is more beautiful and more illustrious ; inas
much as yesterday's light was a forerunner
of the rising of the Great Light, and as it
were a kind of rejoicing in preparation for
the Festival ;
but today we are celebrating
the Resurrection itself, no longer as an object

a 2 Cor. v. 17.
(J The reading evooxi'a of the Received Text is pronounced by
Tischendorf to have less authority than «u6o«i'a?. which he adopts
on the testimony of important MSS., but chiefly on the strength
of a citation and comment three times in Oricen, and because nil
the l.atin Fathers read boner voluntatis.
Laehmann, Tregelles.
Wc*tcott. and with s'>me hesitation Alford follow him : though
Tregelles and Wcstcott allow ev£oKta; a place in the margin.
Wordsworth (giving no reason) ; and Scrivener because he thinks
it makes better sense, read evSoxia, and scout tvSoKtat : which,
however, is found in four of the five oldest MSS., and in alt the
I.atin versions and Fathers. The Creek Fathers, however, all but
unanimously support the Received Text.
says Niceioprrf
tas, is one thing, waiojyvpic another,
eopnj is the Commemora
tion of a Saint ; navrpfvpit is Kastcr, or Ascension, or some other
mystical festival. Thus Syncsius calls the Paschal Letters of the
Alexandrian Patriarch iranryvptxd ypa>para.

y iopTrj coprwi-, kou ffwijTVpic iravTryvptov.

different
.

of expectation, but as having already come to
pass, and gathering the whole world unto it
Let then different persons bring forth
self.
offerings
different fruits and offer
at this season, smaller or greater
such
.
spiritual offerings as are dear to God
as each may have power.
For scarcely An
gels themselves could offer gifts worthy of its
rank, those first and intellectual and pure be
ings, who are also eye-witnesses of the Glory
That is on high; if even these can attain the
full strain of praise. We will for our part of
fer a discourse, the best and most precious
thing we have-especially as we are praising
the Word for the blessing which He hath
bestowed on the reasoning creation.
I will
begin from this point.
For I cannot endure,
when I am engaged in offering the sacrifice of
the lips concerning the Great Sacrifice and
the greatest of days, to fail to recur to God,
and to take my beginning from Him. There
fore I pray you, cleanse your mind and ears
and thoughts, all you who delight in such sub
jects, since the discourse will be concerning
God, and will be divine ; that you inay de
part filled with delights of a sort that do not
pass away into nothingness.
And it shall be
at once very full and very concise, so as nei
ther to distress you by its deficiencies, nor to
displease you by satiety.

III. GodTM always was and always is, and al
ways will be ; or rather, God always Is^ For
Was and Will Be are fragments of our time,
But He is Eternal
and of changeable nature.
Being ; and this is the Name He gives Him
self when giving -the Oracles to Moses in the
Mount.
For in Himself He sums up and
contains all Being, having neither beginning
like some
in the past nor end in the future .
great Sea of Being, limitless and unbounded,
transcending all conception of time and nature,
only adumbrated by the mind, and that very
dimly and scantily .
not by His Essentials
.
but by His Environment,'!' one image being
got from one source and another from another,
and combined into some sort of presentation
of the truth, which escapes us before we have
caught it, and which takes to flight before we
have conceived it, blazing forth upon our
master-part, even when that is cleansed, as
the lightning flash which will not stay its

.

aThis passage to the end of c. ix. occurs verbatim in the oration
on the Theophany, cc.vii.-xtii.
0 "There is no Past in Eternity, nnd no Future ; for that which
is past has ceased to be. and that which is future has not yet
come into existence ; but Kternity is only Present :
it has no Past
which does not still exist nor any Future which does not yet
exist" (S. Augustine dc Vera Rel.. c. 49).
to mean those
created Existences of which God is the Self- Existent 1Jause.

y The Environment here spoken of seems

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

.

.

course does upon our sight
in order, as I
conceive, by that part of it which we can
comprehend to draw us to
itself (for that
which is altogether incomprehensible is out
side the bounds of hope, and not within the
compass of endeavour) ; and by that part of It
which we cannot comprehend to move our
wonder ; and as an object of wonder to be
come more an object of desire ; and being
desired, to purify ; and purifying to make us
like God ; so that, when we have become like
Himself, God may, to use a bold expression,
hold converse with us as God ; being united
to us, and known by us ; and that perhaps to
the same extent as He already knows those
who are known to Him.° The Divine Nature,
then, is boundless and hard to understand, and
all that we can comprehend of Him is His
boundlessness ; even though one may conceive
that because He is of a simple Nature He is
therefore either wholly incomprehensible or
perfectly comprehensible.
For let us further
enquire what is implied by "is of a simple
For it is quite certain that this
Nature?"
simplicity is not itself its nature, just as com
position is not by itself the essence of com
pound beings.

IV. And when Infinity is considered from
two points of view, beginning and end (for
that which is beyond these and not limited
by them is Infinity), when the mind looks
into the depths above, not having where to
stand, and leans upon phenomena to form
an idea of God it calls the Infinite and Un
approachable which it finds there by the
name of Unoriginate.
And when it looks
into the depth below and at the future, it
calls Him Undying and Imperishable.
And
when it draws a conclusion from the whole, it
For Eternity is neither
calls Him Eternal.
time nor part of time ;
for it cannot be
measured.
But what time measured by the
course of the sun is to us, that Eternity is to
the Everlasting ; namely a sort of timelike
movement and interval,
coextensive with
Their Existence.
This however is all that I
must now say of God ; for the present is not
a suitable time, as my present subject is not
the doctrine of God, but that of the Incarn
And when I say God, I mean Father,
ation.
Son, and Holy Ghost ; for Godhead is neither
diffused beyond These, so as to introduce a
mob of gods, nor yet bounded by a smaller
compass than These, so as to condemn us for
a poverty stricken conception of Deity, either
Judaizing to save the Monarchia, or falling

a John x. 15 ;

1 Cor. xiii. 12.

into heathenism by the multitude of our gods.
For the evil on either side is the same, though
found in contrary directions.
Thus then is
the Holy of Holies, Which is hidden even
from the Seraphim, and is glorified with a
thrice-repeated Holy meeting in one ascription
of the title Lord and God, as one of our
predecessors has most beautifully and loftily
reasoned out.

V. But since this movement of Self-contem
plation alone could not satisfy Goodness, but
Good must be poured out and go forth be
yond Itself, to multiply the objects of Its
beneficence (for this was essential to the high
est Goodness), He first conceived the Angelic
and Heavenly Powers. And this conception
was a work fulfilled by His Word and per
fected by His Spirit.
And so the Secondary
Splendours came into being, as the ministers
of the Primary Splendour (whether we are to
conceive of them as intelligent Spirits, or as
Fire of an immaterial and incorporeal kind,
or as some other nature approaching this as
I should like to say that
near as may be).
they are incapable of movement in the direc
tion of evil, and susceptible only of the move
ment of good, as being about God and illum
inated with the first Rays from God (for
earthly beings have but the second illumina
tion), but I am obliged to stop short of saying
that they are immovable, and to conceive and
speak of them as only difficult to move, be
cause of him who for His Splendour was called
Lucifer, but l)ecame and is called Darkness
through his pride ; and the Apostate Hosts
who are subject to him, creators of evil by
their revolt against good, and our inciters.

VI. Thus then and for these reasons, He gave
being to the world of thought, as far as I can
reason on these matters, and estimate great
things in my own poor language.
Then, when
His first Creation was in good order, He con
ceives a second world, material and visible ;
and this a system of earth and sky and all that
is in the midst of them ; an admirable crea
tion indeed when we look at the fair form of
every part, but yet more worthy of admiration
when we consider the harmony and unison of
the whole, and how each part fits in with
every other in fair order, and all with the
whole, tending to the perfect completion of
the vvorld as a Unit.
This was to shew that
He could call into being not only a nature
akin to Himself, but also one altogether alien
For akin to Deity are those natures
to Him.
which are intellectual, and only to be com
prehended by mind ; but all of which sense
can take cognizance are utterly alien to It j

THE SECOND ORATION ON EASTER.

and of these the furthest removed from It are
all those which are entirely destitute of soul
and power of motion.

VII. Mind then and sense, thus distin
guished from each other, had remained within
their own boundaries, and bore in themselves
the magnificence of the Creator-Word, silent
praisers and thrilling heralds of His mighty
Not yet was there any mingling of
work.
both, nor any mixture of these opposites,
tokens of a greater wisdom and generosity in
the creation of natures ; nor as yet were the
whole riches of goodness made known. Now
to exhibit
the Creator-Word, determining
this, and to produce a single living being out
of both (the invisible and the visible creation,
I mean) fashions Man ; and taking a body
from already existing matter, and placing in
it a Breath taken from Himself (which the
Word knew to be an intelligent soul, and the
image of God), as a sort of second world,
great in
littleness, He placed him on the
earth, a new Angel, a mingled \vorshipper,
fully initiated into the visible creation, but
only partially into the intellectual ; king of all
upon earth, but subject to the King above ;
earthly and heavenly ; temporal and yet im
mortal ; visible and yet intellectual ; half-way
between greatness and lowliness; in one per
son combining spirit and flesh ; spirit because
of the favour bestowed on him, flesh on ac
count of the height to which he had been
raised ; the one that he might continue to live
and glorify his benefactor, the other that he
might suffer, and by suffering be put in re
membrance, and be corrected if he became
proud in
his greatness ; a living creature,
trained here and then moved elsewhere; and
to complete the mystery, deified by its inclin
ation to God ... for to this, I think,
tends that light of Truth which here we pos
sess but in measure ; that we should both see
and experience the Splendour of God, which
is worthy of Him Who made us, and will dis
solve us, and remake us after a loftier fashion.
VIII. This being He placed in paradisewhatever that paradise may have been (having
honoured him with the gift of free will, in
order that good might belong to him as the
result of his choice, no less than to Him Who
had implanted the seeds of it) -to till the im
mortal plants, by which is perhaps meant the
Divine conceptions, both the simpler and the
more perfect ; naked in his simplicity and in
artificial life ; and without any covering or
screen ; for it was fitting that he who was from
the beginning should be such.
And He gave
Him a Law, as material for his free will to

act upon.
This Law was a commandment as
to what plants he might partake of, and which
one he might not touch.
This latter was the
Tree of Knowledge ; not, however, because it
was evil from the beginning when planted ;
nor was it forbidden because God grudged it
to men-let not the enemies of God wag their
tongues in that direction, or imitate the ser
pent. But it would have been good if partaken
of at the proper time ; for the Tree was, ac
cording to my theory, Contemplation, which
it is only safe for those who have reached ma
turity of habit to enter upon ; but which is
not good for those who are still somewhat
simple and greedy ; just as neither is solid
food good for those who are yet tender and
have need of milk.
But when through the
devil's malice and the woman's caprice," to
which she succumbed as the more tender, and
which she brought to bear upon the man, as
she was the more apt to persuade-alas for my
weakness, for that of my first father was mine ;
he forgot the commandment which had -been
given him, and yielded to the baleful fruit ;
and for his sin was banished at once from the
tree of life, and from paradise, and from God ;
and put on the coats of skins, that is, perhaps,
the coarser flesh, both mortal and contradict
ory. And this was the first thing which he
learnt-his own shame-and he hid himselt
from God.
Yet here too he makes a gain,
namely death and the cutting off of sin, in
order that evil may not be immortal.
Thus,
his punishment is changed into a mercy, for
it is in mercy, I am persuaded, that God in
flicts punishment.

IX. And having first been chastened by
many means because his sins were many, whose
root of evil sprang up through divers causes and
sundry times, by word, by law, by prophets,
by benefits, by threats, by plagues, by waters,
by fires, by wars, by victories, by defeats, by
signs in heaven, and signs in the air, and in
the earth, and in the sea ; by unexpected
changes of men, of cities, of nations (the ob
ject of which was the destruction of wicked
ness) at last he needed a stronger remedy, for
diseases were growing worse ; mutual
his
unnatural
slaughters,
crimes, and that first and last of all evils, idol
atry, and the transfer of worship from the
Creator to the creatures.
As these required a
greater aid, so they also obtained a greater.
And that was that the Word of God Himself,
Who is before all worlds, the Invisible, the
Incomprehensible, the Bodiless, the Begin-

adulteries,

perjuries,

a Wisd. ii. 34.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

ning of beginning, the Light of Light, the
Source of Life and Immortality, the Image of
the Archetype, the Immovable Seal, the Un
changeable Image, the Father's Definition and
Word, came to His own Image, and took on
Him Flesh for the sake of our flesh, and min
gled Himself with an intelligent soul for my
soul's sake, purifying like by like ; and in all
points except sin was made Man; conceived
by the Virgin, who first in body and soul was
purified by the Holy Ghost, for it was needful
both That Child-bearing should be honoured
and that Virginity should receive a higher
He came forth then, as God, with
honour.
That which He had assumed ; one Person
in two natures, flesh and Spirit, of which
the latter deified the former. O new com
mingling ; O strange conjunction! the Selfexistent comes into Being, the Uncreated is
created, That which cannot be contained is
contained by the intervention of an intellect
ual soul mediating between the Deity and the
corporeity of the flesh.
And He who gives
riches becomes poor ; for He assumes the pov
erty of my flesh, that I may assume the riches
full empties
of His Godhead.
Himself; for He empties
Himself of His
Glory for a short while, that I may have a
What is the riches of
share in His Fulness.
What is this mystery that is
His Goodness ?
around me ?
I had a share in the Image and
I did not keep it ; He partakes of my flesh
that He may both save the Image and make
He communicates a Sec
the flesh immortal.
ond Communion, far more marvellous than
the first, inasmuch as then He imparted the
better nature, but now He Himself assumes
the worse.
This is more godlike than the
former action ; this is loftier in the eyes of all
men of understanding.

He that is

X. But perhaps some one of those who are
too impetuous and festive may say, " What has
all this to do with us?
Spur on your horse
to the goal ; talk to us about the Festival and
the reasons for our being here to-day."
Yes,
this is what I am about to do, although I have
begun at a somewhat previous point, being
compelled to do so by the needs of my argu
There will be no harm in the eyes of
ment.
scholars and lovers of the beautiful if we say
a few words about the word Pascha itself, for
such an addition will not be useless in their
ears.
This great and venerable Pascha is
called Phaska by the Hebrews in their own
language ; and the word means Passing Over.
Historically, from their flight and migration
from Egypt into the Land of Canaan ; spirit
ually, from the

progress and ascent from I

things below to things above and to the Land
of Promise. And we observe that a thing
which we often find to have happened in
Scripture, the change of certain nouns from
an uncertain to a clearer sense, or from a
coarser to a more refined, has taken place in
this instance.
For some people, supposing
this to be a name of the Sacred Passion, and
in consequence Grecizing the word by chang
ing Phi and Kappa into Pi and Chi, called
the Day Pascha." And custom took it up and
confirmed the word, with the help of the ears
of most people, to whom it had a more pious
sound.

XI. But before our time the Holy Apostle
declared that the Law was but a shadow of
things to come.P which are conceived by
thought. And God too, who in still older
times gave oracles to Moses, said when giving
laws concerning these things, See thou make
all things according to the pattern shewed
thee in the Mount,» when He shewed him the
visible things as an adumbration of and de
sign for the things that are invisible. And
I am persuaded that none of these things
has been ordered in vain, none without a rea
son, none in a grovelling manner or unwor
thy of the legislation of God and the ministry
of Moses, even though it be difficult in each
type to find a theory descending to the most
delicate details,
to every point about the
Tabernacle itself, and its measures and mate
rials, and the Levites and Priests who carried
them, and all the particulars which were en
acted about the Sacrifices and the purifica
tions and the Offerings ; 8 and though these
are only to be understood by those who rank
with Moses in virtue, or have made the near
For in that
est approach to his learning.
Mount itself God is seen by men ; on the one
hand through His own descent from His lofty
abode, on the other through His drawing us
up from our abasement on earth, that the In
comprehensible may be in some degree, and
as far as is safe, comprehended by a mortal
nature.
For in no other way is it possible
for the denseness of a material body and an

a Pascha represents the Hebrew PHSKH. Throughout 2 Chron.
the I.W. represents the word by Phased, which like Pascha is a
transliteration of the Hebrew word. The form which the translit
eration takes is due to the fact that the Greek language doc* not
tolerate these two aspirates in juxtaposition.
S. Gregory is cor
rect in remarking that Pascha has no real connection with irdffvw
(to suffer), though it might appear to unlearned cars that it has.

fi Heb. x. 1.
& a^aiptfta is given by the Lexicons as the Heave-Offering, and
it is certainly used in that sense among others (.dl sacrificial) in
the LXX. Suicer, however, follows Suidas in regarding the word
as quite general ; he also quotes Zonaras' definition . "Quod offertur ai^at'offxa dicitur. quod a toto mactal.-e animantis corpore al>-
stractum sit." Balsamon, according to the same authority, makes it
the portion which was severed from the carcase of the victim and
set apart for the Priest (f.f., the heave-offering. Lev. vii. 14, 3a).

y Kxod. xxv. 40.

THE SECOND ORATION ON EASTER.

imprisoned mind to come into consciousness
of God, except by His assistance.
Then
therefore all men do not seem to have been
deemed worthy of the same rank and posi
tion ; but one of one place and one of an
other, each, I think, according to the measure
of his own purification.
Some have even
been altogether driven away, and only per
mitted to hear the Voice from on high, name
ly those whose dispositions are altogether like
wild beasts, and who are unworthy of divine
mysteries.
XII.

But we, standing midway between
those whose minds are utterly dense on the
one side, and on the other those who are very
contemplative and exalted, that we may
neither remain quite idle and immovable, nor
yet be more busy than we ought, and fall
short of and be estranged from our purposefor the former course is Jewish and very low,
and the latter is only fit for the dream-sooth
sayer, and both alike are to be condemnedlet us say our say upon these matters, so far
as is within our reach, and not very absurd,
or exposed to the ridicule of the multitude.
Our belief is that since it was needful that we,
who had fallen in consequence of the original
sin, and had been led away by pleasure, even
as far as idolatry and unlawful bloodshed,
should be recalled and raised up again to our
original position through the tender mercy of
God our Father, Who could not endure that
such a noble work of His own hands as Man
should be lost to Him ; the method of our
new creation, and of what should be done,
was this : -that all violent remedies were dis
approved, as not likely to persuade us, and
as quite possibly tending to add to the plague,
through our chronic pride; but that God dis
posed things to our restoration by a gentle
and kindly method of cure.
For a crooked
sapling will not bear a sudden bending the
other way, or violence from the hand that
would straighten it, but will be more quickly
broken than straightened ; and a horse of a
hot temper and above a certain age will not
endure the tyranny of the bit without some
coaxing and encouragement.
Therefore the
Law is given to us as an assistance, like a
boundary wall between God and idols, draw
ing us away from one and to the Other. And
it concedes a little at first, that it may receive
that which is greater.
It concedes the Sacri
fices for a time, that it may establish God in
us, and then when the fitting time shall come
may abolish the Sacrifices also ; thus wisely
changing our minds by gradual removals,
and bringing us over to the Gospel when we

have already been trained to a prompt obedi
ence.

XIII. Thus then and for this cause the writ
ten Law came in, gathering us into Christ ; and
this is the account of the Sacrifices as I ac
count for them.
And that you may not be
ignorant of the depth of His Wisdom and the
riches of His unsearchable judgments,11 He did
not leave even these unhallowed altogether,
or useless, or with nothing in them but mere
blood. 0
But that great, and if I may say so,
in Its first nature unsacrificeable Victim, was
intermingled with the Sacrifices of the Law,
and was a purification, not for a part of the
world, nor for a short time, but for the whole
world and for all time.
For this reason a
Lamb was chosen for its innocence, and its
clothing of the original nakedness.
For such
is the Victim, That was offered for us, Who
is both in Name and fact the Garment of incorruption.
And He was a perfect Victim
not only on account of His Godhead, than
which nothing is more perfect ; but also on
account of that which He assumed having
been anointed with Deity, and having become
one with That which anointed It, and I am
bold to say, made equal with God. A Male,
because offered
rather the
for Adam ;
Stronger for the strong, when the first Man
had fallen under sin; and chiefly because
there is in Him nothing feminine, nothing
unmanly ; but He burst from the bonds of
the'Virgin-Mother's womb with much power,
and a Male was brought forth by the Proph
etess,'' as Isaiah declares the good tidings.
And of a year old, because He is the Sun of
Righteousness* setting out from heaven, and
circumscribed by His visible Nature, and re
turning unto Himself." And "The blessed
crown of Goodness," -being on every side
equal to Himself and alike ; and not only this,
but also as giving life to all the circle of the
virtues, gently commingled and intermixed
with each other, according to the Law of
And Immaculate and
Love and Order. (

or

a Rom. xi. 33.
0 The Jewish Sacrifices had a deep inner meaning and mystery.
In a limited sense they may be called Sacraments of the future
But only in
Atonement, which they prefigured and appealed to.
a limited sense can they be so called, because ti ey did not convey
grace to the soul, but only appealed to the fir.ice to come ; and so
the Sin-offerintrs of the Law arc onlv said to ry»T<er, not to take
away sin. They removed the spiritual disqualification for wor
ship : but they did not restore full Spiritual Communion with God.
Still they were not altocelher unhallowed or usel' ss like those of
the hcatnen, inasmuch as they did point forward and plead the
merits of the One true Sacrifice.

y Isa. xiii. 3.
e The Creek here is very obscure. The meaning scctps to be
that which Nicetas suggests, viz. : -that our Lord in coming to
earth and becoming Incarnate did not in His Divine Nature leave
Heaven, but was. while still here on earth in His own words,
" The Son of Man Which is in Heaven."
£Christ is "a. blessed crown of goodness" according to the

6 Mai. iv. 2.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

guileless, as being the Healer of faults, and of
the defects and taints that come from sin.
For though He both took on Him our sins
and bare our diseases," yet He did not Him
self suffer aught that needed healing.
For
He was tempted in all points like as we are
yet without sin.0 For he that persecuted the
Light that shineth in darkness could not over
take Him.

XIV. What more?

The First Month is
introduced, or rather the beginning of months,
whether it was so among the Hebrews from the
beginning, or was made so later on this account,
and became the first in consequence of the
Mystery ; and the tenth of the Month, for this
is- the most complete number, of units the first
perfect unit, and the parent of perfection. And
it is kept until the fifth day, perhaps because
the Victim, of Whom lam speaking, purifies the
five senses, from which comes falling into sin,
and around which the war rages, inasmuch as
they are open to the incitements to sin. And
it was chosen, not only out of the lambs, but also
out of the inferior species, which are placed on
the left hand v-the kids ; because He is sacri
ficed not only for the righteous, but also for
sinners ; and perhaps even more for these, in
asmuch as we have greater need of His mercy.
that a lamb
And we need not be surprised
for a house should be required as the best
course, but if that could not be, then one
might be obtained by contributions (owing to
poverty) for the houses of a family ; because it
is clearly best that each individual should suf
fice for his own perfecting, and should offer his
own living sacrifice holy unto God Who called
him, being consecrated at all times and in
every respect. But if that cannot be, then that
those who are akin in virtue and of like dispos
ition should be made use of as helpers.
For
I think this provision means that we should
communicate of the Sacrifice to those who are
nearest, if there be need.

XV. Then comes the Sacred Night, the An
niversary of the confused darkness of the pres-

saying of David. Thou shalt bless the crown of the year with Thy
goodness (Ps. lxv. n). The idea of a year is taken from the Sun :
that of the crown from the year (for the year is a circle guarded
Therefore
with four season^), and from the circle again equality.
the crown is Christ, as adorning and beautifying the minds of be
Hut the year of (loudness was that time when Christ
lievers.
moved by goodness was declaring the Gospel, as Isaiah saith of
Him, " He haih sent Me to preach the Gospel to the poor, to pro
claim the acceptable year of the I,ord " (Isa. lxi. i, z). Thus the
Crown is on every side equal.
For if one draw a line from the
upper side to the lower, and the same in a transverse direction, all
the intervals will he equal. And the Crown is like itself, because
its ngure is seen alike on every side, for on every side it is seen as
Therefore Christ as to His Humanity is called a Crown
a round.
of Righteousness, as composed of all the virtues, and having no
end of His poodness anil righteousness ; and of that righteousness
one quality is equality, that is, it allows neither excess nor defect.
For excess and defect do not arise from virtue and righteousness,
but from fault and unrighteousness (Nicetas).

a. Isa. liii. 4.

J Hcb. iv. 15.

y Man. xxv. 33.

ent life, into which the primaeval darkness is
dissolved, and all things come into life and
rank and form, and that which was chaos is
Then we flee from Egypt,
reduced to order.
that is from sullen persecuting sin ; and from
Pharaoh the unseen tyrant, and the
bitter
taskmasters, changing our quarters to the world
above ; and are delivered from the clay and
the brickmaking, and from the husks and dan
gers of this fleshly condition, which for most
men is only not overpowered by mere husklike
calculations. Then the Lamb is slain, and act
and word are sealed with the Precious Blood ;
that is, habit and action, the sideposts of our
doors ;
I mean, of course, of the movements of
mind and opinion, which are rightly opened
and closed by contemplation, since there is a
limit even to thoughts.
Then the last and
gravest plague upon the persecutors, truly wor
thy of the night ; and Egypt mourns the first
born of her own reasonings and actions which
are also called in the Scripture the Seed of the
Chaldeans* removed, and the children of Baby
lon dashed against the rocks and destroyed ; s
and the whole air is full of the cry and clamour
of the Egyptians ; and then the Destroyer of
them shall withdraw from us in reverence of
the Unction.
Then the removal of leaven ;
that is, of the old and sour wickedness, not of
that which is quickening and makes bread ;
for seven days, a number which is of all the
most mystical,* and is co-ordinate with this
present world, that we may not lay in provis
ion of any Egyptian dough, or relic of Pharisaic
or ungodly teaching.

XVI. Well, let them lament ; we will feed
on the Lamb toward evening-for Christ's
Passion was in the completion of the ages ; be
cause too He communicated His Disciples in
the evening with His Sacrament, destroying
the darkness of sin ; and not sodden, but roast
-that our word may have in it nothing that is
unconsidered or watery, or easily made away
with ; but may be entirely consistent and solid,
and free from all that is impure and from all
vanity. And let us be aided by the good coals,8
kindling and purifying our minds from Him

P Ps. exxxviii. 9.

a Judith v. 6.
15),
y We arc to part with leaven for seven days (Exod. xii.
that is. with sin for the whole week of this life. The number Seven
flays signifies the passing of time which revolves in weeks.
And
this number is mystical, because it is virgin and signifies virginity
and the angelic life: for it alone, as arithmeticians teach, of all
the numbers within the decade, is neither a multiple nor a measure,
For there are
and also contains in itself the Four and the Three.
four elements of the world, and the Trinity is their Creator. He
calls it co-ordinate with the world, because the world was made in
seven days, and again because when seven thousand years are
completed the end of the world is to c>mc {Nicetas). S. Augustine
(Civ. Dei. c. ii. 31) says that the number Seven often stands for
the Universe, because it is made up of Four which is altogether
even (2 and 2 the sum of two even numliers) anil Three which is
altogether uneven (1 and 1 and 1).

6 Isa. vi. 6.

THE SECOND ORATION ON EASTER.

That cometh to send fire on the earth," that
shall destroy all evil habits, and to hasten its
kindling.
Whatsoever then there be, of solid
and nourishing in the Word, shall be eaten with
the inward parts and hidden things of the
mind, and shall be consumed and given up to
spiritual digestion ;
aye, from head to foot,
that is, from the first contemplations of God
head to the very last thoughts about the Incar
nation. Neither let us carry aught of it abroad,
nor leave it till the morning ; because most of
our Mysteries may not be carried out to them
that are outside, nor is there beyond this night
any further purification ; and procrastination is
not creditable to those who have a share in the
Word. For just as it is good and well-pleasing
to God not to let anger last through the day,0
but to get rid of it before sunset, whether you
take this of time or in a mystical sense, for it is
not safe for us that the Sun of Righteousness
should go down upon our wrath ; so too we
ought not to let such Food remain all night,
nor to put it off till to-morrow.
But whatever
is of bony nature and not fit for food and
hard for us even to understand, this must not
be broken ; that is, badly divined and miscon
ceived (I need not say that in the history not
a bone of Jesus was broken, even though His
death was hastened by His cnicifiers on account
of the Sabbath) ; * nor must it be stripped off
and thrown away, lest that which is holy should
be given to the dogs,4 that is, to the evil hearers
of the Word ; jast as the glorious pearl of the
Word is not to be cast before swine ; but it
shall be consumed with the fire with which the
burnt o'fferings also are consumed, being re
fined and preserved by the Spirit That searcheth and knoweth all things, not destroyed in
the waters, nor scattered abroad as the calf's
head which was hastily made by Israel was by
Moses,' for a reproach for their hardness ofheart.
XVII. Nor would it be right for us to pass
over the manner of this eating either, for the
Law does not do so, but carries its mystical
labour even to this point in the literal enact
ment.
Let us consume the Victim in haste,
eating It with unleavened bread, with bitter
herbs, and with our loins girded, and our shoes
on our feet, and leaning on staves like old
men ; with haste, that we fall not into that
fault which was forbidden to Lot i by the com-

0 Ephes. IT. 26.

a I.uke xii. 49.
y S. Gregory does not mean to say that our Lord's death was
actually hastened by violent actions on the part of the Jews, which
we know was not the case : but that they were anxious that it
should take place before the Sabbath began. The two thieves, who
were still living, received the couft tie grace from the Roman sol
diers, who broke their lees; but our Lord, much to their astonish
ment, was dead already, so this course was not taken with Him,
but His side was pierced with a spear.
e Exod. xxxii. so.

8 Matt. vii. 6.

(Gen. xix. 17.

mandment, that we look not around, nor stay
in all that neighbourhood, but that we escape
to the mountain, that we be not overtaken by
the strange fire of Sodom, nor be congealed
into a pillar of salt in consequence of our turn
ing back to wickedness ; for this is the result
of delay.
With bitter herbs, for a life accord
ing to the Will of God is bitter and arduous,
especially to beginners, and higher than pleas
For although the new yoke is easy and
ures.
the burden light," as you are told, yet this is
on account of the hope and the reward, which
is far more abundant than the hardships of this
life.
If it were not so, who would not say that
the Gospel is more full of toil and trouble than
the enactments of the Law ?
For, while the
Law prohibits only the completed acts of sin,
we are condemned for the causes also, almost
as if they were acts.
The Law says, Thou shalt
not commit adultery ; hxA you may not even
desire, kindling passion by curious and ear
nest looks.
Thou shall not kill, says the Law ;
but you are not even to return a blow, but
on the contrary are to offer yourself to the
smiter. How much more ascetic is the Gos
pel than the Law !
Thou shalt not forswear
thyself is the Law ; but you are not to swear
at all, either a greater or a lesser oath, for an
oath is the parent of perjury.
Thou shalt not
join house to house, nor field to field, oppress
ing the poor ; 0 but you are to set aside willingly
even your just possessions, and to be stripped
for the poor, that without encumbrance you
may take up the Cross » and be enriched with
the unseen riches.

XVIII. And let the loins of the unreason
ing animals be unbound and loose, for they
have not the gift of reason which can overcome
pleasure (it
is not needful to say that even
they know the limit of natural movement).
But let that part of your being which is the
seat of passion, and which neighs,4 as Holy
Scripture calls it, when sweeping away this
shameful passion, be restrained by a girdle of
continence, so that you may eat the Passover
purely, having mortified your members which
are upon the earth,' and copying the girdle £ of
John, the Hermit and Forerunner and great
Herald of the Tnith.
Another girdle I know,
the soldierly and manly one, I mean, from
which the Euzoni of Syria and certain Monozoni '
in re
spect of this too that God saith in an oracle
to Job, " Nay, but gird up thy loins like a

take their name.

And it

is

a Matt. xi. 30.
8 Jcr. v. 8.
b The expression is often used in the LXX. to represent

j3 Isa. v. 8.
« Col. iii. 5.
the word T113i translated A Band, especially in 3 Kings.

y Mark x. at.
f Matt. iii. 4.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

man, and give a manly answer." a With this
also holy David boasts that he is girded with
strength from God/ and speaks of God Him
self as clothed with strength * and girded about
with power-against the ungodly of coursethough perhaps some may prefer to see in this
a declaration of the abundance of His power,
and, as it were, its restraint, just as also He
clothes Himself with Light as with a garment.4
For who shall endure His unrestrained power
and light? Do I enquire what there is com
mon to the loins and to truth ? What then is
the meaning to S. Paul of the expression,
girt
"Stand, therefore, having your loins
Is it perhaps that con
about with truth ? " •
templation is to restrain concupiscence, and
not to allow it to be carried in another direc
tion ?
For that which is disposed to love in a
particular direction will not have the same
power towards other pleasures.

XIX. And as to shoes, let him who is about
to touch the Holy Land which the feet of God
have trodden, put them off, as Moses did upon
the Mount, f that he may bring there nothing
dead ; nothing to come between Man and God.
So too if any disciple is sent to preach the
Gospel, let him go in a spirit of philosophy
and without excess, inasmuch as he must, be
sides being without money and without staff
and with but one coat, also be barefooted,'' that
the feet of those who preach the Gospel of
Peace and every other good may appear beau
But he who would flee from Egypt and
tiful.'
the things of Egypt must put on shoes for
safety's sake, especially in regard to the scor
pions and snakes in which Egypt so abounds,
so as not to be injured by those which watch
the heel," which also we are bidden to tread
And concerning the staff and
under foot/
the signification of it, my belief is as follows.
There is one I know to lean upon, and another
which belongs to Pastors and Teachers, and
which corrects human sheep.
Now the Law
prescribes to you the staff to lean upon, that
you may not break down in your mind when
you hear of God's Blood, and His Passion,
and His death ; and that you may not be car
ried away to heresy in your defence of God ;
but without shame and without doubt may eat
the Flesh and drink the Blood, if you are de
sirous of true
life, neither disbelieving His
words about His Flesh, nor offended at those
about His Passion.
Lean upon this, and stand
firm and strong, in nothing shaken by the ad
versaries nor carried away by the plausibility

&Ib.civ.7.

a Job xxxviii. 3.
0 Isa. lit. 7.

t Eph. v. 14.

0 Ps. xviii. 3a.

f Kxod. iii.

k Gen. iii. 15.

y lb. xciii. 1.
5.
A Luke x. 19.

if Matt. x. 9.

of their arguments.
Stand upon thy High
Place ; in the Courts of Jerusalem ■ place thy
feet ; lean upon the Rock, that thy steps in
God be not shaken.

XX. What sayest thou?

Thus it hath
pleased Him that thou shouldest come forth *
out of Egypt, the iron furnace; that thou
shouldest leave behind the idolatry of that
country, and be led by Moses and his lawgiv
I give thee a piece of
ing and martial rule.
advice which is not my own, or rather which
is very much my own, if thou consider the
matter spiritually.
Borrow from the Egyptians
vessels of gold and silver ; » with these take thy
journey ; supply thyself for the road with the
goods of strangers, or rather with thine own.
There is money owing to thee, the wages of thy
bondage and of thy brickmaking ; be clever on
thy side too in asking retribution ; be an hon
Thou didst suffer wrong there
est robber.
whilst thou wast fighting with the clay (that is,
this troublesome and filthy body) and wast
building cities foreign and unsafe, whose me
morial perishes with a cry.4
What then ? Dost
thou come out for nothing and without wages ?
But why wilt thou leave to the Egyptians and
to the powers of thine adversaries that which
they have gained by wickedness, and will
spend with yet greater wickedness?
It does
not belong to them : they have ravished it,
and have sacrilegiously taken it as plunder from
Him who saith, The silver is Mine and the
gold is Mine,' and I give it to whom I
will.
Yesterday it was theirs, for it was permitted to
be so ; to-day the Master takes it and gives it
to thee,i that thou mayest make a good and
saving use of it.
Let us make to ourselves
friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness,'
that when we fail, they may receive us in the
time of judgment.

XXI. If you are a Rachel or a Leah, a pa
triarchal and great soul, steal whatever idols of
your father you can find ; ' not, however, that
you may keep them, but that you may destroy
them ; and if you are a wise Israelite remove
them to the Land of the Promise, and let the
persecutor grieve over the loss of them, and
learn through being outwitted that it was vain
for him to tyrannize over and keep in bondage
If thou doest this,
better men than himself.
and comest out of Egypt thus, I know well
that thou shalt be guided by the pillar of fire
and cloud by night and day."
The wilderness
shall be tamed for thee, and the Sea divided ; *

cal authors.

a Ps. exxii. a.
B i^tXBtlf c. acc. loci ; a very rare use, but found in classi
C Matt. xx. 14.
k Kxod. xiii. 20.

i Ps. ix. 6.
A lb. xiv. 91.

« Hag. ii. 8.
0 Gen. joan. 19.

a Luke xvi. 9.

y Kxod. xi. a.

,

THE SECOND ORATION ON EASTER.

43i

Pharaoh shall be drowned ; a bread shall be
rained down ; • the rock shall become a fount
ain ; v Amalek shall be conquered, not with
arms alone, but with the hostile hand of the
righteous forming both prayers and the invin
cible trophy of the Cross ; a the River shall be
cut off ; the sun shall stand still ; and the moon
be restrained ; « walls shall be overthrown even
without engines ; f swarms of hornets shall go
before thee to make a way for Israel, and to hold
the Gentiles in check ; * and all the other events
which are told in the history after these and
with these (npt to make a long story) shall be
given thee of God.
Such is the feast thou art
keeping to-day ; and in this manner I would
have thee celebrate both the Birthday and
the Burial of Him Who was born for thee and
suffered for thee.
Such is the Mystery of the
Passover ; such are the mysteries sketched by
the Law and fulfilled by Christ, the Abolisher
of the letter, the Perfecter of the Spirit, who by
His Passion taught us how to suffer, and by
His glorification grants us to be glorified with
Him.

XXII.' Now we are to examine another fact
and' dogma, neglected by most people, but in
my judgment well worth enquiring into.
To
Whom was that Blood offered that was shed for
us, and why was It shed ? I mean the precious
and famous Blood of our God and Highpriest
and Sacrifice. We were detained in bondage
by the Evil One, sold under sin, and receiving
pleasure in exchange for wickedness.
Now,
since a ransom belongs only to him who holds
in bondage, I ask to whom was this offered,
If to the Evil One, fie
and for what cause?
upon the outrage !
If the robber receives ran
som, not only from God, but a ransom which
consists of God Himself, and has such an illus
trious payment for his tyranny, a payment for
whose sake it would have been right for him
to have left us alone altogether.
But if to the
Father, I ask first, how ?
For it was not by
Him that we were being oppressed ; and next,
On what principle did the Blood of His Only
begotten Son delight the Father, Who would
not receive even Isaac, when he was being
offered by his Father, but changed the sacrifice,
putting a ram in the place of the human vic
Is it not evident that the Father accepts
tim ? *
Him, but neither asked for Him nor demanded
Him ; but on account of the Incarnation, and
because Humanity must be sanctified by the
Humanity of God,A that He might deliver us

a F.xod. xiv. 28.
5 lb. xvii. 10. it.
1} lb. vi. 20.
A Have we not here the germ of the idea, afterwards known
as the Scotist, that the Incarnation was the purpose of God in-

y IK xvii. 6.
f lb. x. 13.
k Gen. xxii. 11, &c.

0 lb. xvi. 15.
< Josh. iii. 15. 16.

9 lb. xxiv. 12.

Himself, and overcome the tyrant, and draw
us to Himself by the mediation of His Son,
Who also arranged this to the honour of the
Father, Whom it
is manifest that He obeys
all things? So much we have said of
in
Christ ; the greater part of what we might say
shall be reverenced with silence.
But that
brazen serpent * was hung up as a remedy for
the biting serpents, not as a type of Him that
suffered for us, but as a contrast ; and it saved
those that looked upon it, not because they be
lieved it to live, but because it was killed, and
killed with it the powers that were subject to
it, being destroyed as it deserved. And what
" O
is the fitting epitaph for
death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is
thy victory ? " H Thou art overthrown by, the
Cross ; thou art slain by Him who is the Giver
of life ; thou art without breath, dead, without
motion, even though thou keepest the form of
a serpent lifted up on high on a pole.

it from us ?

XXIII. Now we will partake of a Passover
which is still typical, though it is plainer than
the old one. For that is ever new which is now
It is ours to learn what is
becoming known.
that drinking and that enjoyment, and His to
teach and communicate the Word to His dis
ciples. For teaching is food, even to the Giver
of food.
Come hither then, and let us partake
of the Law, but in a Gospel manner, not a lit
eral one ; perfectly, not imperfectly ; eternally,
not temporarily.
Let us make our Head, not
the earthly Jerusalem, but the heavenly City ; »
not that which is now trodden under foot by
j armies,8 but that which is glorified by Angels.
Let us sacrifice not young calves, nor lambs
that put forth horns and hoofs,' in which many
parts are destitute of life and feeling ; but let us
! sacrifice to God the sacrifice of praise upon the
heavenly Altar, with the heavenly dances ; let
j ns hold aside the first veil ; let us approach the
I second, and look into the Holy of Holies. f
Shall I say that which is a greater thing yet ?
Let us sacrifice ourselves to God ; or rather let
j ns go on sacrificing throughout every day and at
Let us accept anything for the
By sufferings let us imitate His
Passion : by our blood let us reverence His
I Blood : let us gladly mount upon the Cross.
; Sweet are the nails, though they be very pain-
•ful.
For to suffer with Christ and for Christ
j is better than a life of ease with others.

every moment.

: Word's sake.

XXIV. If you are a Simon of Cyrene,i take

dependently of the Fall, for the perfecting of Humanity; but that
the Passion and death of Incarnate God were the direct result
of the sin of man?

a Num. xxi. o.

0 Hos. xiii. 14 and x Cor. xv. 55.
6 Luke xxi. 20-24.
i Heb. xiii. 15 and x, 20.

* Ps. Ixiv. 32.

yffeb. xiL 22.
11 Mark xv. ax.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

up the Cross and follow.
If you are crucified
with Him as a robber," acknowledge God as a
penitent robber.
If even He was numbered
among the transgressors 0 for you and your sin,
do you become law-abiding for His sake. Wor
ship Him Who was hanged for you, even if you
yourself are hanging ; make some gain even
from your wickednsss ; purchase salvation by
your death ; enter with Jesus into Paradise,» so
that you may learn from what you have fallen.4
Contemplate the glories that are there ;
let the
murderer die outside with his blasphemies ; and
if you be a Joseph of Arimathaea,* beg the Body
from him that crucified Him, make thine own
If you be a
that which cleanses the world. f
Nicodemus, the worshipper of God by night,
bury Him with spices. *
If you be a Mary, or
another Mary, or a Salome, or a Joanna, weep
in the early morning.
Be first to see the stone
taken away,9 and perhaps you will see the Angels
and Jesus Himself.
Say something ; hear His
Voice.
If He say to you, Touch Me not," stand
afar off; reverence the Word, but grieve not;
for He knoweth those to whom He appeareth
Keep the feast of the Resurrection ;
first.
come to the aid of Eve who was first to fall, of
Her who first embraced the Christ, and made
Him known to the disciples.
Be a Peter or a
John; hasten to the Sepulchre,nmning together,
running against one another, vying in the noble
race.* And even if you be beaten in speed, win
the victory of zeal ; not Looking into the tomb,
but Going in.
And if, like a Thomas, you
were left out when the disciples were assembled
to whom Christ shews Himself, when you do
see Him be not faithless ; <* and if you do not
believe, then believe those who tell you ; and
if you cannot believe them either, then have
confidence in the print of the nails.
If He
Learn
descend into Hell," descend with Him.
to know the mysteries of Christ there also, what
is the providential purpose of the twofold de
scent, to save all men absolutely by His man
ifestation, or there too only them that believe.
XXV. And if He ascend up into Heaven,*
ascend with Him.
Be one of those angels
who escort Him, or one of those who receive
Him.
Bid the gates be lifted up,0 or be made
higher, that they may receive Him, exalted
after His Passion. Answer to those who are in
doubt because He bears up with Him His*
body and the tokens of His Passion, which He
had not when He came down, and who there
fore inquire, " Who is this King of Glory?"

a Luke xxiii. 43.
fi Rev. ii. 5.
■ John xix. 39.
* lb. xx. 3, 4.

t l.uke xxtv. 51.

0 Isa. liii. 11.
« Luke xxiii. 52.
0 lb. xx. 11, etc
ft lb. xx. 35.

y Luke xxiii. 43.
f 1 John i. 7.
k lb. xxi. 17.
v I Pet. iii. 19.

o Ps. xxiv. 7, 10.

this

that it is the Lord strong and mighty, as in all
things that He hath done from time to time
and does, so now in His battle and triumph for
the sake of Mankind.
And give to the doubt
And
ing of the question the twofold answer.
if they marvel and say as in Isaiah's drama
Who is
that cometh from Edom and
from the things of earth ? Or How are the
garments red of Him that is without blood or
body, as of one that treads in the full wine
press ? "
Set forth the beauty of the array of
the Body that suffered, adorned by the Passion,
and made splendid by the Godhead, than
which nothing can be more* lovely or more
beautiful.

XXVI. P To this what will those cavillers
say, those bitter reasoners about Godhead,
those detractors of all things that are praise
worthy, those darkeners of Light, uncultured in
respect of Wisdom, for whom Christ died in
vain, unthankful creatures, the work of the
Evil One.
Do you turn this benefit into a re
proach to God? Will you deem Him little on
this account, that He humbled Himself for
your sake, and because to seek for that which
had wandered the Good Shepherd, He who
layeth down His life for the sheep,"' came upon
the mountains and hills upon which you used
to sacrifice,4 and found the wandering one ; and
having found it, took it upon His shoulders,'
on which He also bore the wood; and having
borne it, brought it back to the life above;
and having brought it back, numbered it
among those who have never strayed.
That
He lit a candle,t His own flesh, and swept the
house, by cleansing away the sin of the world,
and sought for the coin, the Royal Image that
was all covered up with passions, and calls to
gether His friends, the Angelic Powers, at the
finding of the coin, and makes them sharers of
His joy, as He had before made them sharers of
the secret of His Incarnation ? That the Light
that is exceeding bright should follow the
Candle -Forerunner,'
and the Word, the
Voice, and the Bridegroom, the Bridegroom's
friend,9 that prepared for the Lord a peculiar
people " and cleansed them by the water * in
preparation for the Spirit ? Do you Reproach
God with this? Do you conceive of Him as
less because He girds Himself with a towel and
washes His disciples,'' and shows that humilia
tion is the best road to exaltation ; * because He
humbles Himself for the sake of the soul that

the Oration on the Nativity, cc. XIU.-XIV.

a Isa. Ixiii. t.
0 This passage, to nearly the end of c. XXVII., is taken from
6 John v. 35.
c Hos. iv. 13.
H lb. xv. 8, 9.
x A reminiscence of S. Luke i. 17.
1* John xiii. 4, 5.

7 John x. 11.
f Luke xv. 4. 5.
A Matt. iii. is.

9 lb. 1. «3 ; iii. 9, 29.

r Matt- xxiii. is.

THE SECOND ORATION ON EASTER.

is bent down to the ground," that He may even
exalt with Himself that which is bent double
under a weight of sin ? How comes it that you
do not also charge it upon Him as a crime that
He eateth with Publicans3 and at Publicans'
tables, and makes disciples of Publicans * that
He too may make some gain. And what
gain ? The salvation of sinners. If so, one must
blame the physician for stooping over suffering
and putting up with evil smells in order to
give health to the sick ; and him also who
leans over the ditch, that he may, according to
the Law, save the beast that has fallen into it.
XXVII. He was sent, but sent according to
His Manhood (for He was of two Natures),
since He was hungry and thirsty and weary,
and was distressed and wept, according to the
But even if He were
Laws of human nature.
Consider the
sent also as God, what of that ?
Mission to be the good pleasure of the Father,
to which He refers all that concerns Himself,
both that He may honour the Eternal Principle,
and that He may avoid the appearance of being
For He is said on the one hand
a rival God.
to have been betrayed, and on the other it is
written that He gave Himself up ; and so too
that He was raised and taken up by the Father,
and also that of His own power He rose and
The former belongs to the Good
ascended.
Pleasure, the latter to His own Authority ; but
you dwell upon all that diminishes Him, while
you ignore all that exalts Him.
For instance,
you score that He suffered, but you do not add
Ah, what things has the
" of His own Will."
Word even now to suffer ! By some He is hon
oured as God but confused with the Father ; by
others He is dishonoured as Flesh, and is sev
ered from God. With whom shall He be most
angry-or rather which shall He forgive-those
who falsely contract Him, or those who divide
Him ?
For the former ought to have made a
distinction, and the latter to have made a
Union, the one in number, the other in God
So did
Do you stumble at His Flesh ?
head.
the Jews. Do you call Him a Samaritan,8 and
the rest which I will not utter?
This did not
even the demons, O man more unbelieving
than demons, and more stupid than Jews.
The
Jews recognized the title Son as expressing
equal rank ; and the demons knew that He
who drove them out was God, for they were
persuaded by their own experience.
But you
will not either admit the equality or confess the
It would have been better for you
Godhead.
to have been circumcised and a demoniac-to
reduce the matter to an absurdity-than in

a Luke xiii. 10, etc.
y Luke xv. a.

ft Mark ii. 15, id.
6 John viii. 48.

uncircumcision and robust health to be thus ill
and ungodly disposed.
But for our war with
such men, let it be brought to an end by their
returning, however late, to a sound mind, if
they will ; or else if they will not, let it be
postponed to another occasion, if they continue
as they are.
Anyhow, we will have no fear
when contending for the Trinity with the help
of the Trinity.

XXVIII. It is now needful for us to sum up
our discourse as follows : We were created
that we might be made happy. We were made
happy when we were created. We were en
trusted with Paradise that we might enjoy life.
We received a Commandment that we might
obtain a good repute by keeping it ; not that
God did not know what would take place, but
because He had laid down the law of Free
Will. We were deceived because we were the
objects of envy. We were cast out because we
transgressed. We fasted because we refused to
fast, being overpowered by the Tree of Know
ledge.
For the Commandment was ancient,
coeval with ourselves, and was a kind of educa
tion of our souls and curb of luxury, to which we
were reasonably made subject, in order that wemight recover by keeping it that which we had
lost by not keeping it. We needed an Incarn
ate God, a God put to death, that we might
live. We were put to death together with
Him, that we might be cleansed ; we rose
again with Him because we were put to death
with Him ; we were glorified with Him,
because we rose again with Him.

XXIX. Many indeed are the miracles of
that time : God crucified ;
the sun darkened
and again rekindled ; for it was fitting that the
creatures should suffer with their Creator ; the
veil rent ; the Blood and Water shed from
His Side ; the one as from a man, the other
as above man ; the rocks rent for the Rock's
sake ; the dead raised for a pledge of the final
Resurrection of all men ;
the Signs at the
Sepulchre and after the Sepulchre, which none
can worthily celebrate ; and yet none of these
equal to the Miracle of my salvation. A few
drops of Blood recreate the whole world, and
become to all men what rennet is to milk, draw
ing us together and compressing us into unity.
XXX. But, O Pascha, great and holy and
purifier of all the world-for I will speak to
thee as to a living person-O Word of God
and Light and Life and Wisdom and Mightfor I rejoice in all Thy names-O Offspring
and Expression and Signet of the Great Mind ;
O Word conceived and Man contemplated,
Who bearest all things, binding them by the
Word of Thy power ; receive this discourse,

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

not now as firstfruits, but perhaps as the com
pletion of my offerings, a thanksgiving, and at
the same time a supplication, that we may suf
fer no evil beyond those necessary and sacred
cares in which our life has been passed ; and
stay the tyranny of the body over us ; (Thou
seest, O Lord, how great it is and how it bows
me down) or Thine own sentence, if we are to

be condemned by Thee.
But if we are to l>e
released, in accordance with our desire, and be
received into the Heavenly Tabernacle, there
too it may be we shall offer Thee acceptable
Sacrifices upon Thine Altar, to Father and
Word and Holy Ghost ; for to Thee belongeth
all glory and honour and might, world without
end. Amen.

SELECT LETTERS

OF

SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE.

A SELECTION FROM THE LETTERS OF SAINT GREG-

.

ORY NAZIANZEN, SOMETIME ARCHBISHOP OF CON

STANTINOPLE.

DIVISION L

LETTERS ON THE APOLLINARIAN CONTROVERSY.

Introduction.

The circumstances which called forth the two
letters to Cledonius have already been described
in the first section of the General Prolegomena,
and it will not be necessary here to add much
to what was there said.
In the letter to Nectarius, his own successor on the throne of Con
stantinople, written about a. d. 383, and some
times reckoned as Orat. XLVI., S. Gregory gives
extracts from a work of Apollinarius himself,
but without mentioning the title of the book.
In this treatise the fundamental errors of the
heresy (see Proleg. c. 1, p. 172) are laid down.
Apollinarius, according to S. Gregory, declares
that the Son of God was from all eternity
clothed with a human body, and not from the
time of His conception only by the Blessed Vir
gin; but that this humanity' of God is without
human mind, the place of which was supplied
by the Godhead of the Only-begotten. And
he goes even further and ascribes passibility
and mortality to the very Godhead of Christ.
Therefore S. Gregory earnestly protests against
any toleration being granted to these heretics,
or even permission to hold their assemblies;
for, he says, toleration or permission would cer
tainly be regarded by them as a condonation
of their doctrinal position, and a condemnation
of that of the Church.
Dr. Ullman, however,
thinks that while S. Gregory was certainly
speaking the truth in saying that he had in his
hands a pamphlet by Apollinarius, yet that he,
perhaps unconsciously, exaggerated the heret
ical character of its contents, pushing its state
consequences which Apollinarius
ments to
would have repudiated.
The one purpose of
the latter was, in Dr. Ullman's view, to safe

guard the doctrine of the Unity of Christ; and
he thought that the orthodox expression of Two
Whole and Perfect Natures tended to a Nestorian division of the Person of Christ; and so he
used language which certainly seemed to con
found the natures, or at any rate to make the
Incarnation imperfect, inasmuch as a Christ in
Whom the human mind is absent, and its place
filled up by the Godhead of the Son, cannot
be said to be perfect Man.
But while Epiphanius mentions these extravagances of the
heresy, and does so with a lingering feeling of
regret for the lapse of so good a man whose
services in the past had been of so much value
to the Church, yet, in the spirit common to
Ecclesiastical authorities of the time, he would
rather ascribe them to an expansion of Apol
linarius' teaching by his younger disciples who
did not really understand what Apollinarius
himself meant.

Olympius, to whom the last of this series is
addressed, was Governor of Cappadocia Secunda in a.d. 382. He was a man for whom S.
Gregory had a very high esteem, and with whom
he was upon terms of close friendship, as will
be seen from other letters of Gregory to him in
another division of this Selection.
The occa
sion of the present letter was the necessity to
appeal to the secular power for aid to punish
a sect of Apollinarians at Nazianzus, who had
ventured to take advantage of S. Gregory's ab
sence at the Baths of Xanxaris to procure the
consecration of a Bishop of their own way of
thinking.
Technically the See was vacant,
but the administration had been committed to
Gregory by the Bishops of the Province, and
though he, foreseeing some such attempt on the
part of the heretics, had been very earnest in

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

pressing upon the Metropolitan and his Cornprovincials the necessity of filling this throne
by a canonical election, yet he was by no means
prepared to hand over the authority, with which
he had been invested, to an irregularly elected
and uncanonically consecrated heretic.

To Nectarius, Bishop of Constantinople.
(Ep. CCII.)

The Care of God, which throughout the
time before us guarded the Churches, seems to
have utterly forsaken this present life. And
my soul is immersed to such a degree by cal
amities that the private sufferings of my own
life hardly seem to be worth reckoning among
evils (though they are so numerous and great,
that if they befel anyone else I should think
them unbearable) ; but I can only look at the
common sufferings of the Churches; for if at
the present crisis some pains be not taken to
find a remedy for them, things will gradually
get into an
altogether desperate condition.
Those who follow the heresy of Arius or Eudoxius (I cannot say who stirred them up to
this folly) are making a display of their dis
ease, as if they had attained some degree of
confidence by collecting congregations as if by
And they of the Macedonian
permission.
party have reached such a pitch of folly that
they are arrogating to themselves the name of
Bishops, and are wandering about our districts
babbling of Eleusiusa as
ordina
Our bosom evil, Eunomius, is no
tions.
longer content with merely existing ; but unless
he can draw away everyone with him to his
ruinous heresy, he thinks himself an injured
man.
The
All this, however, is endurable.
most grievous item of all in the woes of the
Church is the boldness of the Apollinarians,
whom your Holiness has overlooked, I know
not how, when providing
themselves with
authority to hold meetings on an equality with
However, you being, as you are,
myself.
thoroughly instructed by the grace of God in
the Divine Mysteries on all points, are well
informed, not only as to the advocacy of the
true faith, but also as to all those arguments
devised by the heretics
which have been
against the sound faith ; and yet perhaps it will
not be unseasonable
that your Excellency
should hear from my littleness that a pamphlet
by Apollinarius has come into my hands, the

to their

a Eleusius was Bishop of Cyzicus. a prominent leader of the
Semi-Arian party. He bore a very high character for personal
holiness, and approached more nearly to orthodoxy than most of
his associates, men like Basil of Ancyra, Eustathius of Sehaste,
etc. He obstinately maintained, however, Macedonian views on |
the Oeity of the Holy Ghost, even after their condemnation by the i
J
Council ofConstantinople.

contents of which surpass all heretical pravity.
For he asserts that the Flesh which the Onlybegotten Son assumed in the Incarnation for
the remodelling of our nature was no new ac
quisition, but that that carnal nature was in the
Son from the beginning. And he puts for
ward as a witness to this monstrous assertion a
garbled quotation from the Gospels, namely,
No man hath Ascended up into Heaven save
He which came down from Heaven, even the.
Son of Man which is in Heaven." As though
even before He came down He was the Son of
Man, and when He came down He brought
with Him that Flesh, which it appears He had
in Heaven, as though it had existed before the
ages, and been joined with His Essence.
For
he alleges another saying of an Apostle, which
he cuts off from the whole body of its context,
that The Second Man is the Lord from Heaven.*
Then he assumes that that Man who came
down from above is without a mind, but that
the Godhead of the Only-begotten fulfils the
function 'of mind, and is the third part of this
human composite, inasmuch as soul and body
are in it on its human side, but not mind, the
place of which is taken by God the Word.
This is not yet the most serious part of it ; that
which is most terrible of all is that he declares
that the Only-begotten God, the Judge of all,
the Prince of Life, the Destroyer of Death, is
mortal, and underwent the Passion in His
proper Godhead ; and that in the three days'
death of His body, His Godhead also was put to
death with His body, and thus was raised again
from the dead by the Father.
It would be
tedious to go through all the other propositions
which he adds to these monstrous absurdities.
Now, if they who hold such views have author
ity to meet, your Wisdom approved in Christ
must see that, inasmuch as we do not approve
their views, any permission ofassembly granted
to them is nothing less than a declaration that
their view is thought more true than ours. For
if they are permitted to teach their view as
godly men, and with all confidence to preach
their doctrine, it is manifest that the doctrine
of the Church has been condemned, as though
the truth were on their side.
For nature does
not admit of two contrary doctrines on the
same subject being both true. How then could
your noble and lofty mind submit to suspend
your usual courage in regard to the correction
of so great an evil ?
But even though there is
no precedent for such a course, let your inim
itable perfection in virtue stand up at a crisis
like the present, and teach our most pious

a John iiL 13.

0 Cor. xv. 47.

LETTERS OF SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

Emperor, that no gain will come from his zeal
for the Church on other points if he allows such
an evil to gain strength from freedom of speech
for the subversion of sound faith.

To Cledonius the Priest Against

Apollinarius.

(Ep. CI.)

TO OUR MOST REVEREND AND GOD-BELOVED
BROTHER AND FELLOW-PRIEST CLEDONIUS,
GREGORY, GREETING IN THE LORD.

I desire to learn what is this fashion of in
novation in things concerning the Church,
which allows anyone who likes, or the passer
by," as the Bible says, to tear asunder the flock
that has been well led, and to plunder it by
larcenous attacks, or rather by piratical and
fallacious teachings.
For if our present as
sailants had any ground for condemning us in
regard of the faith, it would not have been
right for them, even in that case, to have ven
tured on such a course without giving us notice.
They ought rather to have first persuaded us,
or to have been willing to be persuaded by us
(if at least any account is to tie taken of us as
fearing God, labouring for the faith, and help
ing the Church), and then, if at all, to innov
ate; but then perhaps there would be an ex
cuse for their outrageous conduct.
But since
our faith has been proclaimed, both in writing
and without writing, here and in distant parts,
in times of danger and of safety, how comes it
that some make such attempts, and that others
keep silence?

The most grievous part of it is not (though
this too is shocking) that the men instil their
own heresy into simpler souls by means of
those who are worse ; but that they also tell
lies about us and say that we share their opin
ions and sentiments ; thus baiting their hooks,
and by this cloak villainously fulfilling their
will, and making our simplicity, which looked
upon them as brothers and not as foes, into a
support of their wickedness. And not only so,
but they also assert, as I am told, that they
have been received by the Western Synod, by
which they were formerly condemned, as is
well known to everyone.
If, however, those
who hold the views of Apollinarius have either
now or formerly been received, let them prove
it and we will be content.
For it is evident
that they can only have been so received as
assenting to the Orthodox Faith, for this were
And
an impossibility on any other terms.

a Pi. Ixxx. ta.

they can surely prove it, either by the minutes
of the Synod, or by Letters of Communion,
But
for this is the regular custom of Synods.
if it is mere words, and an invention of their
own, devised for the sake of appearances and
to give them weight with the multitude through
the credit of the persons, teach them to hold
their tongues, and confute them ; for we believe
that such a task is well suited to your manner
of life and orthodoxy.
Do not let the men
deceive themselves and others with the asser
tion that the " Man of the Lord," as they call
Him, Who is rather our Lord and God, is
without human mind.
For we do not sever the
Man from the Godhead, but we lay down as a
dogma the Unity and Identity of Person, Who
of old was not Man but God, and the Only
Son before all ages, unmingled with body or
anything corporeal ;
but Who in these last
days has assumed Manhood also for our salva
tion ; passible in His Flesh, impassible in His
Godhead ;
circumscript in the body, uncircumscript in the Spirit ; at once earthly and
heavenly, tangible and intangible, comprehen
sible and incomprehensible ; that by One and
the Same Person, Who was perfect Man and
also God, the entire humanity fallen through
sin might be created anew.

If anyone does not believe that Holy Mary
is the Mother of God, he is severed from the
Godhead.
If anyone should assert that He
passed through the Virgin as through a chan
nel, and was not at once divinely and humanly
formed in her (divinely, because without the
intervention of a man ; humanly, because in
accordance with the laws of gestation), he is
If any assert that the
in like manner godless.
formed and afterward was
Manhood was
clothed with the Godhead, he too is to be con
For this were not a Generation of
demned.
God, but a shirking of generation.
If any in
troduce the notion of Two Sons, one of God
the Father, the other of the Mother, and dis
credits the Unity and Identity, may he lose
his part in the adoption promised to those who
believe aright.
For God and Man are two
natures, as also soul and body are ; but there
are not two Sons or two Gods.
For neither
in this life are there two manhoods ; though
Paul speaks in some such language of the inner
and outer man.
And (if I am to speak con
cisely) the Saviour is made of elements which
are distinct from one another (for the invisible
is not the same with the visible, nor the time
less with that which is subject to time), yet
He is not two Persons.
For
both natures are one by the combination, the
Deity being made Man, and the Manhood

God forbid 1

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

deified or however one should express it. And
I say different Elements, because it is the re
verse of what is the case in the Trinity ; for
There we acknowledge different Persons so as
not to confound the persons ; but not different
Elements, for the Three are One and the same
in Godhead.

If any should say that it wrought in Him by
grace as in a Prophet, but was not and is not
united with Him in Essence-let him be emp
ty of the Higher Energy, or rather full of the
opposite.
If any worship not the Crucified,
let him be Anathema and be numbered among
If any assert that He was made
the Deicides.
perfect by works, or that after His Baptism,
or after His Resurrection from the dead, He
was counted worthy of an adoptive Sonship,
like those whom the Greeks interpolate as add
ed to the ranks of the gods, let him be
anathema.
For that which has a beginning or
a progress or is made perfect, is not God, al
though the expressions may be used of His
gradual manifestation.
If any assert that He
has now put off His holy flesh, and that His
Godhead is stripped of the body, and deny
that He is now with His body and will come
again with it, let him not see the glory of His
Coming.
For where is His body now, if not
For it is not laid
with Him Who assumed it ?
by in the sun, according to the babble of the
Manichaeans, that it should be honoured by a
dishonour ; nor was it poured forth into the air
and dissolved, as is the nature of a voice or
the flow of an odour, or the course of a light
ning flash that never stands.
Where in that
*ase were His being handled after the Resurrec
tion, or His being seen hereafter by them that
pierced Him, for Godhead is in its nature in
Nay; He will come with His bodyvisible.
so I have learnt-such as He was seen by His
Disciples in the Mount, or as he shewed Him
self for a moment, when his Godhead over
powered the carnality.
And as we say this to
disarm suspicion, so we write the other to cor
rect the novel teaching.
If anyone assert that
His flesh came down from heaven, and is not
from hence, nor of us though above us, let him
be anathema.
For the words, The Second
Man is the Lord from Heaven ; ° and, As is the
Heavenly, such are they that are Heavenly ;
and, No man hath ascended up into Heaven
save He which came down from Heaven, even
the Son of Man which is in Heaven ; P and the
like, are to be understood as said on account of
the Union with the heavenly ; just as that All
Things were made by Christ,* and that Christ

dwelleth in your hearts * is said, not of the visi
ble nature which belongs to God, but of what
is perceived by the mind, the names being
mingled like the natures, and flowing into one
another, according to the law of their intimate
union.

If anyone has put his trust in Him as a Man
without a human mind, he is really bereft of
For
mind, and quite unworthy of salvation.
that which He has not assumed He has not
healed ; but that which is united to His God
head is also saved.
If only half Adam fell,
then that which Christ assumes and saves may
be half also ; but if the whole of his nature
fell, it must be united to the whole nature of
Him that was begotten, and so be saved as a
whole.
Let them not, then, begrudge us our
complete salvation, or clothe the Saviour only
with bones and nerves and the portraiture of
For if His Manhood is without
humanity.
soul, even the Arians admit this,
that they
may attribute His Passion to the Godhead, as
that which gives motion to the body is also
But if He has a soul, and
that which suffers.
yet is without a- mind, how is He man, for
man is not a mindless animal ? .And this
would necessarily involve that while His form
and tabernacle was human, His soul should be
that of a horse or an ox, or some other of the
brute creation.
This, then, would be what He
saves ; and I have been deceived by the Truth,
and led to boast of an honour which had been
bestowed upon another.
But if His Man
hood is intellectual and not without mind, let
them cease to be thus really mindless.
But,
says such an one, the Godhead took the place
of the human intellect. How does this touch
me ?
For Godhead joined to flesh alone is
not man, nor to soul alone, nor to both apart
from intellect, which is the most essential part
of man.
Keep then the whole man, and min
gle Godhead therewith, that you may benefit
me in my completeness.
But, he asserts, He
Not
could not contain Two perfect Natures.
if you only look at Him in a bodily fashion.
For a bushel measure will not hold two bush
els, nor will the space of one body hold two
or more bodies.
But if you will look at what
is mental and incorporeal, remember that I in
my one personality can contain soul and rea
son and mind and the Holy Spirit ; and before
me this world, by which I mean the system of
things visible and invisible, contained Father,
For such is the na
Son, and Holy Ghost.
ture of intellectual Existences, that they can
mingle with one another and with bodies, in-

oCor. xv. 47.

0 John iii. 13.

y John i. 3.

e Ephes. iii. 17.

LETTERS OF SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

corporeally and invisibly.
For many sounds
are comprehended by one ear ; and the eyes of
many are occupied by the same visible ob
jects, and the smell by odours ; nor are the
senses narrowed by each other, or crowded
out, nor the objects of s^nse diminished by the
multitude of the perceptions.
But where is
there mind of man or angel so perfect in com
parison of the Godhead that the presence of
the greater must crowd out the other ? The
light is nothing compared with the sun, nor a
little damp compared with a river, that we must
first do away with the lesser, and take the
from a house, or the moisture from
light
the earth, to enable it to contain the greater
and more perfect.
For how shall one thing
contain two completenesses, either the house,
the sunbeam and the sun, or the earth, the
Here is matter for
moisture and the river?
inquiry ; for indeed the question is worthy of
much consideration. Do they not know, then,
that what is perfect by comparison with one
thing may be imperfect by comparison with an
other, as a hill compared with a mountain, or
a grain of mustard seed with a bean or any oth
er of the larger seeds, although it may be called
larger than any of the same kind ? Or, if you
like, an Angel compared with God, or a man
So our mind is perfect and
with an Angel.
commanding, but only in respect of soul and
body ; not absolutely perfect ; and a servant
and a subject of God, not a sharer of His
Princedom and honour.
So Moses was a God
to Pharaoh," but a servant of God,0 as it is
written ; and the stars which illumine the night
are hidden by the Sun, so much that you could
not even know of their existence by daylight ;
and a little torch brought near a great blaze is
neither destroyed, nor seen, nor extinguished ;
but is all one blaze, the bigger one prevailing
over the other.

What then of our flesh ?

But, it may be said, our mind is subject to
condemnation.
Is
that not subject to condemnation ? You must
therefore either set aside the latter on account
of sin, or admit the former on account of
salvation.
If He assumed the worse that He
might sanctify it by His incarnation, may He
not assume the better that it may be sanctified
by His becoming Man ?
If the clay was
leavened and has become a new lump, O ye
wise men, shall not the Image be leavened and
mingled with God, being deified by His God
head ? And I will add this also : If the mind
was utterly rejected, as prone to sin and sub
this reason He
ject to damnation, and for

a Exod. vii. i.

Num. xii. 7.

assumed a body but left out the mind, then
there is an excuse for them who sin with the
mind ; for the witness of God-according to
you-has shewn the impossibility of healing it.
Let me state the greater results.
You, my
good sir, dishonour my mind (you a Sarcolater,
if I am an Anthropolater a that you
may tie God down to the Flesh, since He can
not be otherwise tied ; and therefore you take
away the wall of partition.
But what is my
theory, who am but an ignorant man, and no
Mind is mingled with mind,
Philosopher.
as
and more closely related, and
nearer
through it with flesh, being a Mediator be
tween God and carnality.

Further let us see what is their account of
the assumption of Manhood, or the assumption
of Flesh, as they call it.
If it was in order
that God, otherwise incomprehensible, might
be comprehended, and might converse with
men through His Flesh as through a veil, their
mask and the drama which they represent is a
pretty one, not to say that it was open to Him
to converse with us in other ways, as of old, in
the burning bush P and in the appearance of a
man.* But if it was that He might destroy the
condemnation by sanctifying like by like, then
as He needed flesh for the sake of the flesh
which had incurred condemnation, and soul
for the sake of our soul, so, too, He needed
mind for the sake of mind, which not only
fell in Adam, but was the first to be affected,
as the doctors say of illnesses. For that which
received the command was that which failed to
keep the command, and that which failed to
keep it was that also which dared to trans
gress ; and that which transgressed was that
which stood most in need of salvation ; and
that which needed salvation was that which
also He took upon Him.
Therefore, Mind
was taken upon Him.
This has now been de
monstrated, whether they like it or no, by, to
use their own expression,
geometrical and
But you are acting as if,
necessary proofs.
when a man's eye had been injured and his
foot had been injured in consequence, you
were to attend to the foot and leave the eye
uncared for ; or as if, when a painter had
drawn something badly, you were to alter the
picture, but to pass over the artist as if he had
succeeded.
But if they, overwhelmed by these
arguments,' take refuge in the proposition that
it is possible for God to save man even apart

a The Apollinarians seem to have charged the Orthodox with
being Anthropolaters, or worshippers of a mere Man. S. Greg
ory retorts upon them that if so, they arc worse themselves, being
actually Sarcolaters, or worshippers of mere flesh, denying Mind
to Him whom they adore as Lord and Saviour.
y Gen. xviii. 5.

0 Exod. iii. a.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

from mind, why, I suppose that it would be
possible for Him to do so also apart from flesh
by a mere act of will, just as He works all
other things, and has wrought them without
body.
Take away, then, the flesh as well as
the mind, that your monstrous folly may be
complete.
ter, and, therefore, they run to the flesh, be
cause they do not know the custom of Script
ure. We will
For
what need is there even to mention to those
who know it,
that everywhere in
Scripture he is called Man, and the Son of
Man ?

But they are deceived by the lat- :

teach them this

the fact

also.

thicker

If, however, they rely on the passage, The
Word was made Flesh and dwelt among us,"
and because of this erase the noblest part of
Man (as cobblers do the
part of ]
skins) that they may join together God and
Flesh, it is time for them to say that God is
God only of flesh, and not of souls, because it
is written, "As Thou hast given Him power
overall Flesh," fl and " Unto Thee shall all
Flesh come ; " * and " Let all Flesh bless His
Or,
holy Name,"* meaning every Man.
again, they must suppose that our fathers went
down into Egypt without bodies and invisi
ble, and that only the Soul of Joseph was im
prisoned by Pharaoh, because it
is written,
" They went down into Egypt with threescore
and fifteen Souls,"' and "The iron entered
into his Soul," ( a thing which could not be
bound.
They who argue thus do not knowthat such expressions are used by Synecdoche,
as when
declaring the whole by the part,
Scripture says that the young ravens call upon
God,*" to indicate the whole feathered race ; or
Pleiades, Hesperus, and Arcturus' are men
tioned, instead of all the Stars and His Provid
ence over them.

Moreover, in no other way was it possible
for the Love of God toward us to be mani
fested than by making mention of our flesh,
and that for our sake He descended even to
For that flesh is less precious
our lower part.
than soul, everyone who has a spark of sense will
acknowledge.
And so the passage, The Word
was made Flesh, seems to me to be equivalent
to that in which it
is said that He was made
sin," or a curse x for us ; not that the Lord was
transformed into either of these, how could He
be?
But because by taking them upon Him
He took away our sins and bore our iniquities.1*
This, then, is sufficient to say at the present
time for the sake of clearness and of being

a John i. 14.
c Acts vii. 14.
■ 2 Cor. v. ai.

01b. xvii. 3.
( Pa, cv. 18.

y Ps. lav. 1.
11 Ps. cjtlvii. 8.

t lb. cxlv. fx.
0 Job ix. a.
ft Isa. till. 7 LXX.

A Gal. iii. 13.

And I write

understood by the many.
it,
not with any desire to compose a treatise, but
only to check the progress of deceit ; and if
is thought well, I will give a fuller account
it
of these matters at greater length.

But there is a matter which is graver than
these, a special point which it is necessary that
I should not pass over.
I would they were even
cut off that trouble you," and would reintroduce
a second Judaism, and a second circumcision,
and a second system of sacrifices.
For if
this be done, what hinders Christ also being
born again to set them aside, and again being
betrayed by Judas, and crucified and buried,
and rising again, that all may be fulfilled in the
same order, like the Greek system of cycles,
in which the same revolutions of the stars bring
round the same events ?
For what the method
of selection is, in accordance with which some
of the events are to occur and others to be
omitted, let these wise men who glory in the
multitude of their books shew us.

But since, puffed up by their theory of the
Trinity, they falsely accuse us of being un
sound in the Faith and entice the multitude,
it is necessary that people should know that
Apollinarius, while granting the Name of God
head to the Holy Ghost, did not preserve the
Power of the Godhead.
For to make the
Trinity consist of Great, Greater, and Greatest,
as of Light, Ray, and Sun, the Spirit and the
Son and the Father (as is clearly stated in
his writings), is a ladder of Godhead not lead
ing to Heaven, but down from Heaven.
But
we recognize God the father and the Son and
the Holy Ghost, and these not as bare titles,
dividing inequalities of ranks or of power, but
as there is one and the same title, so there is
one nature and one substance in the Godhead.
But if anyone who thinks we have spoken
rightly on this subject reproaches us with hold
ing communion with heretics, let him prove
that we are open to this charge, and we will
either convince him or retire.
But it is not
safe to make any innovation before judgment
is given, especially in a matter of such import
ance, and connected with so great issues. We
have protested and continue to protest this be
fore God and men.
And not even now, be
well assured, should we have written this, if we
had not seen that the Church was being torn
asunder and divided, among their other tricks,
by their present synagogue of vanity. "
But if
anyone when we say and protest this, either
from some advantage they will thus gain, or
through fear of men, or monstrous littleness of

a Galat t. ia.

P Ps. xavi. 4 LXX.

LETTERS OF SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

mind, or through some neglect of pastors and
governors, or through love of novelty and
proneness to innovations, rejects us as unwor
thy of credit, and attaches himself to such
men, and divides the noble body of the Church,
he shall bear his judgment, whoever he may
be," and shall give account to God in the day of
judgment.^
But if their long books, and their
new Psalters, contrary to that of David, and
the grace of their metres, are taken for a third
Testament, we too will compose Psalms, and
will write much in metre.
For we also think
we have the spirit of God,"" if indeed this is a
gift of the Spirit, and not a human novelty.
This I will that thou declare publicly, that we
may not be held responsible, as overlooking
such an evil, and as though this wicked doc
trine received food and strength from our in
difference.

AGAINST APOLLINARIUS ; THE SEC
OND LETTER TO CLEDONIUS.
(Ep. CII.)

Forasmuch as many persons have come to
your Reverence seeking confirmation of their
faith, and therefore you have affectionately
asked me to put forth a brief definition and
rule of my opinion, I therefore write to your
Reverence, what indeed you knew before, that
I never have and never can honour anything
above the Nicene Faith,
that of the Holy
Fathers who met there to destroy the Arian
heresy ; but am, and by God's help ever will
be, of that faith ; completing in detail that
which was incompletely said by them concern
ing the Holy Ghost; for that question had
not then been mooted, namely, that we are to
believe that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
are of one Godhead, thus confessing the Spirit
also to be God.
Receive then to communion
those who think and teach thus, as I also do ;
but those who are otherwise minded refuse, and
hold them as strangers to God and the Cathol
And since a question has also
ic Church.
been mooted concerning the Divine Assump
tion of humanity, or Incarnation, state this
also clearly to all concerning me, that I join
in One the Son, who was begotten of the
Father, and afterward of the Virgin Mary,
and that I do not call Him two Sons, but wor
ship Him as One and the same in undivided
Godhead and honour.
But if anyone does
not assent
this statement, either now or
hereafter, he shall give account to God at the
day of judgment.

to

a Galat. v. 10.

0 Malt. xn. 36.

y 1 Cor. vii. 4a

as it

lay down,

Now, what we object and oppose to their
mindless opinion about His Mind is this, to
put it shortly ; for they are almost alone in the
condition which they
is
through want of mind that they mutilate His
mind.
But, that they may not accuse us of
having once accepted but of now repudiat
ing the faith of their beloved Vitalius a which
he handed in in writing at the request of the
blessed Bishop Damasus of Rome, I will give
a short explanation on this point also.
For
these men, when they are theologizing among
their genuine disciples, and those who are in
itiated into their secrets, like the Manichaeans
among those whom they call the " Elect," ex
pose the full extent of their disease, and scarce
ly allow flesh at all to the Saviour.
But when
they a.re refuted and pressed with the common
answers about the Incarnation which the Scrip
ture presents, they confess indeed the ortho
dox words, but they do violence to' the sense ;
for they acknowledge the Manhood to be
neither without soul nor without reason nor
without mind, nor imperfect, but they bring
in the Godhead to supply the soul and reason
and mind, as though It had mingled Itself only
with His flesh, and not with the other proper
ties belonging to us men ; although His sinlessness was far above us, and was the cleans
ing of our passions.

they

then,

Thus,

interpret wrongly the
words, But we have the Mind of Christ,5 and
very absurdly, when they say that His God
head is the mind of Christ, and not under
standing the passage as we do, namely, that
they who have purified their mind by the imi
tation of the mind which the Saviour took of
us, and, as far as may be, have attained con
formity with it, are said to have the mind of
Christ ; just as they might be testified to have
the flesh of Christ who have trained their flesh,
and in this respect have become of the same
body and partakers of Christ ; and so he says
' ' As we have borne the image of the earth f
we shall also bear the image of the heavenly. "
And so they declare that the Perfect Man is not

a Vitalius or Vitalis was one of the principal followers of
Apollinarius. and by him was consecrated schismatical Bishop of
where, while yet orthodox, he had been ordained a
Antioch,
Hut he quarrelled with his Bishop through
priest by Meletius.
jealousy of another priest, and then fell under the influence of
Apollinarius. He was summoned to Rome to clear himself of the
charge of heresy ; and by a clever manipulation of language he
produced a confession which the Tope, Damasus, accepted as
orthodox ; but the Pope remitted the whole case to Paulinus, who
was at that time recognized by the Western Church as rightful
Vitalius, however, was unable to accept the test re
Bishop.
quired, and seceded. On his return from Rome he had visited
Nazianzus, where S. Gregory received him as a brother in the
failh, though further acquaintance compelled him to withdraw
Vitalius, while admitting that our I,ord had
both a human body and a human soul, denied Him a human
mind ; whose place, according to his teaching, w:*s supplied by
the Divinity.

y z Oor. xv. 49.

/3 1 Cor. ii. 16.

> from this position.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

He who was in all points tempted like as we are
yet without sin ; « but the mixture of God and
Flesh.
For what, say they, can be more per
fect than this?

They play the same trick with the word that
describes the Incarnation, viz. : He was made
Man, explaining it to mean, not, He was in the
human nature with which He surrounded Him
self, according to the Scripture, He knew what
was in man ; ' but teaching that it means, He
consorted and conversed with men, and taking
refuge in the expression which says that He
was seen on Earth and conversed with Men.?
And what can anyone contend further ? They
who take away the Humanity and the Interior
Image cleanse by their newly invented mask
only our outside,4 and that which is seen ; so
far in conflict with themselves that at one time,
for the sake of the flesh, they explain all the
is
rest in a gross and carnal manner (for it
from hence that they have derived their second
Judaism and their silly thousand years delight
in paradise, and almost the idea that we shall
resume again the same conditions after these
same thousand years) ; and at another time they
bring in His flesh as a phantom rather than a
reality, as not having been subjected to any of
our experiences, not even such as are free from
sin ; and use for this purpose the apostolic ex
pression, understood and spoken in a sense
which is not apostolic, that our Saviour was
made in the likeness of Men and found in
fashion as a Man,' as though by these words
was expressed, not the human form, but some
delusive phantom and appearance.

Since then these expressions, rightly under
stood, make for orthodoxy, but wrongly inter
preted are heretical, what is there to be sur
prised at if we received the words of Vitalius in
the more orthodox sense ; our desire that they
should be so meant persuading us, though
others are angry at the intention of his writ
ings?
reason why
Damasus himself, having been subsequently
better informed, and at the same time learning
that they hold by their former explanations,
excommunicated them and overturned their
written confession of faith with an Anathema ;
as well as because he was vexed at the deceit
which he had suffered from them through sim
plicity.

think, the

This is,

Since,

then, they have been openly con
victed of this, let them not be angry, but let
them be ashamed of themselves ; and let them
not slander us, but abase themselves and wipe
off from their portals that great and marvellous

proclamation and boast of their orthodoxy,
meeting all who go in at once with the ques
tion and distinction that we must worship, not
a God-bearing Man, but a flesh-bearing God.
What could be more unreasonable than this,
though these new heralds of truth think a great
deal of the title ?
For though it has a certain
sophistical grace through the quickness of its
antithesis, and a sort of juggling quackery
grateful to the uninstructed, yet it is the most
absurd of absurdities and the most foolish of
follies.
For if one were to change the word
Man or Flesh into God (the first would please
us, the second them), and then were to use this
wonderful antithesis, so divinely recognized,
what conclusion should we arrive at ?
That
we must worship, not a God-bearing Flesh, but
a Man-bearing God. O monstrous absurdity !
They proclaim to us to-day a wisdom hidden
ever since the time of Christ-a thing worthy
of our tears.
For if the faith began thirty
years ago, when nearly four hundred years had
passed since Christ was manifested, vain all
that time will have been our Gospel, and vain
our faith ; in vain will the Martyrs have borne
their witness, and in vain have so many and so
great Prelates presided over the people ; and
Grace is a matter of metres and not of the faith.
And who will not marvel at their learning,
in that on their own authority they divide the
things of Christ, and assign to His Manhood
such sayings as He was born, He was tempted,
He was hungry, He was thirsty, He was
wearied, He was asleep ; but reckon to His
Divinity such as these: He was glorified by
Angels, He overcame the Tempter, He fed the
people in the wilderness, and He fed them in
such a manner, and He walked upon the sea ;
and say on the one hand that the " Where
have ye laid Lazarus?" " belongs to us, but the
loud voice " Lazarus, Come Forth " *> and the
raising him that had been four days dead, is
above our nature; and that while the " He was
in an Agony, He was crucified, He was buried,"
belongs to the Veil, on the other hand, "He
was confident, He rose again, He ascended,"
belong to the Inner Treasure ; and then they
accuse us of introducing two natures, separate
or conflicting, and of dividing the supernatural
They ought, either not
and wondrous Union.
to do that of which they accuse us, or not to
accuse us of that which they do ; so at least if
they are resolved to be consistent and not to
propound at once their own and their oppon
Such is their want of rea
ents' principles.
it conflicts both with itself and with the
son ;

a Heb. iv. 15.

0 John ii. 25.

t Matt, axiii. as, a°*

y Banich iii. 37.
■ Phil, ii. 7.

John xi. 34.

P lb. xi. 43.

LETTERS OF SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

truth to such an extent that they are neither
conscious nor ashamed of it when they fall out
with themselves.
Now, if anyone thinks that
we write all this willingly and not upon com
pulsion, and that we are dissuading from unity,
and not doing our utmost to promote it, let
him know that he is very much mistaken, and
has not made at all a good guess at our desires,
for nothing is or ever has been more valuable
in our eyes than peace, as the facts themselves
prove ; though their actions and brawlings
against us altogether exclude unanimity.

Ep. CXXV.

To Olympius.

for wisdom.

Even hoar hairs have something to learn ;
and old age, it would seern, cannot in all
respects be trusted
at any
rate, knowing better than anyone, as I did,
the thoughts and the heresy of the Apollinarians, and seeing that their folly was intoler
able; yet thinking that I could tame them by
patience and soften them by degrees, I let my
hopes make me eager to attain this object.
But, as it seems, I overlooked the fact that I
and injuring the
was making them worse,

Church by my untimely philosophy.
For
gentleness does not put bad men out of coun
tenance.
And now if it had been possible
for me to teach you this myself, I should not
have hesitated, you may be sure, even to un
dertake a journey beyond my strength to throw
myself at the feet of your Excellency.
But
since my illness has brought me too far, and
it has become necessary for me to try the hot
baths of Xanxaris at the advice of my medical
men, I send a letter to represent me.
These
wicked and utterly abandoned men have dared,
in addition to all their other misdeeds, either
to summon, or to make a bad use of the pas
sage (I am not prepared to say precisely which)
of certain Bishops, deprived by the whole
Synod of the Eastern and Western Church ;
and, in violation of all Imperial Ordinances,
and of your commands, to confer the name of
Bishop on a certain individual of their own
misbelieving and deceitful crew ; encouraged
to do so, as I believe, by nothing so much as
my great infirmity ; for I must mention this.
If this is to be tolerated, your Excellency will
tolerate it, and I too will bear it, as I have
often before.
But if it is serious, and not to
be endured by our most august Emperors, pray •
punish what has been done-though more
mildly than such madness merits.

DIVISION II.

CORRESPONDENCE WITH SAINT BASIL THE GREAT, ARCHBISHOP OF
CAESAREA.

Ep. I.

(Perhaps about a.d. 357 or 358 ; in answer

to a letter which is not now extant.)

To Basil his Comrade.

mise.

I have failed, I confess, to keep my pro
I had engaged even at Athens, at the
* time of our friendship and intimate connection
there (for I can find no better word for it),
But I
to join you in a life of philosophy.
failed to keep my promise, not of my own will,
but because one law prevailed against another ;
I mean the law which bids us honour our par
ents overpowered the law of our friendship and
Yet I will not fail you altogether,
intercourse.
if you will accept this offer.
I shall be with
you half the time, and half of it you will be
with me, that we may have the whole in com
mon, and that our friendship may be on equal
terms ; and so it will be arranged in such a
way that my parents will not be grieved, and
yet I shall gain you.

Ep. II.

(Written about the same time, in reply to

another letter now lost.)

I do not like being joked about Tiberina
and its mud and its winters, O my friend, who
are so free from mud, and who walk on tiptoe,
and trample on the plains.
You who have
wings and are borne aloft, and fly like the ar
rows of Abaris, in order that, Cappadocian
though you are, you may flee from Cappadocia.
Have we done you an injury, because
while you are pale and breathing hard and
measuring the sun, we are sleek and well fed

Yet this is your
and not pressed for room ?
You are luxurious and rich, and
condition.
I do not approve of this.
go to market.
Either then cease to reproach us with our mud
(for you did not build your city, nor we make
our winter), or else for our mud we will bring
against you your hucksters, and the rest of
the crop of nuisances which infest cities.

Ep. IV.

(In answer to Ep. XIV., of Basil, about

361.)

You may mock and pull to pieces my af
fairs, whether in jest or in earnest.
This is a
matter of no consequence ; only laugh, and
take your fill of culture, and enjoy my friend
ship.
Everything that comes from you is
pleasant to me, no matter what it may be, and
how it may look.
For I think you are chaf
fing about things here, not for the sake of
chaffing, but that you may draw me to your
self, if I understand you at all ; just like peo
ple who block up streams in order to draw
them into another channel.
That is how your
sayings always seem to me.

.

For my part I will admire your Pontus and
your Pontic darkness, and your dwelling place
so worthy of exile, and the hills over your
head, and the wild beasts which test your faith,
and your sequestered spot that lies under them
or as I should say your mousehole with
the stately names of Abode of Thought, Monas
tery, School ; and your thickets of wild bushes,
and crown of precipitous mountains, by which
may you be, not crowned but, cloistered ; and
your limited air ; and the sun, for which you
long, and can only see as through a chimney,
O sunless Cimmerians of Pontus, who are con
demned not only to a six months' night, as

LETTERS OF SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

.

.

some are said to be, but who have not even a
part of your life out of the shadow, but all
your life
is one long night, and a real shadow
And I
to use a Scripture phrase.
of death,
admire your strait and narrow road, leading
I know not if it be to the Kingdom,
or to Hades, but for your sake I hope it is the
Kingdom.
And as for the interven
ing country, what is your wish? Am I
falsely to call it Eden, and the fountain divided
into four heads, by which the world is wa
tered, or the dry and waterless wilderness
(only what Moses will come to tame it, bring
ing water out of the rock with his staff) ? For
all of it which has escaped the rocks is full of
gullies ; and that which is not a gully is a
thicket of thorns ; and whatever is above the
thorns is a precipice ; and the road above that
is precipitous, and slopes both ways, exercising
the mind of travellers, and calling for gymnas
tic exercises for safety.
And the river rushes
roaring down, which to you is a Strymon of
Amphipolis for quietness, and there are not
so many fishes in it as stones, nor does it flow
into a lake, but it dashes into abysses, 0 my
grandiloquent friend and inventor of new
names.
For it is great and terrible, and over
whelms the psalmody of those who live above
like the Cataracts and Catadoupa of the
it ;
Nile, so does it roar you down day and night.
It is rough and fordless ; and it has only this
morsel of kindness about it, that it does not
sweep away your dwelling when the torrents
This then is
and winter storms make it mad.
what I think of those Fortunate Islands and of
you happy people. And you are not to ad
mire the crescent-shaped curves which strangle
rather than cut off the accessible parts of your
Highlands, and the strip of mountain ridge
that hangs over your heads, and makes your
life like that of Tantalus ; and the draughty
breezes, and the vent-holes of the earth, which
refresh your courage when it fails; and your
musical birds chat sing (but only of famine),
and fly about (but only about the desert). No
one visits it, you say, except for hunting ; you
might add, and except to look upon your dead
This is perhaps too long for a letter,
bodies.
If you can
but it
take my jokes kindly you will do well, but if
not, I will send you some more.

is too short for a comedy.

Ep. V.

(Circa a.d. 361.)

" Come now and change thy theme,
And sing of the inner adornment."

-Od. viii. 492.

.

.

Your roofless and doorless hut, your fireless
and smokeless hearth, your walls dried by fire,
that we may not be hit by the drops of the mud,
condemned like Tantalus thirsting in the midst
of waters, and that pitiable feast with nothing
to eat, to which we were invited from Cappadocia, not as to a Lotus-eater's poverty, but to
a table of Alcinous-we young and miserable
survivors of a wreck.
For I remember those
loaves and the broth (so it was called), yes,
and I shall remember them too, and my poor
teeth that slipped on your hunks of bread, and
then braced themselves up, and pulled them
selves as it were out of mud.
You yourself will
raise these things to a higher strain of tragedy,
having learnt to talk big through your own suf
ferings.
for if we had not been quickly
delivered by that great supporter of the poor
-I mean your mother-who appeared oppor
tunely like a harbour to men tossed by a storm,
we should long ago have .been dead, rather
pitied than admired for our faith in Pontus.
How shall I pass over that garden which was
no garden and had no vegetables, and the
Augean dunghjll which we cleared out of the
house, and with which we filled it up (sc.
the garden), when we drew that mountainous
wagon, I the vintager, and you the valiant,
with our necks and hands, which still bear the
traces of our labours.
" O earth and sun, O air
will indulge a little in
and virtue" (for I
tragic tones), not that we might bridge the
Hellespont, but that we might level a preci
pice.
If you are not put out by the mention
of the circumstances, no more am I ; but if
you are, how much more was I by the reality.
pass by the rest, through respect for the
others from whom I received much enjoyment.

Ep. VI.

(Written about the same time, in a more

serious vein.)

What I wTote before about our stay in
Pontus was in joke, not in earnest ; what I
write now is very much in earnest. O that
one would place me as in the month of
those former days,* in which I luxuriated with
you in hard living;
since- voluntary pain is
more valuable than involuntary delight. O
that one would give me back those psalmodies

Sin e you do take my jokes kindly, I send

you tfft rest. My prelude is from Homer.

a Job xxix. a.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

and vigils and those sojournings with God in
prayer, and that immaterial, so to speak, and
unbodied life. O for the intimacy and oriesouledness of the brethren who were by you
divinized and exalted : O for the contest and
incitement of virtue which we secured by writ
ten Rules and Canons ; O for the loving labour
in the Divine Oracles, and the light we found
in them by the guidance of the Holy Ghost.
Or, if I may speak of lesser and slighter mat
ters, O for the daily courses and experiences ;
O for the gatherings of wood, and the cutting
of stone ; O for the golden plane-tree, more
precious than that of Xerxes, under which sat,
not a King enfeebled by luxury, but a Monk
worn out by hard life, which I planted and
Apollos (I mean your honourable self) watered ; "
but God gave the increase to our honour, that
a memorial might remain among you of my
diligence, as in the Ark we read and believe,
did Aaron's rod that budded.'' To long for all
this is very easy, but it is not easy to attain it.
But do you come to me, and conspire with me
in virtue, and co-operate with me, and aid me
by your prayers to keep the profit which we used
to get together, that I may not perish by little
and little, like a shadow as the day draws to its
close.
I would rather breathe you than the
air, and only live while I am with you, either
actually in your presence, or virtually by your
likeness in your absence.

Ep. VIII.

(Written to S. Basil shortly after his Ordina
tion as Priest, probably toward the end of
a.d. 362.)

I approve the beginning of your letter ; but
what is there of yours that I do not approve ?
And you are convicted of having written just
like me;» for I, too, was forced into the rank
of the Priesthood, for indeed I never was eager
for it. We are to one another, if ever any
men were, trustworthy witnesses of our love for
a humble and lowly philosophy.
But perhaps
it would have been better that this had not
happened, or I know not what to say, as long
as I am in ignorance of the purpose of the
But since it has come about, we
Holy Ghost.
must bear it, at least so it seems clear to me ; and
especially when we take the times into con
sideration, which are bringing in upon us so
many heretical tongues, and must not put to
shame either the hopes of those who have
trusted us thus, or our own lives.

a : Cor. iii. 6.

fS Num. xvii. 8, 10.

y The Editors render "And you were captured just as I also was
circumscribed," etc., but the Greek hardly bears this rendering.

Ep. XIX.

(This Epistle should be read in connection
with the three addressed to Eusebius of Caesarea, to which it refers.
For the circumstances
see General Prolegomena, § i, p. 194.)

It is a time for prudence and endurance, and
that we should not let anyone appear to be of
higher courage than ourselves, or let all our
labours and toils be in an instant brought to
nothing. Why do I write this, and wherefore ?
Our Bishop Eusebius, very dear to God (for so
we must for the future both think and write of
him), is very much disposed to agreement and
friendship with us ; and as fire softens iron, so
has time softened him ; and I think a letter of
appeal and invitation will come to you from
him, as he intimated to me, and as many per
sons who are well acquainted with his affairs
assure me. Let us be beforehand with him then,
either by going to him, or by writing to him ;
or rather by first writing and then going ; in
order that we may not by and by be put to
shame by being defeated when it was in our
power to secure a victory by being honourably
and philosophically beaten, which so many are
Be persuaded by me then, and
asking from us.
come ; both on this account and on account of
the bad times ; for a conspiracy of heretics is
assailing the Church ; some of them are here
now, and are troubling us ; and others, rumour
says, are coming ; and there is reason to fear
lest the Word of Truth should be swept away,
unless there be stirred up very soon the spirit of
a Bezaleel, the wise Master builder of such ar
guments and dogmas.
If you think I ought to
go too, to stay with you and travel with you,
I will not refuse to do even this.

(We insert here the three letters to Eusebius,
which are so closely connected with the above
as not to seem out of place.)

Ep. XVI.

■

v

To Eusebius, Bishop of CesaXea.

Since I am addressing a man who d!>es not
love falsehood, and who is the keenest man I
know at detecting it in another, howevt.1: it may
be twined in skilful and varied lab-Tinths ;
and, moreover, on my own part I wihsay it.
though against the grain I do not like rtifice,
either, both from my natural constituticf, and
because God's Word has formed me so- There-

\

\

fore I write what presents itself to my mind ;
and I beg you to excuse my plain speaking, or
you will wrong the tnith by depriving me of my
liberty, and forcing me to restrain within my
self the pain of my grief, like some secret and
malignant disease.
I rejoice that I have your
respect (for Lam a man, as some one has said
before), and that I am summoned to Synods and
But I am troubled at the
spiritual conferences.
slight which has been inflicted on my most
Reverend brother Basil, and is still inflicted on
him by Your Reverence ; for I chose him as
the companion of my life and words and high
est philosophy, and he is so still ; and I never
had reason to regret my judgment of him.
It
is more temperate to speak thus of him, that I
may not seem to be praising myself in admiring
him.
You, however, I think, by honouring me
and dishonouring him, seem to be acting like a
man who should with one hand stroke a man's
head, and with the other hand strike him on the
(ace ; or while tearing up the foundations of a
house should paint the walls and decorate the
If then you will listen to me, this is
exterior.
what you will do, and I claim to be listened
to, for this is justice.
If you will pay due at
tention to him, he will do the like by you.
And I will follow him as a shadow does the
body, being of little worth and inclined to
peace.
For I am not so mean as to be willing
in other respects to philosophize, and to be of
the better part, but to overlook a matter which
is the end of all our teaching, namely love ;
especially in regard to a Priest, and one of
so high a character, and one whom I know of
all my acquaintances to be the best both in life
and doctrine and conduct.
For my pain shall
not obscure the truth.

Ep. XVII.

To Eusebius, Archbishop of Cjesarea.

I did not write in an insolent spirit, as you
complain of my letter, but rather in a spiritual
and philosophical one, and as was fitting, un
less this too wrongs ' ' your most eloquent Greg
ory. ' ' For though you are my Superior in rank,
yet you will grant me something of liberty and
just freedom of speech. Therefore be kinder to
me.
But if you regard my letter as coming
from a servant, and from one who has not the
right even to look you in the face, I will in
this instance accept your stripes and not even
shed a tear.
Will you blame me for this also?
That would befit anyone rather than your Re
For it is the part of a high-souled man
verence.
"9

to accept more readily the freedom of a friend
than the flattery of an enemy.

Ep. XVIII.

To Eusebius of C^sarea.

I was never meanly disposed towards your
Reverence ; do not find me guilty.
But after
allowing myself a little liberty and boldness,
just to relieve and heal my grief, I at once
bowed and submitted, and willingly subjected
What else could I have
myself to the Canon.
done, knowing both you and the Law of the
Spirit?
But if I had been ever so mean and
ignoble in my sentiments, yet the present time
would not allow such feelings, nor the wild
beasts which are rushing on the Church, nor
your own courage and manliness, so purely and
genuinely fighting for the Church.
I will
come then, if you wish it, and take part with
you in prayers and in conflict, and will serve
you, and like cheering boys will stir up the
noble athlete by my exhortations.

Ep. XL.

To the Great Basil.

(About the middle of the year 370. On the
death of Eusebius Basil seems to have formed a
desire that his friend Gregory should succeed to
the vacant Metropolitanate ; and so he wrote
to him, without mentioning the death of the
Archbishop, to come to him at Ca^sarea, repre
senting himself as dangerously ill.
Gregory,
deeply grieved at the news, set off at once, but
had not proceeded far on his way when he
learned that Basil was in his usual health, and
that the Bishops of the Province were assem
bling at Csesarea for the Election of a Metro
politan. He saw through the artifice at once;
and thinking that Basil had wished to secure
his presence at the Metropolis in order that his
influence might bring about his own (Basil's)
Election, he wrote him the following indignant
letter.
Nevertheless both he and his father felt
that no one was so well fitted to succeed to the
vacant throne ; and so. Gregory wrote in his
father's name the three letters which we have
placed next, addressed
respectively to the
people of Caisarea, to the Bishops attending
the Synod, and to Eusebius Bishop of Samosata.)

Do not be surprized if I say something strange,
which has not been said before by anyone.
I think you have the reputation of being a steady

4SO

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

safe and strong-minded man, but also of being
more simple than safe in much that you plan
and do.
For that which is free from evil is
also in proportion slow to suspect evil, as is
shewn by what has just occurred.
You have
summoned me to the Metropolis at the moment
when a council has been called for the election
of a Bishop, and your pretext is very seemly
You pretend to be very ill, in
and plausible.
deed at your last breath, and to long to see me
and to bid me a last farewell ; I do not know
with what object, even what my presence can
I started in great grief at
effect in the matter.
for what could be of
what had happened ;
higher value to me than your life, or more dis
tressing than your departure? And I shed a
fountain of tears ; and I wailed aloud ; and I
felt myself now for the first time unphilosophWhat did I leave unperformed
ically disposed.
of all that befits a funeral ?
But as soon as I
found that the Bishops were assembling at the
City, at once I stopped short in my course ;
and I wondered first that you had not per
ceived what was proper, or guarded against
people's tongues, which are so given to slander
the guileless ; and secondly that you did not
think the same course to be fitting for me as for
yourself, though our life and our rule and every
thing is common to us both, who have been
so closely associated by God from the first.
Thirdly, for I must say this also, I wondered
whether you remembered that such nominations
are worthy of the more religious, not of the
more powerful, nor of those most in favour with
For these reasons then I backed
the multitude.
water, and held back.
Now, if you think as I
do, come to this determination, to avoid these
public turmoils and evil suspicions.
I shall see
your Reverence when the matters are settled
and time allows, and I shall have more and
graver reproaches to address to you.

Ep. XLI.

To the People of C/esarea, in his
Father's name.

I am a little shepherd, and preside over a tiny
flock, and I am among the least of the servants
But Grace is not narrow, or
of the Spirit.
circumscribed by place.
Wherefore let free
dom of speech be given even to the small,-
especially when the subject matter is of such
great importance, and one in which all are
interested-even to deliberate
with men of
hoary hairs, who speak with perhaps greater
wisdom than the ordinary run of men.
You
are deliberating on no ordinary or unimpor

tant matter, but on one by which the common
interest must necessarily be promoted or injured
according to the decision at which you arrive.
For our subject matter is the Church, for which
Christ died, and the guide who is to present it
For the light of the body
and lead it to God.
is the eye," as we have heard ;
not only
the bodily eye which sees and is seen, but
that which contemplates and is contemplated
spiritually.
But the light of the Church is the
Bishop, as is evident to you even without our
writing it.
As then the straightness or crook
edness of the course of the body depends upon
the clearness or dulness of the eye, so must the
Church necessarily share the peril or safety in
curred by the conduct of its Chief.
You must
then take thought for the whole Church as the
Body of Christ, but more especially for your
own, which was from the beginning and is now
the Mother of almost all the Churches, to which
all the Commonwealth looks, like a circle de
scribed round a centre, not only because of its
orthodoxy proclaimed of old to all, but also
because of the grace of unanimity so evidently
bestowed upon it by God. You then have sum
moned us also to your discussion of this matter,
and so are acting rightly and canonically.
But
we are oppressed by age and infirmity, and if
we by the strength given us by the Holy Ghost
could be present (nothing is incredible to them
that believe), this would be best for the com
mon welfare and most pleasant to ourselves,
that we might confer something on you, and
ourselves have a part of the blessing ; but if I
should be kept away through weakness, I will
give at any rate whatever can be given by one
who is absent.

I believe that there are others among you
worthy of the Primacy, both because of the
greatness of your city, and because it has been
governed in times past so excellently and by
such great men ; but there is one man among
you to whom I cannot prefer any, our son
(I
well beloved of God, Basil the Priest
speak before God as my witness) ; a man
of pure life and word, and alone, or almost
alone, of all qualified in both respects to stand
times, and the prevail
against the present
I write this
ing wordiness of the
to men of the priestly and monastic Orders, and
also to the dignitaries and councillors, and to
the whole people.
If you should approve it,
and my vote should prevail, being so just and
right, and given with God's aid, I am and will
be with you in spirit ; or rather I have already
set my hand to the work-and am bold in

heretics.

LETTERS OF SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

the Spirit.
But if you should not agree with
me, but determine something else, and if the
matter is to be settied by cliques and relation
ships, and if the hand of the mob is again
to disturb the sincerity of your vote, do what
pleases you-I shall stay at home.

Ep. XLIII.

(The comprovincial Bishops had notified the
elder Gregory of their Synod, but without men
tioning its date or purpose or inviting him to
take part in it-probably because they knew
how strongly he would support the election of
Basil, to which they were unfavourable.
S.
Gregory therefore wrote the following letter
in his father's name.)

To The Bishops.

How sweet and kind you are, and how full of
love.
You have invited me to the Metropolis,
because, as I imagine, you are going to take
some counsel about a Bishop.
So much I
learn from you, though you have not told me
either that I am to be present, or why, or
when, but have merely announced to me sud
denly that you were setting out, as though re
solved not to respect me, and as not desirous
that I should share your counsels, but rather
putting a hindrance in the way of my coming,
that you may not meet me even against my will.
This is your way of action, and I will put
up with the insult, but I will set before you
my view and how I feel.
Various people will
put forward various candidates, each accord
ing to his own inclinations and interests, as is
But I cannot
usually the case at such times.
prefer anyone, for my conscience would not
allow it, to my dear son and fellow priest
Basil.
For whom of all my acquaintance do I
find more approved in his life, or more powerful
in his word, or more furnished altogether with
the beauty of virtue ?
But if you allege weak
health against him, I reply that we are choos
ing not an athlete but a teacher. And at the
same time is seen in this case the power of Him
that strengthens and supports the weak, if such
If you accept this vote I will come
they be.
and take part, either in spirit or in body.
But
if you are marching to a foregone conclusion,
and faction is to overrule justice, I shall rejoice
The work must be
to have been overlooked.
yours ; but pray for me."

a There is here a various reading (the difference being merely
11 Ours

the result of itacism) which seems to give a better sense ;
is to pray for you."

Ep. XLII.

(There still seemed a probability that in
trigues and party spirit would carry the day,
and so the two Gregories determined to call
in the aid of Eusebius of Samosata, though
he did not belong to the Province.
He had
been a conspicuous champion of orthodoxy
against the Arian Emperor Valens, and the
Gregories hoped much from his presence at the
Synod. He responded to their appeal, and
undertook the three hundred miles ofvery diffic
ult travelling to throw in his influence with the
cause which they had at heart.
He saw, how
ever, that it was necessary that the aged Bishop
of Nazianzus, notwithstanding his years and
infirmities, should make the effort, and he per
The result was all that
suaded him to go.
could be desired ; for Basil was elected by a
unanimous vote. The letter, which S. Gregory
wrote in his own name to thank him, will be
found later on.)

To Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata.

O that I had the wings of a dove, or that
my old age could be renewed, that I might be
able to go to your charity, and to satisfy the
longings that I have to see you, and to tell you
the troubles of my soul, and in you to find
some comfort for my afflictions.
For since
the death of the blessed Bishop Eusebius I am
not a little afraid lest they who on a former
occasion set traps for our Metropolis, and
wanted to fill
it with heretical tares, should
now seize the opportunity, and uproot by their
evil teaching the piety which has with so much
labour been sown in the hearts of men, and
should tear asunder its unity, as they have done
in many Churches.
As soon as I received let
ters from the Clergy asking me not to forget
them in their present circumstances, I looked
round about me, and remembered your love
and your right faith and the zeal with which
you are ever possessed for the Churches of God ;
and therefore I sent my beloved Eustathius,
my Deacon and helper, to warn your Rever
ence, and to entreat you, in addition to all
your toils for the Churches, to meet me, and
both to refresh my old age by your coming,
and to establish in the Orthodox Church that
piety which is so famous, by giving her with
us (if we may be deemed worthy to have a
share with you in the good work) a Shepherd
according to the will of the Lord, who shall
For we have a
be able to rule His people.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

man before our eyes, and you are not unac
quainted with him ; and if we are permitted to
obtain him I know that we shall acquire great
boldness towards God, and shall confer a very
great benefit upon the people who have called
upon our aid.
put away all delay, and to come to us be
fore the bad weather of the winter sets in.

I beg you again and again to ]

Ep. XLV.

(After the Consecration every one thought
that Gregory would at once join his friend ;
and Basil himself much wished for his assist-,
ance.
But Gregory thought it better to re
strain his desire to see his friend until jealousies
had had time to calm down.
So he wrote the
following letter to explain the reasons for his
staying away at this juncture.)

To Basil.

When I learnt that you had been placed on
the lofty throne, and that the Spirit had pre
vailed to publish the candle upon the candle
stick, which even before shone with no dim
light, I was glad, I confess. Why should I
not be, seeing as I did that the commonwealth
of the Church was in sorry plight, and needed
such a guiding hand ?
Yet I did not run to
you off hand, nor shall I run to you, not even
if you ask me yourself.
First, in order that I
may be careful of your dignity, and that you
may not seem to be collecting partisans under
the influence of bad taste and hot temper, as
your calumniators would say ; and secondly
that I may make for myself a reputation for
When then will
stability, and above illwill.
you come, perhaps you will ask, and how long
will you put it off?
As long as God shall bid
me, and until the shadow of the present enmity
and slander shall have passed away.
For the
lepers, I well know, will not hold out very
long to keep our David out of Jerusalem.

Ep. XLVI.

(The new Archbishop seems not to have been
satisfied with the reasons given in Gregory's
last letter; so the latter writes again.)

To Basil.

How can any affairs of yours be mere grapegleanings to me, O dear and sacred friend ?

' ' What a word has escaped the fence of your
teeth," or how could you dare to say such a
thing, if
I too may be somewhat daring ?
How could your mind set it going, or your
ink write it, or your paper receive it, O lec
tures and Athens and virtues and literary
You almost make me write a tragedy
labours !
by what you have written.
Do you not know
me or yourself, you eye of the world, and
great voice and trumpet and palace of learn
ing ?
Your affairs trifles to Gregory ? What
then on earth could any one admire, if Gregory
admire not you ?
There is one spring among
the seasons, one sun among the stars, and one
heaven that embraces all things ; and so your
voice is unique among all things, if I am capa
ble of judging such things, and not deceived by
my affection-and this I do not think to be the
But if it is because I do not value you
case.
according to your worth that you blame me,
you must also blame all mankind ; for no one
else has or will sufficiently admire you, unless it
be yourself, and your own eloquence, at least if
it were possible to praise oneself, and if such
were the custom of our speech.
But if you are
accusing me of despising you, why not rather
of being mad ? Or are you vexed because I am
acting like a philosopher ?
Give me leave to
say that this and this alone is higher than even
your conversation.

Ep. XLVII.

(The division of the civil Province of Cappadocia into two Provinces in the year 372 was
followed by ecclesiastical troubles.
Anthimus,
the Bishop of Tyana, the civil metropolis of the
new division of Cappadocia Secunda, main
tained that the Ecclesiastical divisions must ne
cessarily follow the civil, and by consequence
claimed for himself that the purely civil action
of the State had ipsofacto elevated him to the
dignity of Metropolitan of the new Province ;
and this pretension was supported by the Bish
ops of that district, who were as a rule not well
disposed towards the great Archbishop.
The
next three letters are connected with this dis
pute.)

To Basil.

I hear that you are being troubled by this
fresh innovation, and are being worried by
some sophistical and not unusual officiousness
on the part of those in power ; and it is not to
be wondered at.
For I was not ignorant of
their envy, or of the fact that many of those

LETTERS OF SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

around you are making use of you to further
their own interests, and are kindling the spark
of meanness.
I have no fear of seeing you unphilosophically affected by your troubles, or in
any way unworthy of yourself and me.
Nay, I
think that it is now above all that my Basil will
be known, and that the philosophy which all
your life you have been collecting will shew it
self, and will overcome the abuse as with a
high wave ; and that you will remain unshaken
while others are being troubled.
If you think
it well, I will come myself and perhaps shall be
able to give you some assistance by my counsel
(if the sea needs water, you do counsel ! ) ; but
in any case I shall derive benefit, and shall learn
philosophy by bearing my part of the abuse.

Ep. XLVIII.

(Shortly after the events described above, Ba
sil determined to strengthen his own hands by
creating a number of new Bishoprics in the
disputed Province, to one of which, Sasima, he
consecrated Gregory, very much against the
will of the latter, who felt that he had been
hardly used, and did not attempt to disguise
his reluctance.

See Gen. Prolegg. p. 195.)

To Basil.

Do leave off speaking of me as an ill-educ
ated and uncouth and unfriendly man, not even
worthy to live, because I have ventured to be
conscious of the way in which I have been
treated. You yourself would admit that I have
not clone wrong in any other respect, and my
own conscience does not reproach me with hav
ing been unkind to you in either great or small
matters ; and I hope it never may.
I only
know that I saw that I had been deceivedtoo late indeed, but I saw it - and I throw
the blame on your throne, as having on a sud
den lifted you above yourself ; and I am weary
of being blamed for faults of yours, and of hav
ing to make excuses for them to people who
know both our former and our present relations.
For of all that I have to endure this is the most
ridiculous or most pitiable thing, that the same
person should have both to suffer the wrong
and to bear the blame, and this is my present
case.
Different people blame me for different
things according to the tastes of each, or each
man's disposition, or the measure of their ill
feeling on my account ; but the kindest re
proach me with contempt and disdain, and
they throw me on one side after making use

of me, like the most valueless vessels, or those
frames upon which arches are built, which after
the building is complete are taken down and
cast aside. We will let them be and say what
they please ; no one shall curb their freedom
of speech. And do you, as my reward, pay off
those blessed and empty hopes, which you de
vised against the evil speakers, who accused you
of insulting me on pretence of honouring me, as
though I were lightminded and easily taken in
by such, treatment. Now I will plainly speak
out the state of my mind, and you must not
be angry with me.
For I will tell you just what
I said at the moment of the suffering, not
in a fit of anger or so much in the sense of as
tonishment at what had happened as to lose
my reason or not to know what I said.
I will
not take up arms, nor will I learn tactics which
I did not learn in former times, when the oc
casion seemed more suitable, as every one was
arming and in frenzy (you know the illness of
the weak), nor will 1 face the martial Anthimus,
though he be an untimely warrior, being my
self unarmed and unwarlike, and thus the
more exposed to wounds.
Fight with him
yourself if you wish (for necessity often makes
warriors even of the weak), or look out for
some one to fight when he seizes your mules,
keeping guard over a defile, and like Amalek
of old, barring the way against Israel.
Give
me before all things quiet. Why should I fight
for sucking pigs and fowls, and those not my
own, as though for souls and canons ? Why
should I deprive the Metropolis of the cele
brated Sasima, or lay bare and unveil
the
secret of your mind, when I ought to join in
concealing it? Do you then play the man
and be strong and draw all parties to your
own conclusion, as the rivers do the winter
torrents, without regard for friendship or inti
macy in good, or for the reputation which such
Give yourself up
a course will bring you.
to the Spirit alone.
I shall gain this only
from your friendship, that I shall learn not to
trust in friends, or to esteem anything more
valuable than God.

Ep. XLIX.

(The Praises of Quiet.)

To Basil.

You accuse me of laziness and idleness, be
cause I did not accept your Sasima, and be
cause I have not bestirred myself like a Bishop,

and do not arm you against each other like a
bone thrown into the midst of dogs. My great
est business always is to keep free from busi
ness. And to give you an idea of one of my
good points, so much do I value freedom from
business, that I think I might even be a stand
ard to all men of this kind of magnanimity,
and if only all men would imitate me the
Churches would have no troubles ; nor would
the faith, which every one uses as a weapon in
his private quarrels, be pulled in pieces.

Ep. L.

(At the request of Anthimus it would appear
that S. Gregory wrote to S. Basil a letter, not
now extant, proposing a conference between
Basil took umbrage
the rival Metropolitans.
at the well-meant proposal, and wrote a stiff
letter to S. Gregory, to which the following is
the reply.)

To Basil.

How hotly and like a colt you skip in your
letters.
Nor do I wonder that when you have
just become the property of glory you should
wish to shew me what you find glory to be, so
that you may make yourself more majestic, like
those painters who picture the seasons.
But,
to explain the whole matter about the Bishops,
and the letter by which you were annoyed ;
what was my starting point, and how far
went, and where I stopped, appears to me to
be too long a matter for a letter, and to be a
subject not so much for an apology as for a
history. To explain it to you concisely: -the
most noble Anthimus came to us with certain
Bishops, whether to visit my Father (this at
least was the pretext), or to act as he did act.
He sounded me in many ways and on many
subjects ; dioceses, the marshes of Sasima, my or
flattering, questioning, threat
dination, .
ening, pleading, blaming, praising, drawing
circles round himself, as though I ought only
to look at him and his new Metropolis, as being
the greater.
Why, I said, do you draw your
line to include our city, for we too deem our
Church to be really a Mother of Churches, and
that too from ancient times ?
In the end he
went away without having gained his object,
much out of breath, and reproaching me with
Basilism, as if it were a kind of Philipism. Do
you think I did you wrong in this ? And now
look at the letter from me, who, you say, in
They fashioned a Synodal sum
sulted you.

.

.

mons to me ; and when I declined it and said
that the thing was an insult, they then asked as
an alternative that through me you should be
invited to deliberate upon these matters.
This
I promised, in order to prevent their first plan
being carried out ; placing the whole matter in
your hands, if you choose to call them together,
and where and when.
And if I have not in
jured you in this, tell me where there is room
If you have to learn this from me,
for injury.
I will read you the letter which Anthimus sent
me, after invading the marshes, notwithstand
ing my prohibitions and threats, insulting and
reviling me, and as it were singing a song of
triumph over my defeat. And what reason is
there that I should offend him for your sake
and at the same time displease you, as though
I were currying favour with him ? You ought
to have learnt this first, my dear friend ; and
even if it had been so, you should not have
insulted me,-if only because I am a Priest.
But if you are very much disposed to ostenta
tion and quarrelsomeness, and speak as my Su
perior-as the Metropolitan to an insignificant
Suffragan, or even as to a Bishop without a
See-I too have a little pride to set against
yours.
That is very easy to anybody, and is
perhaps the most suitable course.

Ep. LVIII.

(An attack had been made in Gregory's
presence on the orthodoxy of Basil in respect
of the Deity of God the Holy Ghost ; and in
this letter he gives his friend an account of the
way in which he had defended him.
Unfor
tunately Basil was not pleased with the letter,
taking it as intended to convey reproach under
the guise of friendly sympathy.)

To Basil.

From the first I have taken you, and I take
you still, for my guide of life and my teacher
of the faith, and for every thing honourable that
can be said ; and if any one else praises your
merits, he is altogether with me, or even be
hind me, so far am I surpassed by your piety,
and so thoroughly am I yours.
And no won
der ; for the longer the intimacy the greater the
experience ; and where the experience is more
And
abundant the testimony is more perfect.
if I get any profit in life it is from your friend
ship and company.
This is my disposition in
regard to these matters, and I hope always will

LETTERS OF SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

What I now write I write unwillingly,
be.
but still
I write it. Do not be angry with
me, or I shall be very angry myself, if you do
not give me credit for both saying and writ
ing it out of goodwill to you.

Many people have condemned us as not firm
in our faith ; those, I mean, who think and
think rightly that we thoroughly agree.
Some
openly charge us with heresy, others with cow
ardice ; with heresy, those who believe that
our language is not sound ; with cowardice,
I need not re
they who blame our reserve.
port what other people say ;
I will tell you
what has recently happened.

There was a party here at which a great
many distinguished friends of ours were present,
and amongst them was a man who wore the
name and dress which betoken piety (i.e. a
They had not yet begun to drink,
Monk).
but were talking about us, as often happens at
such parties, and made us rather than anything
else the subject of their conversation.
They
admired everything connected with you, and
they brought me in as professing the same
philosophy ; and they spoke of our friendship,
and of Athens, and of our conformity of views
and feelings on all points.
Our Philosopher
was annoyed by this.
'"What is this, gen
tlemen ? " he said, with a very mighty shout,
" what liars and flatterers you are. You may
praise
reasons if you
like, and I will not contradict you ; but I can
not concede to you the most important point,
Basil and Gregory are falsely
their orthodoxy.
praised ; the former, because his words are a
betrayal of the faith, the latter, because his
toleration aids the treason."

these men for other

What is this, said I, O vain man and new
Where do you
Dathan and Abiram in folly ?
come from to lay down the law for us ? How
do you set yourself up as a judge of such great
matters?
I have just come," he replied,
" from the festival of the Martyr Eupsychius
(and so it really was), and there I heard the
great Basil speak most beautifully and perfectly
upon the Godhead of the Father and the Son,
as hardly anyone else could speak ;
but he
slurred over the Spirit." And he added a
sort of illustration from rivers, which pass
by rocks and hollow out sand.
" As for you
my good sir," he said, looking at me, " you
do now express yourself openly on the God
head of the Spirit," and he referred to some
remarks of mine in speaking of God at a
largely attended Synod, as having added in

o He suffered under the Emperor Hadrian. The Festival was

Sept. 7.

respect of the Spirit that expression which has
made a noise, (how long shall we hide the
candle under the bushel?) "but the other
man hints obscurely, and as it were, merely sug
gests the doctrine, but does not openly speak
out the truth ; flooding people's ears with more
policy than piety, and hiding his duplicity by
the power of his eloquence. ' '

" It is," I said, " because I (living as I do
in a corner, and unknown to most men who
do not know what I say, and hardly that I
speak at all) can philosophize without danger ;
but his word is of greater weight, because he
is better known, both on his own account and
on that of his Church.
And everything that
he says is public, and the war around him is
great, as the heretics try to snatch every naked
word from Basil's lips, to get him expelled
from the Church ; because he is almost- the only
spark of truth left and the vital force, all else
around having been destroyed ; so that evil
may be rooted in the city, and may spread
over the whole world as from a centre in that
Surely then it is better to use some
Church.
reserve in the truth, and ourselves to give
way a little to circumstances as to a cloud,
rather than by the openness of the proclama
tion to risk its destruction.
For no harm will
come to us if we recognize the Spirit as God
from other phrases which lead to this conclu
sion (for the truth consists not so much in
sound as in sense), but a very great injury
would be done to the Church if the truth were
The
driven away in the person of one man."
company present would not receive my econ
omy, as out of date and mocking them ; but
they shouted me down as practising it rather
from cowardice than for reason.
It would lje
much better, they said, to protect our own
people by the truth, than by your so-called
Economy to weaken them while failing to win
over the others.
It would be a long business
and perhaps unnecessary to tell you all the de
tails of what I said, and of what I heard, and
how vexed I was with the opponents, perhaps
immoderately and contrary to my own usual
But, in fine, I sent them away in the
temper.
same fashion.
But do you O divine and
sacred head, instruct me how far I ought to go
in setting forth the Deity of the Spirit ; and
what words I ought to use, and how far to use
reserve ; that I may be furnished against oppo
nents.
For if I, who more than any one else
know both you and your opinions, and have
often both given and received assurance on
this point, still need to be taught the truth
of this matter, I shall be of all men the most
ignorant and miserable.

Ep. LIX.

For who would flinch, who would not rather
take courage in speaking and contending for
the truth under you and by your side ?

(The reply to Basil's somewhat angry answer

to the last.)

To Basil.

This was a case which any wiser man would
have foreseen ; but I who am very simple and
foolish did not fear it in writing to you. My
letter grieved you ; but in my opinion neither
rightly nor justly, but quite unreasonably. And
whilst you did not acknowledge that you were
hurt, neither did you conceal it, or if you did
it was with great skill, as with a mask, hiding
your vexation under an appearance of respect.
But as to myself if I acted in this deceitfully
or maliciously, I shall be punished not more by
your vexation than by the truth itself ; but if
in simplicity and with my accustomed good
I will lay the blame on my own sins
will,
But it would
rather than on your temper.
this matter
have been better
straight, rather than to be angry with those
who offer you counsel.
But you must see to
your own affairs, inasmuch as you are quite
capable of giving the same advice to others.
You may look upon me as very ready, if God
will, both to come to you, and to join you in
the conflict, and to contribute all that I can.

to have set

Ep. LX.

(Gregory was not able, owing to the serious
illness of his Mother, to carry out the promise
at the end of Ep. LIX. ; so he writes to explain
and excuse himself.)

To Basil.

The Carrying Out of your bidding depends
partly on me ; but partly, and I venture to
think principally, on your Reverence.
What
depends on me is the good will and eagerness,
for I never yet avoided meeting you, but have
always sought opportunities, and at the present
moment am even more desirous of doing so.
What depends on your Holiness is that my af
For I am sitting by my
fairs be set straight.
lady Mother, who has for a long time been
suffering from illness. And if I could leave
her out of danger you might be well assured
that I would not deprive myself of the pleasure
So give me the help of your
of going to you.
prayers for her restoration to health, and for my
journey to you.

DIVISION III.

MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS.

§ i.

Letters to His Brother CitSARius.

Ep. VII.

(On the death of the Emperor Constantius
the undisputed succession devolved on his
cousin Julian the Apostate, who at once be
gan to employ all the power of the Empire to
discourage, while not absolutely persecuting,
Christianity, and to restore the supremacy of
the ancient Paganism.
One of his first acts
was to dismiss all the men who had held high
dignities under his predecessor.
S. Coesarius,
Gregory's brother, was however to be except
ed ; Julian, who had perhaps known and es
teemed him at Athens, did all that he could to
keep him at Court, and to attach him to him
self.
This caused much anxiety to Gregory
and other friends of Caesarius, who foresaw that
Julian would do his utmost to shake the young
man's faith, and could not feel sure that he
would have courage to resist such assaults.
In
his trouble Gregory wrote him the following
Shortly afterwards the expected at
letter.
S. Caesarius bravely held
tempt was made.
his ground against the Emperor, and after de
claring his unalterable determination to hold
firm to his faith, resigned his office at Court and
withdrew to Nazianzus.)

I have had enough to blush for in you ; that
I was grieved, it is hardly necessary to say to
him who of all men knows me best.
But,
not to speak of my own feelings, or of the dis
tress with which the rumour about you filled
me (and let me say also the fear), I should
have liked you, had it been possible, to have
heard what was said by others, both relations
and outsiders, who are any way acquainted
with us (Christians I mean, of course,) about
you and me ; and not only some of them, but
everyone in turn alike ; for men are always
more ready to philosophize about strangers
Such speech
than about their own relations.

es as the following have become a sort of
exercise among them : Now a Bishop's son
takes service in the army ; now he covets ex
terior power and fame ; now he is a slave of
is being rekindled for
money, when the fire
all, and men are running the race for life;
and he does not deem the one only glory and
safety and wealth to be to stand nobly against
the times, and to place himself as far as pos
sible out of reach of every abomination and
defilement. How then can the Bishop ex
hort others not to be carried along with the
times, or to be mixed up with idols ? How
can he rebuke those who do wrong in other
ways, seeing his own home takes away his
right to speak freely ? We have every day to
hear this, and even more severe things, some
of the speakers perhaps saying them from a
motive of friendship, and others with unfriend
ly feelings. How do you think we feel, and
what is the state of mind with which we, men
professing to serve God, and to deem the only
good to be to look forward to the hopes of the
future, hear such things as these ?
Our vener
able Father is very much distressed by all that
he hears, which even disgusts him with life.
I console and comfort him as best I can, by
making myself surety for your mind, and as
suring him that you will not continue thus
But if our dear Mother were
to grieve us.
to hear about you (so far we have kept her
in
I think
she would be altogether inconsolable ; being,
as a woman, of a weak mind, and besides
unable, through her great piety, to control her
feelings on such matters.
If then you care
at all for yourself and us, try some better
and safer course.
Our means are certainly
enough for an independent life, at least for a
man of moderate desires, who is not insatia
ble in his lust for more.
Moreover, I do not
see what occasion for your settling down we
are to wait for, if we let this one pass.
But
if you cling to the same opinion, and every

the dark by various

devices),

GREGORY

thing seems to you of small account in com
parison with your own desires, I do not wish
to say anything else that may vex you, but
I foretell and protest, that one of two
this
things must happen ; either you, remaining a
genuine Christian, will be ranked among the
lowest, and will be in a position unworthy of
yourself and your hopes ; or in grasping at
honours you will injure yourself. in what is
more important, and will have a share in the
smoke, if not actually in the fire.

Ep. XIV. and XXIII.

(Under the Emperor Valens Csesarius re
turned to public life and was made Quaxtor of
Bithynia.
While he was in this office the fol
lowing letters were written to him by his brother
on behalf of two cousins, Eulalius, who after
wards succeeded Gregory in the Bishopric of
Nazianzus, and with whom Gregory was on
terms of intimate friendship, and Amphilochius,
who, through the roguery of a partner, had
got into some trouble at Constantinople about
money matters, and for whom he asks aid and
advice.
Some however think that this letter is
not addressed to his brother (who may have
been at Constantinople at the time), but to
some other officer of high rank at the Imperial
Court.
Amphilochius soon after retired from
the world, and by a.d. 347 was already bishop
of the important See of Iconium.
Gregory's
letters to him are given later in this division.)

the purchase they have
partly through

Do a kindness to yourself and to me, of a
kind that you will not often have an oppor
tunity of doing, because opportunities for such
Undertake a
kindnesses do not often occur.
most righteous protection of my dear cousins,
who are worried more than enough about a
property which they bought as suitable for re
tirement, and capable of providing them with
some means of living ; but after having com
into
pleted
many troubles,
the
vendors dishonest, and partly through being
plundered and robbed by their neighbours, so
that it would be a gain to them to get rid of
their acquisition for the price they gave for it,
plus the not small sum they have spent on it
besides.
If, then, you would like to transfer
the business to yourself, after examining the
contract to see how it may be best and most
securely done, this course would be most ac
ceptable both to them and me ; but if you
would rather not, the next best course would be
to oppose yourself to the officiousness and dis

fallen
finding

honesty of the man, that he may not succeed
in gaining one advantage over their want of
business habits,
either by wronging them if
they retain their property, or by inflicting loss
upon them if they part with it.
I am really
ashamed to write to you on such a subject.
All the same, since we owe it to them, on
account both of their
relationship and of
their profession (for of whom would one rather
take care than of such, or what would one be
more ashamed of than of being unwilling to
confer such a benefit ?) do you either for your
own sake, or for mine, or for the sake of the
men themselves, or for all these sakes put to
gether, by all means do them this kindness.

Ep. XXIII.

Do not be surprized if I ask of you a great
favour ; for it is from a great man that I am
asking it, and the request must be measured by
him of whom it is made ; for it is equally absurd
to ask great things from a small man, and small
things from a great man, the one being unsea
sonable, and the other mean.
I therefore pre
sent to you with my own hand my most precious
son Amphilochius, a man so famous (even be
yond his years) for his gentlemanly bearing, that
I myself, though an old man, and a Priest, and
your friend, would be quite content to be as
much esteemed.
What wonder is it if he was
cheated by a man's pretended friendship, and
For not being
did not suspect the swindle ?
himself a rogue, he did not suspect roguery,
but thought that correction of language rather
than of character was what was wanted, and
therefore entered into partnership with him
attach to
in
him for this with honest men ? Do not then
allow wickedness to get the better of virtue ;
and do not dishonour my grey hairs, but do
honour to my testimony, and add your kind
ness to my benedictions, which are perhaps
of some account with God before Whom we
stand.

What blame can

business.

Ep. XX.

(In a.d. 368 the City of Nicaea in Bithynia
was almost entirely destroyed by a terrible
Csesarius lost his house, and his
earthquake.
personal escape was almost miraculous.
Gre
gory writes (as also did Basil) to congratulate
him on his escape, and profits by the occasion to
urge upon him retirement from his secular avo
Caesarius soon resolved to follow this
cations.
' advice, and was taking steps to carry this reso

MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS.

lution into effect, when he died suddenly, early
in a.d. 369, aged only 40. He left the whole
of his large property to the poor, but it fell for
a time into the hands of designing persons, and
Gregory, who was his brother's executor, had
much difficulty in recovering it for the purpose
for which it had been intended.
(See the let
ter to Sophronius, Prefect of Constantinople
on this subject.) He was buried at Nazianzus in the Church of the Martyrs, in a vault
which his parents had prepared for themselves.
Gregory preached the funeral sermon, which is
given in the former part of this, volume.
These
four are the only letters known to have passed
between the brothers.)

Even frights are not without use to the wise ;
or, as I should say, they are very valuable and
salutary.
For, although we pray that they
may not happen, yet when they do they in
struct us.
For the afflicted soul, as Peter"
somewhere admirably says, is near to God ; and
every man who escapes a danger is brought into
nearer relation to Him Who preserved him.
Let us not then be vexed that we had a share
in the calamity, but let us give thanks that we
were delivered.
And let us not shew our
selves one thing to God in the time of peril,
and another when the danger is over, but let
us resolve, whether at home or abroad, whether
in private life or in public office (for I must
say this and may not omit it), to follow Him
Who has preserved us, and to attach ourselves
to His side, thinking little of the little con
cerns of earth ; and let us furnish a tale to those
who come after us, great for our glory and the
benefit of our soul, and at the same time a very
useful lesson to all, that danger is better than
security, and that misfortune is preferable to
success, at least if before our fears we belonged
to the world, but after them we belong to God.
Perhaps I seem to you somewhat of a bore, by
writing to you so often on the same subject,
and you will think my letter a piece not of ex
hortation but of ostentation, so enough of this.
You will know that I desire and wish especially
that I might be with you and share your joy
at your preservation, and to talk over these
matters later on.
But since that cannot be, I
hope to receive you here as soon as may be,
and to celebrate our thanksgiving together.

§ 2. To S. Gregory of Nyssa.

(Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa, was a younger
Ordained a
the Great.

brother of Basil

Reader at an early age he grew tired of his
vocation, and became a professor of Rhetoric.
This gave scandal in the Church and occa
Gregory
sioned much grief to his friends.
of Nazianzus, wrote him the following letter of
remonstrance, which was not without effect,
for shortly afterwards he gave up his secular
avocation, and retired to the Monastery which
his brother Basil had founded in Pontus. Here
he spent several years in the study of Holy
Scripture and the best Commentators.)

Ep. I.

There is one good point

in my char
acter, and I will boast myself of one point
out of many.
I am equally vexed with my
Since,
self and my friends over a bad plan.
then, all are friends and kinsfolk who live ac
cording to God, and walk by the same Gospel,
why should you not hear from me in plain
words what all men are saying in whispers?
They do not approve your inglorious glory (to
borrow a phrase from your own art), and your
gradual descent to the lower life, and your
ambition, the worst of demons, according to
Euripides.0
For what has happened to you,
O wisest of men, and for what do you con
demn yourself, that you have cast away the
sacred and delightful books which you used
once to read to the people (do not be ashamed
to hear this) , or have hung them up over the
chimney, as men do in winter with rudders and
hoes, and have applied yourself to salt and
bitter ones, and preferred to be called a Pro
fessor of Rhetoric rather than of Christianity ?
I, thank God, would rather be the latter than
Do not, my dear friend, do not
the former.
let this be longer the case, but, though it is full
late, become sober again, and come to your
self once more, and make your apology to the
faithful, and to God, and to His Altars and
Sacraments, from which you have withdrawn
yourself.
And do not say to me in proud
rhetorical style, What, was I not a Christian
when I practised rhetoric?
not a
believer when I was engaged among the boys ?
No,
And perhaps you will call God to witness.
my friend, not as thoroughly as you ought to
have been, even if
I grant it you in part.
What of the offence to others given by your
present employment-to others who are prone
naturally to evil-and of the opportunity af
forded them both to think and to speak the
Falsely, I grant, but where
worst of you?

Was I

a Source of the quotation unknown.

oPbocn., 534.

46o

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

was the necessity?
For a man lives not for
himself alone but also for his neighbour ; nor is
it enough to persuade yourself, you must per
suade others also.
If you were to practise
boxing in public, or to give and receive blows
in the theatre, or to writhe and twist yourself
shamefully, would you speak of yourself as
having a temperate soul?
Such an argument
does not befit a wise man ; it is frivolous to
If you make a change I shall re
accept it.
joice even now, said one of the Pythagorean
philosophers, lamenting the fall of a friend ; but,
But
he wrote, if not you are dead to me.
Being a
I will not yet say this for your sake.
still a
friend, he
friend, as the Tragedy says.
But I shall be
grieved (to speak gently), if you do neither
yourself see what is right, which is the highest
method of all, nor will follow the advice of
Thus far my coun
others, which is the next.
sel.
Forgive me that my friendship for you
makes me grieve, and kindles me both on your
behalf and on behalf of the whole priestly
Order, and I may add on that of all Chris
And if I may pray with you or for you,
tians.
may God who quickeneth the dead aid your
weakness.

became an enemy, yet

This more cheerful tone was justified by the
event, for on the death of Valens, a.d. 378, the
exiled Bishops were restored by Gratian, and
Gregory was replaced in his Episcopal Throne,
to the great joy of the faithful of his Diocese.)

Do not let your troubles distress you too
For the less we grieve over things, the
much.
less grievous they are.
It is nothing strange
that the heretics have thawed, and are taking
courage from the springtime, and creeping out
of their holes, as you write.
They will hiss
for a short time, I know, and then will hide
themselves again, overcome both by the truth
and the times, and all the more so the more
we commit the whole matter to God.

Ep. LXXIII.

As to the subject of your letter, these are
my sentiments.
I am not angry at being over
looked, but I am glad when I am honoured.
The one is my own desert, the other is a proof
Excuse this
of your respect.
short letter, for anyhow, though it is short, it
is longer than silence.

Pray for me.

Ep. LXXII.

Ep. LXXIV.

(When S. Gregory was consecrated Bishop
of Nyssa the Imperial Throne was occupied by
Valens, an ardent Arian, whose mind was bent
on the destruction of the Nicene Faith. He ap
pointed, with this object, one Demosthenes, a
former clerk of the Imperial Kitchen, to be
Vicar of the civil Diocese of Pontus. An old
quarrel with Basil had made this man unfriendly
to Gregory, and after persecuting him in various
small ways for some time he procured, a.d. 275,
the summoning of a Synod to enquire into some
allegations of irregularity in his consecration,
and to try Gregory on some frivolous charges
of malversation of Church funds. Gregory was
unable to attend this Synod, which met at
Ancyra, on account of an attack of pleurisy ;
and another was summoned to meet at Nyssa
Gregory however refused to appear,
itself.
and was deposed as contumacious.
Thereupon
Valens banished him, and he seems to have
fallen into very low spirits, almost into de
spondency at the apparent triumph of the
heretical party.
The three letters which follow
throw some light upon his state at this time.
They were written in answer to letters of his
now lost, and their object was to comfort him
in his trouble and to encourage him to take
heart again in the hope of a good day coming.

Trusting in

Although I am at home, my love is expatri
ated with you, for affection makes us have all
things common.
the mercy of
God, and in your prayers, I have great hopes
that all will turn out according to your mind,
and that the hurricane will be turned into a gen
tle breeze, and that God will give you this re
ward for your orthodoxy, that you will over
come your opponents.
Most of all I long to see
you shortly, and to have a good time with you,
as I pray.
But if you delay owing to the pres
sure of affairs, at any rate cheer me by a letter,
and do not disdain to tell me all about your
circumstances, and to pray for me, as you are
May God grant you health
accustomed to do.
and good spirits in all circumstances,-you who
are the common prop of the whole Church.

Ep. LXXVI.

(Basil the Great died Jan. 1, a.d. 379.
Gregory of Nazianzus was prevented by very
serious
funeral,
illness from attending^ his
and therefore wrote as follows to Gregory of
Nyssa.)

«

This, then, was also reserved for my sad life,
to hear of the death of Basil, and the departure

MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS.

of that holy soul, which has gone from us that
it may be with the Lord, for which he had been
preparing himself all his life.
And among all
the other losses I have had to endure this is
the greatest, that by reason of the bodily sick
ness from which I am still suffering and in
great danger, I cannot kiss that holy dust, or
be with you to enjoy the consolations of a just
our common
philosophy, and to comfort
friends.
But to see the desolation of the
Church, shorn of such a glory, and bereft of
such a crown, is what no one, at least no one
of any feeling, can bear to let his eyes look
But you, I think,
upon, or his ear hearken to.
though you have many friends and will receive
many words of condolence, yet will not derive
comfort so much from any as from yousrelfand
your memory of him ; for you two were a pat
tern to all of philosophy, a kind of spiritual
standard, both of discipline in prosperity, and
of endurance in adversity ; for philosophy bears
prosperity with moderation and adversity with
This is what I have to say to Your
dignity.
But for myself who write so,
Excellency.
what time or what words shall comfort me,
except your company and conversation, which
our blessed one has left me in place of all, that
seeing his character in you as in a bright and
shining mirror, I may think myself to possess
him also .!

Ep. LXXXI.

You are distressed by your travels, and think
yourself unsteady, like a stick carried along
But, my dear friend, you must
by a stream.
not let yourself feel so at all.
For the travels
of the stick are involuntary, but your course
is ordained by God, and your stability is in
doing good to others, even though you are
not fixed to a place ; unless indeed one ought
to find fault with the sun, for going about the
world scattering his rays, and giving life to all
things on which he shines ; or, while praising
the fixed stars, one should revile the planets,
whose very wandering is harmonious.

Ep. CLXXXII.

(Gregory after his resignation of the Patri
archal See of Constantinople had retired to
Nazianzus, and had been persuaded to under
take the administration of the diocese then
vacant, until the vacancy should be filled.
The Bishops of the Province wished him to
retain it altogether, and therefore were in no
At length
hum- to proceed

election.

to

wishes
Eulalius.

however they yielded to the continually ex
of Gregory and chose his
pressed
cousin
Soon however Gregory's
enemies spread abroad a report that this elec
tion had been made against his wishes, and
with the intention of unfairly ousting him from
the administration of that Church.
The fol
lowing letter was written in consequence of
this slander.)

Woe is me that my sojourning is prolonged,
and, which is the greatest of my misfortunes,
that war and dissensions are among us, and
that we have not kept the peace which we re
ceived from our holy fathers.
This I doubt
not you will restore, in the power of the Spirit
who upholds you and yours.
But let no one,
I beg, spread false reports about me and my
lords the bishops, as though they had pro
claimed another bishop in my place against
my will.
But being in great need, owing to
my feeble health, and fearing the responsibility
of a Church neglected, I asked this favour of
them, which was not opposed to the Canon
Law, and was a relief to me, that they would
give a Pastor to the Church. He has been
given to your prayers, a man worthy of youc
piety, and I now place him in your hands,, the
most reverend Eulalius, a bishop very dear to
God, in whose arms I should like to die.
If
any be of opinion that it is not right to ordain
another in the lifetime of a Bishop, let him
know that he will not in this matter gain any
is well known that I
hold upon us.
was appointed, not to Nazianzus, but to Sasima, although for a short time out of reverence
for my father, I as a stranger undertook the
government.

For it

Ep. CXCVII.

A Letter of Condolence on the Death
of His Sister Theosebia.

(The writer of the article on Gregory Nyssen
in the Diet. Biogr. supposes her to* have been
his wife, but produces no evidence of this be
yond the ambiguous expression in this letter
which speaks of her as " the true consort of a
priest," but on the other hand she is expressly
called his Sister in the same letter.
Some
writers have imagined that she was the wife of
Gregory Nazianzen himself, but there is no
evidence to show that he was ever married.
The date of her death is uncertain, but it was
probably ^subsequent to a.d. 381.
It would
seem that the term Consort might have a
general application to those who shared in the

same work, and consequently the Benedictine
Editors regard Theosebia as a Deaconess of the
Church of Nyssa.)

I had started in all haste to go to you, and
had got as far as Euphemias, when I was de
layed by the festival which you are celebrat
ing in honour of the Holy Martyrs ; partly be
cause I could not take part in it, owing to my
bad health, partly because my coming at so
unsuitable a time might be inconvenient to
you.
I had started partly for the sake of see
ing you after so long, and partly that I might
admire your patience and philosophy (for I
had heard of it) at the departure of your holy
and blessed sister, as a good and perfect man,
a minister of God, who knows better than any
the things both of God and man ; and who re
gards as a very light thing that which to others
would be most heavy, namely to have lived
with such a soul, and to send her away and
store her up in the safe garners, like a shock
of the threshingfloor gathered in due season,"
to use the words of Holy Scripture ; and that
in such time that she, having tasted the joys of
life, escaped its sorrows through the shortness
of her life ; and before she had to wear mourn
ing for you, was honoured by you with that fair
funeral honour which is due to such as she.
too, believe me, long to depart, if not as you
do, which were much to say, yet only less than
you.
But what must we feel in presence of
a long prevailing law of God which has now
taken my Theosebia (for I call her mine be
cause she lived a godly life ; for spiritual kin
dred is better than bodily), Theosebia, the
glory of the church, the adornment of Christ,
the helper of our generation,
the hope of
Theosebia, the most beautiful and
woman ;
glorious among all the beauty of the Brethren ;
Theosebia, truly sacred, truly consort of a
priest, and of equal honour and worthy of the
Great Sacraments,3 Theosebia, whom all future
time shall receive, resting on immortal pillars,
that is, on the souls of all who have known her
now, and t>f all who shall be hereafter.
And
do not wonder that I often invoke her name.
For I rejoice even in the remembrance of the
Let this, a great deal in few
blessed one.
words, be her epitaph from me, and my word
of condolence for you, though you yourself are
quite able to console others in this way through
your philosophy in all things.
Our meeting
(which I greatly long for) is prevented by the
reason I mentioned.
But we pray with one
another as long as we are in the world, until

the common end, to which we are drawing
nigh, overtake us.
Wherefore we must bear
all things, since we shall not for long have
either to rejoice or to suffer.

§ 3. To Eusebius Bishop of Samosata.

Ep. XLII.

(This letter, urging his friend to attend at
Caesarea for the election of a Metro]x>litan in
succession to Eusebius, has been already given
in the second division of this Selection.)

Ep. XLIV.

referred

(Eusebius, having in response to the ap
to above, betaken himself to
peal
Caesarea, the Elder Gregory, though in very
feeble health, resolved to attend the Synod in
person, that Basil's Election might be secured
by their joint exertions, Gregory the Younger
sent the following letter by his father to ex
plain to his friend the reason why he had not
come too.
The date is about September of
the year 379.)

Whence shall I begin your praises, and by
what name shall I give you your right appella
tion ?
The pillar and ground of the church,
or a light in the world, using the very words
of the apostle, or a crown of glory to the re
maining portion of Christendom ; a or a gift of
God, or the bulwark of your country, or the
standard of faith, or the ambassador of truth,
or all these at once, and more than all ? And
these excessive praises I will prove by what we
What rain ever came so seasonably
shall see.
to a thirsty land, what water flowing out of
the rock to those in the wilderness ?
What
such Bread of Angels did
ever man eat?
When did Jesus the common Lord ever so sea
sonably present Himself to His drowning dis
ciples, and tame the sea, and save the perish
ing, as you have shewn yourself to us in our
weariness and distress, and in our immediate
danger as it were of shipwreck ?
I need not
speak of other points, with what courage and
joy you filled the souls of the orthodox, and
how many you delivered from despair.

But our mother church, Casarea I mean,
is now really putting off the garments of her
widowhood at the sight of you, and putting on
again her robe of cheerfulness, and will be yet
more resplendent when she receives a pastor

a Alluding to his work in,opposing the prevalence of ArianUm.

MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS.

worthy of herself and of her former Bishops
and of your hands.
For you yourself see
what is the state of our affairs, and what a
miracle your zeal has wrought, and your toil,
and your godly plainness of speech.
Age is
renewed, disease is conquered," they leap who
were in their beds, and the weak are girded
with power.
By all this I guess that our mat
You have
ters too will turn out as we desire.
my father, moreover, representing both him
self and me, to put a glorious close to his
whole life and to his venerable age by this
present struggle on behalf of the Church. And
I shall receive him back, I am well assured,
strengthened by your prayers, and with youth
renewed, for one must confidently commit
all in faith to them.
But if he should end
his life in this anxiety, it would be no calamity
Par
to attain to such an end in such a cause.
don me, I beg of you, if I give way a little to
the tongues of evil men, and delay a little to
come and embrace you, and to complete in
person what I now pass over of the praises due
to you.

Ep. LXIV.

(In the year 374 Eusebius and other ortho
dox Bishops of the East were banished by
Valens and their thrones filled with Arian
intruders.
Eusebius was ordered to retire to
Thrace, and his journey lay through Cappadocia, where he saw Basil, but Gregory to his
great grief was too unwell to leave his house
and go to meet him.
Instead he sent the fol
lowing letter.)

When Your Reverence was passing through
our country I was so ill as not to be able even
to look out of my house. And I was grieved
not so much on account of the illness, though
it brought about the fear of the worst, as by the
inability to meet your holiness and goodness.
My longing to see your venerable face was
like that which a man would naturally feel
who needed healing of spiritual wounds, and
expected to receive it from you.
But though
at that time the effect of my sins was that I
is now by
missed the meeting with you, it
your goodness possible for me to find a remedy
for my trouble, for if you will deign to remem
ber me in your acceptable prayers,
this will
be to me-a store of every blessing from God,
both in this my life and in the age to come.
For that such a man, such a combatant for
the Faith of the Gospel, one who has endured

in

such persecutions, and won for himself such
confidence before the all-righteous God by his
patience
tribulation-that such a man
should deign to be my patron also in his prayers
will gain for me, I am persuaded, as much
strength as I should have gained through one
of the holy martyrs.
Therefore let me en
treat you to remember your Gregory without
ceasing in all the matters in which I desire to
be worthy of your remembrance.

Ep. LXV.

(Eusebius having replied to the former letter
Gregory wrote again, having an opportunity of
communicating with his friend through one
Eupraxius, a disciple of Eusebius, who passed
through Cappadocia on his way to visit his
master.
This letter is sometimes attributed to
Basil.)

Our reverend brother Eupraxius has al
ways been dear to me and a true friend, but
he has shewn himself dearer and trjier through
his affections for you, inasmuch as even at
the present time he has hurried to your rev
erence,
use David's words, a hart
to quench his great and unendurable thirst"
with a sweet and pure spring at your pa
tience in tribulations.
Deign then to be his
patron and mine.

like,

to

Happy indeed are they who are permitted
to come near you, and happier still is he who
can place upon his sufferings for Christ's sake
and upon his labours for the truth, a crown
such as few of those who fear God have ob
tained.
For it is not an untested virtue that
you have shown, nor is it only in a time of
calm that you have sailed aright and steered
the souls of others, but you have shone in the
difficulties of temptations, and have been
greater than your persecutors, having nobly de
Others
parted from the land of your 'birth.
possess the threshold of their fathers,-we the
heavenly City ; others perhaps hold our throne,
but we Christ. O what a profitable exchange !
How little we give up, to receive how much !
We went through fire and water, and I believe
that we shall also come out into a place of re
freshment.
For God will not forsake us for
ever, or abandon the true faith to persecution,
but according to the multitude of our pains
This at
His comforts shall make us glad.
But do you,
any rate we believe and desire.
And as often
I beg, pray for our humility.

« Alluding to the effort made by his Dither.

a Ps. xliii. 1.

as occasion shall present itself bless us with
out hesitation by a letter, and cheer us up by
news of yourself, as you have just been good
enough to do.

Ep. LXVI.

(The following letter is sometimes attributed
to Basil, and is found in his works as well as
The MSS. however,
in those of Gregory.
with only a single exception, give it to the
latter.)

You give me pleasure both by writing and
remembering me, and a much greater pleas
ure by sending me your blessing in your letter.
But if I were worthy of your sufferings and of
your conflicts for Christ and through Christ I
should have been counted worthy also to come
to you, to embrace Your Piety, and to take
example by your patience in your sufferings.
But since I am not worthy of this, being troub
led with many afflictions and hindrances I do
what is next best.
I address Your Perfection,
and I beg you not to be weary of remember
ing me.
For to be deemed worthy of your
letters is not only profitable to me, but is also
a matter to boast of to many people, and is an
honour, because I am considered by a man of
so great virtue, and such near relations with
God, that he can bring others also by word
and example into relation to Him.

§ 4. To Sophronius,

Prefect of

Con

stantinople.

(Sophronius, a native of the Cappadocian
Caesarea, was an early friend and fellow-student
of Gregory and Basil.
He entered the Civil
In a.d.
Service, and soon rose to high office.
365 he was appointed Prefect of Constantinople,
as a reward for timely intimation which he gave
to the Emperor Valens of the usurpation at
tempted by Procopius. He is chiefly known
to us by the letters of Gregory and Basil, in
voking his good offices for various persons.
Ep. 21 was written in a.d. 369 to commend to
him Nicobulus, Gregory's nephew by mar
riage, the husband of Alypiana, daughter of his
This Nicobulus was a man of
sister Gorgonia.
great wealth and ability, but much disinclined
for public life.
Gregory constantly writes to
one and another high official to get him excused
from appointments which had been thnist upon
him.)

Ep. XXI.

Gold is changed and transformed

into
various forms at various times, being fash

ioned into many ornaments, and used by art
for many purposes ; yet it remains what it isgold ; and it is not the substance but the form
So also, believing
which admits of change.
that your kindness will remain unchanged for
your friends, although you are ever climbing
higher, I have ventured to send you this re
quest, because I do not more reverence your
high rank than I trust your kind disposition.
I entreat you to be favourable to my most re
spectable son Nicobulus, who is in all respects
allied with me, both by kindred and by inti
macy, and, which is more important, by dis
position. In what matters, and to what extent ?
In whatever he may ask your aid, and as far as
may seem to you to befit your Magnanimity.
I on my part will repay you the l>est I have.
I have the power of speech, and of proclaim
ing your goodness, if not nearly according to
its worth, at any rate to the best of my ability.

Ep. XXII.

(Is for Amphilochius, written at the same
time and in consequence of the same trouble
as that which we have placed second of the
.
letters to Caesarius.)

As we know gold and stones by their look,
so too we may distinguish good men from
bad in the same way, and do not need a very
long trial. For I should not have needed many
words in pleading for my most honourable son
Amphilochius with Your Magnanimity.
should rather have expected some strange and
incredible thing to happen than that he would
do anything dishonourable, or think of such a
thing, in a matter of money ; such a universal
reputation has he as a gentleman, and as wiser
But what must he suffer ?
than his years.
Nothing escapes envy, for some word of blame
has touched even him, a man who has fallen
under accusation of crime through simplicity
rather than depravity of disposition.
But do
not allow it to be tolerable to you to overlook
him in his vexations and trouble.
Not so, I
entreat your sacred and great mind, but hon
our your country11 and aid his virtue, and
have a respect for me who have attained to
glory by and through you ; and be everything
to this man, adding the will to the power, for
I know that there is nothing of equal power
with Your Excellency.

Ep. XXIX.

(Of the same year.

Here Caesarius had
bequeathed all his property to the poor ; but
a Sophronius and Amphilochius were natives of Caesarea.

MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS.

his house had been looted by his servants, and
his friends could only find a comparatively
small sum.
Besides this a number of persons,
shortly afterwards, presented themselves as cred
itors of his estate, and their claims, though in
capable of proof, were paid. Then others kept
coming forward, until at last the family refused
to admit any more. Then a lawsuit was threat
ened. Gregory intensely disliking all this, and
dreading moreover the scandal which might
be caused by legal proceedings, writes as fol
lows to the Prefect.)

You see how matters stand with me, and
how the circle of human affairs goes round,
now some no,w others flourishing or the re
verse, and neither prosperity nor adversity re
maining constant with us, as the saying is, but
ever changing and altering, so that one might
trust the breezes, or letters written in the
waters, rather than human prosperity.
For
what reason is this? I think it is in order that
by the contemplation of the uncertainty and
anomaly of all these things we may learn the
rather to have recourse to God and to the fu
ture, giving scanty thoughts to shadows and
dreams.
But what has produced this talk,
for it is not without a cause that I thus philo
sophize, and I am not idly boasting?

Casarius was once one of your not least
distinguished friends; indeed, unless my broth
erly affection deceives me, he was one of your
most distinguished, for he was remarkably well
informed, and for gentlemanly conduct was
above the average, and was celebrated for the
number of his friends ; among the very first of
these, as he always thought and as he persuad
ed me, Your Excellency held the first place.
These are old stories, and you will add to
them of your own accord in rendering hon
ours to his memory ; for it
is human nature to
add something to the praises of the departed.
But now (that you may not pass over this
story without a tear, or that you may weep to
some good and useful purpose), he lies dead,
friendless, solitary, pitiable, deemed worthy
of a little myrrh (if even of so much), and
of the last small coverings, and it is much that
he has found even thus much compassion.
But his enemies, as I hear, have fallen upon
his estate, and from all quarters with great
violence are plundering it, or are about to do
so. O cruelty ! O savagery ! And there is no
one to hinder them ; but even the kindest of
friends only calls upon the laws as his
his
utmost favour.
If I may put it concisely, I
am become a mere drama, who once was wont
Do not let this seem to you to
to be happy.

be tolerable, but help me by sympathy and
by sharing my indignation, and do right by
the dead Cresarius. Yes, in the name of friend
ship herself ; yes, by all that you hold dearest ;
by your hope (which may you make secure by
shewing yourself faithful and true to the de
parted), I pray you do this kindness to the
living, and make them of good hope. Do you
It
think that I am grieved about the money ?
would have been a more intolerable disgrace
to me if Csesarius alone, who thought he had
so many friends, turned out to have none.
Such is my request, and from such a cause does
it arise, for perhaps my affairs are not alto
gether matters of indifference to you. In what
you will assist me, and by what means, and
how, the matter itself will suggest and your
wisdom will consider.

Ep. XXXVII.

(A letter of recommendation for Eudoxius
a Rhetorician for whom Gregory had a warm
regard.)

To honour a mother is a religious duty.
Now, different individuals have different mo
thers ; but the common mother of all is our
country.
This mother you have honoured by
the splendour of your whole life ; and you will
honour her again now by obtaining for me that
which I entreat.
And what is my request ?
You certainly know Eudoxius the Rhetorician,
the most learned of her sons.
His son, to
speak concisely, another Eudoxius both in life
and learning, now approaches you through me.
In order then to get yourself a yet better
name, be helpful to him in the matters for
which he asks your assistance.
For it were a
shame were you, who are the universal Patron
of our Country, and who have done good to
so many, and I will add, who will yet con
tinue to do so, should not honour above all him
who is most excellent in learning and in his
eloquence, which you ought to honour, if for
no other reason, because he uses it to praise
your goodness.

Ep. XXXIX.

(About the same date. A recommendation
of one Amazonius, whose learning was much
respected by Gregory.)

I wish well to all my friends. And when I
speak of friends, I mean honourable and good
men, linked with me in virtue, if indeed I
Therefore at
myself have any claim to it.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

the present time when seeking how I might
do a kindness to my excellent brother Amazonius (for I was very much pleased with the
man in some intercourse which has lately
taken place between us), I thought I might re
turn him one favour for all,-in your friend
ship and protection.
For in a short time he
shewed proof of an extensive education, both
of the kind which I used once to be very
zealous for, when I was shortsighted, and of
that for which I am zealous in its place since
I have been able to contemplate the summit of
virtue.
Whether I in my turn have appeared
to him to be worth anything in respect of
At any rate I shewed him
virtue is his affair.
the best things I have, namely, my friends to
him as my friend.
Of these I reckon you as
the first and truest, and want you to shew
yourself so to him-as your common Country
demands, and my desire and promise begs ; for
I promised him your patronage in return for
all his kindness.

Ep. XCIII.

(Written soon after Gregory's resignation

of the Archbishopric.)

Our retreat and leisure and quiet have about
them something very agreeable to me ; but the
fact that they cut me off from your friendship
and society is not so advantageous but rather
the other way.
Others enjoy your Perfection,
to me it would be really a great boon if I
might have just that shadow of conversation
which comes in a letter.
Shall I see you
again ?
Shall I embrace again him of whom
I am so proud, and shall this be granted to
If so, all thanks to
the remnant of my life?
God : if not, the best part of my life is over.
Pray remember your friend Gregory and pray
for him.

Ep. CXXXV.

S.

of

(About the middle of a.d. 382 Theodosius,
on the recommendation
Damasus,
summoned a new Synod of Eastern Bish
ops to meet at Constantinople, to try and heal
the schism which had been embittered by the
election of Flavian at Antioch.
As soon as
Gregory heard of the convocation of this
Synod he wrote to several of his influential
friends at Court, to beg them to do their ut
most for the promotion of peace.)
I am philosophizing at leisure.

That is the
injury my enemies have done me, and I should

be glad if they would do more of the same sort,
that I might look upon them still more as
benefactors.
For it often happens that those
who are wronged get a benefit, while they,
whom we would treat well, suffer injury.
That
is the state of my affairs.
But if I cannot
make every one believe this, I am very anxious,
that at all events you, for them all, to whom I
most willingly give an account of my affairs, <
should know, or rather I feel certain that you
do know it, and can persuade those who do
not.
You, however, I beg to give all diligence,
now at any rate, if you have not done so before,
to bring together to one voice and mind the
sections of the world that are so unhappily
divided ; and above all if you should perceive,
as I have observed, that they are divided not on
account of the Faith, but by petty private in
terests.
To succeed in doing this would earn
you a reward ; and my retirement would have
less to grieve over if I could see that I did not
grasp at it to no purpose, but was like a Jonas,
willingly casting myself into the sea, that the
storm might cease and the sailors be saved.
If, however, they are still as storm-tost as ever,
I at all events have done what I could.

§ 5. To Amphilochius The Younger.

Ep. IX.

to

tax

the

from

(Constantine and Constantius had granted
all
military
exemption
clerics.
This privilege was, however, abolished
by Julian, and was restored by Valentinian and
Valens :
but the collectors of revenue often
tried to levy it on them in spite of the exemp
tion.
The collector at Nazianzus tried to do
this in the case of a Deacon named Euthalius,
in whose behalf Gregory wrote the follow
ing letter to Amphilochius, who was at the time
one of the principal magistrates of the province.
The date of the letter is given as a.d. 372, the
year of Gregory's Ordination to the Priesthood.
For further particulars about this Amphilochius,
see introd. to letters II. and III. to Cassarius
Epp. 22, 23.)

Support a wellbuilt chamber with columns of
gold, as Pindar" says,- and make yourself from
the beginning known to us on the right side in
our present anxiety, that you may build yourself
a notable palace, and shew yourself in it with a
good fame.
By
honouring God and the things of God, than
Whom there can be nothing greater in your

But how will you do this?

aOlymp., Od. vi., 1.

MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS.

eyes.
But how, and by what act can you
honour Him ? By this one act, by protecting the
servants of God and ministers of the altar.
One of these is our fellow deacon Euthalius, on
whom, I know not how, the officers of the
Prefecture are trying to impose a payment of
gold after his promotion to the higher rank.
Pray do not allow this.
Reach a hand to this
deacon and to the whole clergy, and above all
to me, for whom you care ; for otherwise he
would have to endure a grievous wrong, alone
of men deprived of the kindness of the time
and the privilege granted by the Emperor to
the Clergy, and would even be insulted and
fined, possibly on account of my weakness.
It
would be well for you to prevent this even if
others are not well disposed.

Ep. XIII.

trouble

to Sophronius.
here alluded

(See the first letter
of the

The
is
to
nature
unknown.
There are several letters to various
persons in reference to his troubles and diffi
culties, many of them coming from his reluc
tance to undertake the duties of any public
office.
He died at an early age", leaving his
widow, Alypiana, with a large family to bring
up in very reduced circumstances. Her troub
les and the education of her children were
matters of much concern to Gregory, whose fre
quent letters on the subject will be found below.)

I approve the statement of Theognis, who,
while not praising the friendship which goes
no further than cups and pleasures, praises that
which extends to actions in these words,

Beside a full wine cup a man has many friends :
But they are fewer when grave troubles press.

We, however, have not shared winecups with
each other, nor indeed have we often met
(though we ought to have been very careful to
do so, both for our own sake, and for the sake
of the friendship which we inherited from our
fathers), but we do ask for the goodwill which
shews itself in acts. A struggle is at hand, and
a very serious struggle. My son Nicobulus
has got into unexpected troubles, from a quarter
from which troubles would least be looked for.
Therefore I beg you to come and help us as
soon as you can, both to take part in trying the
case, and to plead our cause, if you find that a
wrong is being done us.
But if you cannot
come, at any rate do not let yourself be pre
viously retained by the other side, or sell for a
small gain the freedom which we know from
everybody's testimony has always characterized
you.

Ep. XXV.

(Amphilochius was acquitted of the charges
made against him, referred to in former let
ters ; but the result of the accusation on his
own mind was such that he resigned his office,
and retired to a sort of hermitage at a place
called Ozizala, not far from Nazianzus, where
he devoted his hours of labour to the cultivation
of vegetables.
The four letters which follow
are of no special importance, and are only
given as specimens of the lighter style which
Gregory could use with his intimate friends.)

I did not ask you for bread, just as I would
not ask for water from the inhabitants of Ostracine.
But if I were to ask for vegetables from
a man of Ozizala it were no strange thing, nor
too great a strain on friendship ; for you have
plenty of them, and we a great dearth.
I beg
you then to send me some vegetables, and
plenty of them, and the best quality, or as
many as you can (for even small things are
great to the poor) ; for I am going to receive
the great Basil, and you, who have had experi
ence of him full and philosophical, would not
like to know him hungry and irritated.

Ep. XXVI.

What a very small quantity of vegetables
you have sent me ! They must surely be golden
your whole wealth
vegetables !
consists of orchards and rivers and groves and
gardens, and your country is productive of
vegetables as other lands are of gold, and

And yet

You dwell among meadowy leafage.

But corn is for you a fabulous happiness, and
your bread is the bread of angels, as the saying
is, so welcome is it, and so little can you reckon
upon it.
Either, then, send me your vege
tables less grudgingly, or-I won't threaten
you with anything else, but I won't send you
any corn, and will see whether there is any
truth in the saying that grasshoppers live on
dew !

Ep. XXVII.

You make a joke of it ;

but I know the
danger of an Ozizalean starving when he has
taken most pains with his husbandry.
There
is only this praise to be given them, that even
if they die of hunger they smell sweet, and
have a gorgeous funeral. How so ?
Because
they are covered with plenty of all sorts of
flowers.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

Ep. XXVIII.

In visiting the mountain cities which bor
der on Pamphylia I fished up in the Mountains
a sea Glaucus ;
I did not drag the fish out of
the depths with a net of flax, but I snared my
game with the love of a friend.
And having
once taught my Glaucus to travel by land, I
sent him as the bearer of a letter to Your
Goodness.
Please receive him, kindly, and
honour him with the hospitality commended in
the Bible, not forgetting the vegetables.

Ep. LXII.
«

His personal

(The Armenian referred

to
Bishop of Sebaste,

is probably
Eustathius
capital
the
He had been a disciple
of Armenia Minor.
of Arius, but more than once professed the
Nicene Faith, changing his opinions with his
company.
character however
stood very high, and for a long time S. Basil re
Indeed S.
garded him with affectionate esteem.
Basil's Rule for Monks is based on one drawn
up by him.
But after Basil's elevation to the
Episcopate Eustathius began to oppose him
and to calumniate him on all sides, and even
the
entered openly into communion with
It would seem that this man tried to
Arians.
get Amphilochius round to
side, and
through him Gregory.)

his

The Injunction of your inimitable Honour
is not barbaric, but Greek, or rather christian ;
but as for the Armenian on whom you pride
yourself so, he is a downright barbarian, and
far from our honour.

Ep. LXIII.

To Amphilochius the Elder.

(In a.d. 374 Amphilochius was made Bishop
of Iconium ; and his father, a man of the same
name, was deeply aggrieved at being thus de
prived of his son, to whom he had looked to
support him in his old age, and accused Gre
gory of being the cause. Gregory, who had just
lost his own father, writes to undeceive him,
and to convince him how much he dreads the
burden of the responsibilities of the episcopate |
for his friend as well as for himself.)

Are you grieving?

I, of course, am full of
joy!
I, as you see, am
keeping festival and glorying in the present

Are you weeping?

But it

state of things ! Are you grieved because your
son is taken from you and promoted to honour
on account of his virtue, and do you think
it a terrible misfortune that he is no longer
with you to tend your old age, and, as his
custom is, to bestow on you all due care and
service?
is no grief to me that my
father has left me for the last journey, from
which he will return to me no more, and I
shall never see him again !
Then I for my
part do not blame you, nor do I ask you for
due condolence, knowing as I do that private
troubles allow no leisure for those of strangers ;
for no man is so friendly and so philosophical
as to be above his own suffering and to com
fort another when needing comfort himself.
.But you on the contrary heap blow on blow,
when you blame me, as I hear you do, and
think that your son and my brother is neglected
by us, or even betrayed by us, which is a still
heavier charge ; or that we do not recognize
the loss which all
his friends and relatives
have suffered, and I more than all, because I
had placed in him my hopes of life, and looked
upon him as the only bulwark, the only good
counsellor, and the only sharer of my piety.
And yet, on what grounds do you form this
opinion ?
If on the first, be assured that I
came over to you on purpose, and because I
was troubled by the rumour, and I was ready to
share your deliberations while it was still time
for consultation about the matter ; and you
imparted anything to me rather than this,
whether because you were in the same distress,
or with some other purpose, I know not what.
But if the last, I was prevented from meeting
you again by my grief, and the honour I owed
my father, and his funeral, over which I could
not give anything precedence, and that when
my sorrow was fresh, and it would not only
have been wrong but also quite improper to be
unseasonably philosophical, and above human
nature.
Moreover, I thought that I was pre
viously engaged by the circumstances, espec
ially as his had come to such a conclusion as
seemed good to Him who governs all our
affairs.
this matter.
Now I beg you to put aside your grief, which
is most unreasonable I am sure ; and if you
have any further grievance, bring it forward
that you may not grieve both me in part and
yourself, and put yourself in a position un
worthy of your nobility, blaming me instead
of others, though I have done you no wrong,
but, if I must say the tnith, have been equally
tyrannized over by our common friend, al
though you used to think me your only bene
factor.

So much concerning

MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS.

Ep. CLXXI.

To Amphilochius, Bishop of Iconium.

Scarcely yet delivered from the pains of
my illness, I hasten to you, the guardian of my
For the tongue of a priest meditating
cure.
of the Lord raises the sick.
Do then the
greater thing in your priestly ministration,
and loose the great mass of my sins when
you lay hold of the Sacrifice of Resurrection.
For your affairs are a care to me waking or
sleeping, and you are to me a good plectrum,
and have made a welltuned lyre to dwell
within my soul, because by your numerous
letters you have trained my soul to science.
But, most reverend friend, cease not both to
pray and to plead for me when you draw down
the Word by your word, when with a blood
less cutting you sever the Body and Blood of
the Lord, using your voice for the glaive."

Ep. CLXXXIV.

(Bosporitis, Bishop of Colonia in Cappadocia
Secunda, who had apparently taken a prominent
part in the election and consecration of Eulalius
to the See of Nazianzus, was accused of heresy
by Helladius Archbishop of Caesarea, and a
Council met at Parnassus to try him, a.d. 383.
Gregory, not being able personally to attend
this Synod, writes to Amphilochius, to beg him
to undertake the defence of the accused. The
letter is lost, but Gregory's friend carried out
his mission with success, and the following
letter is to thank him for his kindness.)

The Lord fulfil
a father's

all thy petitions (do not
despise
you have
for
prayer),
abundantly refreshed my age, both by having
gone to Parnassus, as you were invited to
do, and by having refuted the calumny against
the most Reverend and God-beloved Bishop.
For evil men love to set down their own faults
For the age of
to those who convict them.
this man is stronger than all the accusations,
and so is his life, and we too who have often
heard from him and taught others, and those
whom he has recovered from error and added
to the common body of the church ; but yet
the present evil times called for more accurate
proof on account of the slanderers and evildisposed ; and this you have supplied us with,
or rather you have supplied it to those who
are of fickler mind and easily led away by
such men.
But if you will undertake a longer
journey, and will personally give testimony,

a A very clear assertion of the Real Presence.

and settle the matter with the other bishops,
you will be doing a spiritual work worthy of
your Perfection.
I and those with me salute
your Fraternity.

§ 6. To Nectarius Archbishop of Con
stantinople.

(Gregory, having failed to persuade the
Council ofA.D. 381 to end the schism at Antioch
by recognizing Paulinus as successor to Meletius, thought it best for the sake of peace to
resign the Archbishopric.
The Council elected
in his place Nectarius, a catechumen at the
time, who was Praetor of Constantinople, and
he was consecrated and enthroned June 9, a.d.
381.
Gregory always maintained cordial rela
tions with him ; and the following letter was
written in answer to the formal announcement
of his election.)

Ep. LXXXVIII.

For this

the Royal City.

It was needful that the Royal Image should
adorn
reason
it wears you upon its bosom, as was fitting,
with the virtues and the eloquence, and the
other beauties with which the Divine Favour
Us it has
has conspicuously enriched you.
treated with utter contempt, and has cast away
like refuse and chaff or a wave of the sea.
But
since friends have a common interest in each
other's affairs, I claim a share in your welfare,
and feel myself a partaker in your glory and
the rest of your prosperity.
Do you also, as is
fitting, partake of the anxieties and reverses of
your exiles, and not only (as the tragedians
say) hold and stick to happy circumstances,
but also take your part with your friend in
troubles ; that you may be perfectly just, living
justly and equally in respect of friendship and
of your friends.
May good fortune abide with
you long, that you may do yet more good ;
yes, may it be with you irrevocably and eter
nally, after your prosperity here, unto the pas
sage to that other world.

Ep. XCI.

(A letter of no great importance, except as
shewing the friendly feelings which Gregory
continued to maintain towards his successor.)

Affairs with us go on as usual : we are quiet
without strifes and disputes, valuing as we do the
reward (which has no risk attaching to it) of
silence, beyond everything. And we have de
rived some profit from this rest, having by God's
Do
mercy fairly recovered from our illness.

GREGORY

you ride on and reign, as holy David says,"
and may God, Who has honoured you with
Priesthood, accompany you throughout, and set
And that we may
it for you above all slander.
give each other a proof of our courage, and may
not suffer any human calamity as we stand be
fore God, I send this message to you, and do
you promptly assent to it.
There are many
reasons which make me very anxious about
our very dear Pancratius.
Be good enough to
receive him kindly, and to commend him to
the best of your friends, that he may attain his
object.
His object is through some kind of
military service to obtain relief from public
office, though there is no single kind of life
that is unexposed to the slanders of worthless
men, as you very well know.

Ep. CLI.

(Written about a.d. 382, commending his
friend George, a deacon of Nazianzus, to the
good offices of the Archbishop and the Count
of the Domestics, or Master of the Imperial
Household, on account of his private troubles
and anxieties.)

People in general make a very good guess at
your disposition-or rather, they do not con
jecture, but they do not refuse to believe me
when I pride myself on the fact that you deem
me worthy of "no small respect and honour.
One of these people is my very precious son
George, who having fallen into many losses,
and being very much overwhelmed by his
troubles, can find only one harbour of safety,
namely, to be introduced to you by us, and to
obtain some favour at the hands of the Most
Illustrious the Count of the Domestics.
Grant
them this favour, either to him and his need,
or else, if you prefer it, to me, to whom I know
you have resolved to grant all favours ; and
facts also persuade me that this is true of you.

Ep. CLXXXV.

(See Introduction to Ep. CLXXXIV. above,
p. 469. Bosporius was to be sent to Constantin
ople that his cause might there be tried in the
Civil Courts.
Gregory therefore writes to the
Archbishop to point out what a serious infringe
ment of the rights of the Church this would be.
Probably the attitude which Nectarius took up
at the suggestion of Gregory was the occa
sion of the Edict which Theodosius addressed in
February, a. d. 384 or 5 , to the Augustal Prefect,
withdrawing all clerics from the jurisdiction of
the civil
tribunals, and placing them under
the exclusive control of the episcopal courts. )

a Ps. xlv. 4.

Whenever different people praise different
points in you, and all are pushing forward your
good fame, as in a marketplace, I contribute
whatever I can, and not less than any of them,
because you deign also to honour me, to cheer
my old age, as a well-beloved son does that of
his father.
For this reason I now also venture
to offer to you this appeal on behalf of the
Most Reverend and God-beloved Bishop Bos
porius ; though ashamed on the one hand that
such a man should need any letter from me,
since his venerable character is assured both by
his daily life and by his age ; and on the other
hand not less ashamed to keep silence and not
to say a word for him, while I have a voice,
and honour faith, and know the man most in
timately.
The controversy about the dioceses
you will no doubt yourself resolve according
to the grace of the Spirit which is in you, and
to the order of the canons.
But I hope Your
Reverence will see that it is not to be endured
that our affairs are to be posted up in the sec
ular courts.
For even if they who are judges
of such courts are Christians, as by the mercy
of God they are, what is there in common be
tween the Sword and the Spirit? And even
if we yield this point, how or where can it be
just that a dispute concerning the faith should
be interwoven with the other questions ? ' Is
our God-beloved Bishop Bosporius to-day a
heretic ?
Is it to-day that his hoar hair is set
in the balance, who has brought back so
many from their error, and has given so great
proof of his orthodoxy, and is a teacher of us
all?
No, I entreat you, do not give place to
such slanders ; but if possible reconcile the op
posing parties and add this to your praises ;
but if this may not be, at all events do not al
low us all, (with whom he has lived, and with
whom he has grown old,) to be outraged by
such insolence,-us whom you know to be accu
rate preachers of the Gospel, both when to be so
was dangerous, and when it is free from risk ;
and to be unable to endure any detraction
from the One Unapproachable Godhead. And
I beg you to pray for me who am suffering
I and all who are with me
from serious illness.
salute the brethren who surround you.
May
you, strong and of good courage and of good
fame in the Lord, grant to us and the Churches
the support which all in common demand.

Ep. CLXXXVI.
(A letter of introduction for a relative.)
What would you have done if I had come
in person and taken up your time ?
I am quite
certain you would have undertaken with all

MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS.

zeal to deliver me from the slander, if I may
take as a token what has happened before.
Do me this favour, then, through my most dis
creet kinswoman who approaches you through
me, reverencing first the age of your petitioner,
and next her disposition and piety, which is
more than is ordinarily found in a woman ;
and besides this, her ignorance in businessmatters, and the troubles now brought upon
her by her own relations ; and above all, my
entreaty.
The greatest favour you can do me
is speed in the benefit for which I am asking.
For even the unjust judge in the Gospel * shewed
kindness to the widow, though only after long
beseeching and importunity.
But from you I
ask for speed, that she may not be overwhelmed
by being long burdened with anxieties and
miseries in a foreign land ; though I know quite
well that Your Piety will make that alien land
to be a fatherland to her.

ep. ecu.

(An important letter on the Apollinarian

controversy has already been given above.)

§ 7. To Theodore, Bishop of Tyana.

(Theodore, a native of Arianzus, and an in
timate friend of Gregory, accompanied him
to Constantinople a.d. 379, and shared his per
secution by the Arians, who broke into their
church during the celebration of the divine
liturgy, and pelted the clergy with stones.
Theodore could not bring himself to put up
with this, and declared his intention of prose
cuting the aggressors.
Gregory wrote the fol
lowing letter to dissuade him from this course,
by shewing him how much more noble it is to
forgive than to revenge.)

Ep. LXXVII.

I hear that you are indignant at the out
rages which have been committed on us by
the Monks and the Mendicants.
And it is
no wonder, seeing that you never yet had felt
a blow, and were without experience of the
evils we have to endure, that you did feel
But we as experienced
angry at such a thing.
in many sorts of evil, and as having had our
share of insult, may be considered worthy of
l>elief when we exhort Your Reverence, as old
age teaches and as reason suggests.
Certainly
what has happened was dreadful, and more than
dreadful, -no one will deny it : that our altars
were insulted, our mysteries disturbed, and

ft S. Luke xviii. i, etc

that we ourselves had to stand between the
communicants and those who would stone
them, and to make our intercessions a cure for
stonings ; that the reverence due to virgins was
forgotten, and the good order of monks, and
the calamity of the poor, who lost even their
pity through ferocity.
But perhaps it would
be better to be patient, and to give an example
For
of patience to many by our sufferings.
argument is not so persuasive of the world in
general as is practice, that silent exhortation.
We think it an important matter to obtain
penalties from those who have wronged us : an
important matter, I say, (for even this is some
times useful for the correction of others)-but
it is far greater and more Godlike, to bear with
injuries.
For the former course curbs wicked
ness, but the latter makes men good, which is
much better and more perfect than merely
being not wicked.
Let us consider that the
great pursuit of mercifulness is set before us,
and let us forgive the wrongs done to us that
we also may obtain forgiveness, and let us by
kindness lay up a store of kindness.

Phineas was called Zelotes because he ran
through the Midianitish woman with the man
who was committing fornication with her," and
because he took away the reproach from the
children of Israel : but he was more praised be
cause he prayed for the people when they had
transgressed. P Let us then also stand and make
propitiation, and let the plague be stayed, and
let this be counted unto us for righteousness.
Moses also was praised because he slew the
Egyptian that oppressed the Israelite ; » but he
was more admirable because he healed by his
prayer his sister Miriam when she was made
leprous for her murmuring.4
Look also at
The people of Nineve are
what follows.
threatened with an overthrow, but by their
tears they redeem their sin.'
Manasses was the
most lawless of Kings,i but is the most conspic
uous among those who have attained salvation
through mourning.

O Ephraim what shall

I do unto thee,'
saith God. What anger is here expressed-and
yet protection is added.
What is swifter than
The Disciples ask for flames of Sod
Mercy?
om upon those who drive Jesus away, but He
deprecates revenge.9
Peter cuts off the ear of
Malchus, one of those who outraged Him, but
Jesus restores it."
And what of him who asks
whether he must seven times forgive a brother
if he has trespassed, is he not condemned for

a Num. xxiv. 7.
3 Num. xii. 40.
>l Hoj. vi. 4.

|

c Jon. iii. 10.

0 Ps. c\i. 30 31,
» S. Luke ix. 54.

£a Chron. xxxiii. 13, 13.

y Kxod. ii. 12.
x lb. xxii. 50.

his niggardliness, for to the seven is added sev
enty times seven ? a What of the debtor in the
Gospel who will not forgive as he has been for
Is it not more bitterly exacted of him
given ? 0
for this?
And what saith the pattern of
Does it not desire that forgiveness
prayer?
may be earned by forgiveness ?

Let us not dry up a fig j

holds

warnings,

the sequence of goodness.

Having so many examples let us imitate the
mercy of God, and not desire to learn from
ourselves how great an evil is requital of sin.
You see
First
it makes laws, then it commands, threatens,
reproaches,
restrains,
out
threatens again, and only when forced to do so
strikes the blow, but this little by little, open
ing the way to amendment.
Let us then not
strike suddenly (for it is not safe to do so), but
being selfrestrained in our fear let us conquer
by mercy, and make them our debtors by our
kindness, tormenting them by their conscience
rather than by anger.
tree which may yet bear fruit,* nor condemn it
as useless and cumbering the ground, when
possibly the care and diligence of a skilful gar
dener may yet heal it.
And do not let us so
quickly destroy so great and glorious a work
through what is perhaps the spite and malice of
the devil ; but let us choose to shew ourselves
merciful rather than severe, and lovers of the
poor rather than of abstract justice ; and let us
not make more account of those who would
enkindle us to this than of those who would
restrain us, considering, if nothing else, the dis
grace of appearing to contend against mendi
cants who have this great advantage that even
if they are in the wrong they are pitied for their
misfortune.
But as things are, consider that all
the poor and those who support them, and all
the Monks and Virgins are falling at your feet
and praying you on their behalf.
Grant to all
these for them this favour (since they have sufferred enough as is clear by what they have
asked of us) and above all to me who am their
And if it appear to you mon
representative.
strous that we should have been dishonoured by
them, remember that it is far worse that we
should not be listened to by you when we make
this request of you.
May God forgive the no
ble Paulus his outrages upon us.

eagerness, and you bestow on us a preliminary
Such- is what Your Reverence gives
festival.
And we in return give you the greatest
us.
But that you maything we have, our prayers.
have some small thing to remember us by, we
send you the volume of the Philocalia of Origen,
containing a selection of passages useful to
students of literature.
Deign to accept this,
and give us a proof of its usefulness, being
aided by diligence and the Spirit.

Ep. CXXI.

(Written a little later, as a letter of thanks
Theodore had quite re

for an Easter Gift.
cently been made Archbishop of Tyana.)

We rejoice in the tokens of love, and especi
ally at such a season, and from one at once so
young a man, and so perfect ; and, to greet you
with the words of Scripture, stablished in your
youth," for so it calls him who is more advanced
in wisdom than his years lead us to expect.
The old Fathers prayed for the dew of heaven
and fatness of the earth P and other such things
for their children, though perhaps some may un
derstand these things in a higher sense i but we
will give you back all in a spiritual sense. The
Lord fulfil all thy requests,* and mayest thou
be the father of such children 4 (if I may pray
for you concisely and intimately) as you your
self have shewn yourself to your own parents,
so that we, as well as every one else, may be
glorified concerning you.

Ep. CXXII.
You owe me, even as a sick man, tend
ing,
for one of the commandments is the
visitation of the sick. And you also owe to the
Holy Martyrs their annual honour, which we
celebrate in your own Arianzus on the 23rd of
the month which we call Dathusa.'
And at
the same time there are ecclesiastical affairs not
a few which need our common examination.
For all these reasons then, I beg you to come
at once : for though the labour is great, the
reward is equivalent.

Ep. CXXIII.

'

Ep. CXV.

(Sent about Easter a.d. 382 with a copy of
the Philocalia, or Chrestomathy of Origen's
works edited by himself and S. Basil.)

(To excuse himself for postponing his ac

ceptance of an invitation.)

I reverence your presence, and I delight in
your company ; although otherwise I counsel-

You anticipate the Festival, and the letters,
and, which is better still, the time by your
$ lb. xviii. 28 sq.

a S, Matt, xviii. 21.

y S. Luke xiii. 7.

a Ps. cxliv. 2.
3 (ien. xxvii. 28.
5 It seems clear, as lienott remarks, that this expression refers to
Spiritual fatherhood. Theodore does not appear to have been
married.

« Probably July.

y Ps. xx. 7.

MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS.

led myself to remain at home and philosophize
in quiet, for I found this of all courses the most
profitable for myself.
And since the winds are
still somewhat rough, and my infirmity has not
yet left me, I beg you to bear with me patient
ly for a little while, and to join me in my
prayers for health ; and as soon as the fit season
comes I will attend upon your requests.

Ep. CXXIV.

(A little later on, when the weather was more
settled, Gregory accepts the invitation and
proposes to come at once, but declines to at
tend the Provincial Synod.)

You call me? And I hasten, and that for
a private visit. Synods and Conventions I sa
lute from afar, since I have experienced that
most of them (to speak moderately) are but
sorry affairs. What then remains ? Help with
your prayers my just desires that I may obtain
that for which I am anxious.

Ep. CLII.

(On his retirement

from Constantinople
Gregory had at the request of the Bishops of
the Province, and especially of Theodore of
Tyana the Metropolitan, and Bosporius Bishop
of Colonia (see letters above) and at the earnest
solicitation of the people, undertaken the charge
of the Diocese of Nazianzus ; but he very soon
found that his health was not equal to so great
a task, and that he could not fulfil
its calls
upon him. He struggled on for some time,
but at length, finding himself quite unequal to
it, he wrote as follows to the Metropolitan:)

It is time for me to use these words of
Scripture, To whom shall I cry when I am
wronged ? a Who will stretch out a hand
to me when I am oppressed ?
To whom
shall the burden of this Church pass, in its
present evil and paralysed condition ?
I pro
test before God and the Elect Angels that
the Flock of God is being unrighteously dealt
with in being left without a Shepherd or a
Bishop, through my being laid on the shelf.
For I am a prisoner to my ill health and have
been very quickly removed thereby from the
Church, and made quite useless to everybody,
every day breathing my last, and getting more
and more crushed by my duties.
If the Pro
vince had any other head, it would have been
my duty to cry out and protest to it contin
But since Your Reverence is the Su
ually.
perior, it is to you I must look.
For, to leave
out everything else, you shall learn from my

a Hab. ii. I.

Eulalius

fellow - priests,
the Chorepiscopus ■
and Celeusius, whom I have specially sent to
Your Reverence, what these robbers P who have
now got the upper hand, are both doing and
threatening.
To repress them is not in the
power of my weakness, but belongs to your
skill and strength ;
since to you, with His
other gifts God has given that of strength also
If in saying
for the protection of His Church.
and writing this I cannot get a hearing, I shall
take the only course remaining to me, that of
publicly proclaiming and making known that
this Church needs a Bishop, in order that it
health.
may not be injured by my feeble
What is to follow is matter for your consider
ation.

j He resigned

Ep. CLIII.
(S. Gregory had to carry out his threat,
of Nazianzus, and
induce him to withdraw
nothing
would
his resignation.
Bosporius wrote him an ur
gent letter with this object, but he replied as
follows : )

care

the

To Bosporius, Bishop of Colonia.

Twice I have been tripped up by you, and
have been deceived (you know what I mean),
and if it was justly, may the Lord smell from
you an odour of sweet savour ; v if unjustly, may
the Lord pardon it.
For so it is reasonable
for me to speak of you, seeing we are com
manded to be patient when injuries are in
But as you are master of your
flicted on us.
own opinions, so am I of mine.
That trouble
some Gregory will no longer be troublesome
will withdraw myself to God,
to you.
Who alone is pure and guileless.
I will retire
This I have determined ; for to
into myself.
stumble twice on the same stone is attributed
by the proverb to fools alone.

To Theodore, Archbishop of Tvana.
Ep. CLVII.
(S. Gregory succeeded at the end of a.d.
382 in convincing the Metropolitan and his
Comprovincials of his sincerity in desiring to
retire : and so they began to cast about for a SucGregory desired that his cousin the
cessor^

a ChorepUcopi :-a grade of clergy called into existence in the
latter part of the Third Century, first in Asia Minor, to meet the
difficulty of providing Episcopal supervision in the country dis
tricts of large Dioceses. They seemed to have been allowed to
confer the Minor, hut not the Holy Orders, unless by special com
mission from the Diocesan, on the ground of their lack of original
Jurisdiction. That they were originally possessed of full Episcopal
Orders there can be no doubt, but eventually the position was
allowed to be held by Priests, and in the West the office became
practically merged in that of the Archdeacon.

3The Apollinarians.

y Gen. viii. at.

Chorepiscopus Eulalius should be nominated,
but the Bishops felt some jealousy at what they
took to be an attempt on his part to dictate to
them, and refused to allow him to take any
part in the election, on the ground that he
either never had been, or at any rate had
ceased to be one of the Bishops of the Pro
vince.
but finding that he
could not convince them he withdrew his
claim to a vote and wrote to Theodore, as fol
lows : -)

He protested,

have reached

Our spiritual affairs

their
will not trouble you any further.
limit :
take
take your precautions :
Join together :
counsel against us :
let our enemies have the
victory : let the canons be accurately observed,
beginning with us, the most ignorant of men.
There is no ill-will in accuracy ; only do not
let the rights of friendship be impeded.
The
children of my very honoured son Nicobulus
have come to the city to learn shorthand.
Be kind enough to look upon them with a
fatherly and kindly eye (for the canons do not
forbid this), but especially take care that they
live near the Church.
For I desire that they
should be moulded in character to virtue by
continual association with Your Perfectness.

Ep. CLXIII.

(George a layman of Paspasus, was sent
by Theodore of Tyana to Saint Gregory
that the latter might convince him of his
error and sin in repudiating an oath which
he had taken, on the ground that it was tak
en in writing and not viva voce.
Gregory
seems to have brought him to a better mind,
and sent him back to the Metropolitan with
the following Tetter, requesting that due pen
ance be imposed upon him. and have its length
regulated by his contrition.
This letter was
read to the Second Council of Constanti
nople in 553, by Euphrantes, a successor of
Theodore in the See of Tyana, and was ac
cepted by the Fathers, wherefore it is regarded
as having almost the force of a Canon of the
Church Universal.)

God grant you to the Churches, both for
our glory, and for the benefit of many, being
as you are so circumspect and cautious in
spiritual matters as to make us also more cau
tious who are considered to have some advan
Since, however, you
tage over you in years.
have wished to take us as partners in your
spiritual inquiry (I mean about the oath which
George of Paspasus appears to have sworn),
we will declare to Your Reverence what pre

while a written

sents itself to our mind.
Very many people,
as it seems to me, delude themselves by con
sidering oaths which are taken with the sanc
tion of spoken imprecations to be real oaths,
but those which are written and not verbally
to be mere matter of form, and
uttered,
For how can we suppose
no oaths at all.
that
schedule of debts is
more binding than a verbal acknowledgment,
yet a written oath is something other than
an oath ?
Or to speak concisely, we hold an
oath to be the assurance given to one who
asked for and obtained it.
Nor is it sufficient
to say that he suffered violence (for the vio
lence was the Law by which he bound himself),
nor that afterwards he won the cause in the
Law Court-for the very fact that he went to
law was a breach of his oath.
I have per
suaded our brother George of this, not to pre
tend excuses for his sin, and not to seek out
arguments to defend his transgression, but to
recognize the writing as an oath, and to be
wail his sin before God and Your Reverence,
even though he formerly deceived himself and
This is what we
took a different view of it.
have personally argued with him ; and it
is
evident that if you will discourse with him
more carefully, you will deepen his contrition,
since you are a great healer of souls, and hav
ing treated him according to the Canon for
as long a time as shall seem right, you will
afterwards be able to confer indulgence upon
him in the matter of time.
And the meas
ure of the time must be the measure of his
compunction.

Ep. CLXXXIII.

(Helladius, Archbishop of Caesarea, contested
the validity of the election of Eulalius to the
Bishopric of Nazianzus, and accused Bosporius
S. Gregory here throws the whole
of heresy.
weight of his authority into the other scale.
It
is however manifest from the very terms of the
letter that the person addressed is not Theodore
of Tyana.
It was conjectured by Clemencet
that perhaps he was Theodore of Mopsuestia.)
Envy, which no one easily escapes, has got
See, even we Capsome foothold amongst us.
padocians are in a state of faction, so to speaka calamity never heard of before, and not to
be believed-so that no flesh may glory" in the
sight of God, but that we may be careful, since
we are all human, not to condemn each other
rashly.
For myself, there is some gain even
from the misfortune (if I may speak somewhat

a 1 Cor. i. 39.

If I were physically

paradoxically), and I really gather a rose out
of thorns, as the proverb has it.
Hitherto I
have never met Your Reverence face to face,,
nor conversed with you by letter, but have
only been illuminated by your reputation ; but
now I am of necessity compelled to approach
you by letter, and I am very grateful to him
who has procured me this privilege.
I omit to
write to the other Bishops about whom you wrote
to me, as the opportunity has not yet arisen.
Moreover my weak health makes me less
active in this matter ; but what I write to you
I write to them also through you. My Lord
Helladius a must
Bishop
the God-beloved
cease to waste his labour on our concerns. For
it
is not through spiritual earnestness, but
through party zeal, that he is seeking this; and
not for the sake of accurate compliance with
the canons, but for the satisfaction of anger,
as is evident by the time he has chosen, and
because many have moved with him unreason
ably, for I must say this, and not trouble my
self about it.
in a
condition to govern the Church of Nazianzus,
to which I was originally appointed, and not
to Sasima as some would falsely persuade you,
I should not have been so cowardly or so ignor
ant of the Divine Constitutions as either to
despise that Church, or to seek- for an easy life
in preference to the prizes which are in store
for those who labour according to Cod's will,
and work with the talent committed to their
care.
For what profit should I have from my
many labours and my great hopes, if I were ill
advised in the most important matters?
But
since my bodily health is bad, as everyone can
plainly see, and I have not any responsibility
to fear on account of this withdrawal, for the
reason I have mentioned, and I saw that the
Church through cleaving to me was suffering i
in its best interests and almost being destroyed
through my illness, I prayed both before and
now again my Lords the God-beloved Bishops
(I mean those of our own Province) to give
the Church a head, which they have done by
God's Grace, worthy both of my desire and of
your prayers.
This I would have you both
know yourself, most honourable Lord, and also
inform the rest of the Bishops, that they may
receive him and support him by their votes,
and not bear heavily on my old age by believ
ing the slander.
Let me add this to my letter.
If your examination finds my Lord the Godbeloved Priest Bosporius guilty concerning the
faith-a thing which it is not lawful even to sug
gest-(I pass over his age and my personal

testimony) judge him so yourselves.
But if
the discussion about the dioceses is the cause
of this evil report and this novel accusation,
do not be led away by the slander, and do not
give to falsehoods a greater strength than to
the truth, I beg you, lest you should cast into
despair those who desire to do what is right.
May you be granted good health and spirits
and courage and continual progress in the
things of God to us and to the Church, whose
common boast you are.

Ep. CXXXIX.

(This letter is written at a somewhat earlier
date in reference to the consent he had been
induced to give to remaining for some time
longer as administrator of the See of Nazianzus.
It is certainly not addressed to Theodore of
Tyana, and it
is not known who this Theo
dore is.)

He Who raised David His servant from the
Shepherd's work to the Throne, and Your
Reverence from the flock to the Work of the
Shepherd : He that orders our affairs and those
of all who hope in Him according to His own
Will : may He now put it into the mind of
Your Reverence to know the dishonour which
I have suffered at the hands of my Lords the
Bishoj* in the matter of their votes, in that
they have agreed to the Election," but have ex
I will not lay the blame on Your
cluded us.
Reverence, because you have
but recently
come to preside over our affairs, and are, as is
to be expected, for the most part unacquainted
with our history.
This is quite enough : for I
have no mind to trouble you further, that I
may not seem burdensome at the very begin
But I will tell you
ning of our friendship.
what suggests itself to me in taking counsel
with God.
I retired from the Church at Nazi
anzus, not as either despising God, or looking
down on the littleness of the flock (God for
bid that a philosophic • soul should be so
disposed ) ; but first tiecause I am not bound
by any such appointment : and secondly be
cause I am broken down by my ill health, and
do not think myself equal to such anxieties.
And since you too have been heavy on me, in
reproaching me with my resignation, and I
myself could not endure the clamours against
me, and since the times are hard, threatening
us with an inroad of enemies to the injury of
the commonwealth of the whole Church, I fi
nally made up my mind to suffer a defeat
which is painful to my body, but perhaps not

a Basil's successor.

a Sec Tntrod. to Ep. 157.
0 Probably equivalent to A Monk.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

bad for my soul.
I make over this miserable
body to the Church for as long as it may be
possible, thinking it better to suffer any dis
tress to the flesh rather than to incur a spiritual
injury myself or to inflict it upon others, who
have thought the worst of us, judging from
their own experience.
Knowing this, do pray
for me, and approve my resolution : and per
haps it is not out of place to say, mould your
self to piety.

§ 8. To Nicobulus.

(See the introduction to the first letter to So-

phronius above.)

Ep. XII. (about a.d. 365).

than

You joke me about Alypiana as being little
and unworthy of your size, you tall and im
mense and monstrous fellow both in form and
strength.
For now I understand that soul is a
matter of measure, and virtue of weight, and
that rocks are more valuable than pearls, and
crows more respectable
nightingales.
Well, well ! rejoice in your bigness and your
cubits, and be in no respect inferior to the
famed sons of Aloeus." You ride a horse, and
shake a spear, and concern yourself with wild
leasts.
But she has no such work ; and no
great strength is needed to carry a comb,0 or
to handle a distaff, or to sit by a loom, " For
such is the glory of woman. " v And if you
add this, that she has become fixed to the
ground on account of prayer, and by the great
movement of her mind has constant com
munion with God, what is there here to boast
of in your bigness or the stature of your body ?
Take heed to seasonable silence : listen to her
voice : mark her unadornment, her wom
anly virility, her usefulness at home, her love
of her husband.
Then you will say with the
Laconian, that verily soul is not a subject for
measure, and the outer must look to the inner
man.
If you look at the things in this way
you will leave off joking and deriding her as
little, and you will congratulate yourself on
your marriage.

Ep. LI.

(An answer to a request made by Nicobulus
for a treatise on the art of writing letters.

a Otus and Ephialtes. the two Homeric Giants, who piled Pclinn
nn Ossa and Olympus on Pelion in the vain endeavour to reach
heaven and dethrone Zeus but were slain by Apollo. (See Horn.,
Ody«B., xi.. 305-320.)
0 An instrument used in weaving to make the web firm and close.
y Krom his own Poem against women who take too much pains

about adorning themselves (i., 267).

Benoit thinks this and the following ones were
written to the Younger Nicobulus.)

Of those who write letters, since this is what
you ask, some write at too great a length, and
others err on the side of deficiency ; and both
miss the mean, like archers shooting at a mark
and sending some shafts short of it and others
beyond it ; for the missing is the same though
on opposite sides.
Now the measure of letters
is their usefulness : and we must neither write
at very great length when there is little to say,
nor very briefly when there is a great deal.
What ? Are we to measure our wisdom by the
Persian Schoene, or by the cubits of a child,
and to write so imperfectly as not to write at
all but to copy the midday shadows, or lines
which meet right.in front of you, whose lengths
are foreshortened and which show themselves
in glimpses rather than plainly, being recog
nized only by certain of their extremities ? We
must in both respects avoid the want of mod
This is my
eration and hit off the moderate.
is
opinion as to brevity ; as to perspicuity it
clear that one should avoid the oratorical form
as much as possible and lean rather to the
chatty : and, to speak concisely, that is the
best and most beautiful letter which can con
unlearned or an educated
vince either an
reader ; the one, as being within the reach of
the many ; the other, as above the many ; and
it should be intelligible in itself.
It is equally
disagreeable to think out a riddle and to have
The third point about a
to interpret a letter.
letter is grace : and this we shall safeguard if
we do not write in any way that is dry and
unpleasing or unadorned and badly arranged
and untrimmed, as they call it ; as for instance
1 a style destitute of maxims and proverbs and
pithy sayings, or even jokes and enigmas, by
which language is sweetened. Yet we must not
seem to abuse these things by an excessive emI ployment of them.
omission
; shews rusticity, but the abuse of them shews
insatiability. We may use them about as much
as purple is used in woven stuffs.
Figures of
speech we shall admit, but few and modest.
Antitheses and balanced clauses and nicely di
vided sentences, we shall leave to the sophists,
or if we do sometimes admit them, we shall do
so rather in play than in earnest. My final
remark shall be one which I heard a clever
man make about the eagle, that when the birds
were electing a king, and came with various
adornment, the most beautiful point about him
was that he did not think himself beautiful.
This point is to be especially attended to in
letter-writing, to be without adventitious orna

Their entire

MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS.

ment and as natural as possible.
So much
about letters I send you by a letter ; but per
haps you had better not apply it to myself, who
The
am busied about more important matters.
rest you will work out for yourself, as you are
quick at learning, and those who are clever in
these matters will teach you.

Ep. LII.
(Nicobulus asked Gregory to publish a col
lection of his letters. Gregory forwards a copy.)
You are asking flowers from an autumn
meadow, and arming Nestor in his old age, in
demanding from me now something clever in
the way of language, after I have long neglected
all that is enjoyable in language and in life.
But yet (since it is not an Eurysthean or Her
culean labour that you are imposing on me,
but rather one which is very agreeable and
quiet, to collect for you as many of my own
letters as I can), do you place this volume among
your books-a work not amatory but oratori
cal, and not for display so much as for use, and
that for our own home.a For different authors
have different characteristics, greater or small
er.
Mine is a tendency to instruct by maxims
and positive statements wherever opportunity
occurs. And as in a legitimate child, so also in
language, the father is always visible, not less
than parents are shewn by bodily characteristics.
Mine are such as I have mentioned.
You may
repay me both by writing and by deriving profit
I cannot ask for or
from what I have written.
request any better reward than this, either more
profitable to the asker, or more becoming him
who gives it.

Ep. LIII.

(Gregory put a collection of Basil's letters
with his own, and gave them the first place.
Nicobulus seems to have been surprised at this,
and asked the reason.
Gregory explains as
follows.)

I have always preferred the Great Basil to
myself, though he was of the contrary opinion ;
and so I do now, not less for truth's sake than
for friendship's.
This is the reason why I have
given his letters the first place and my own the
For I hope we two will always be
second.
coupled together ; and also I would supply
others with an example of modesty and submis
sion.

Ep. LIV.

On Laconicism.

To be laconic is not
merely, as you suppose, to write few words,

a I.e. as a model of Christian style.

but to say a great deal in few words.
Thus I
call Homer very brief and Antimachus lengthy.
Why? Because I measure the length by the
matter and not by the letters.

Ep. LV.

An Invitation. You flee when I pursue you :
perhaps in accordance with the laws of love,
to make yourself more valuable.
Come then,
and fill up at last the loss I have suffered by
your long delay.
And if any home affairs
detain you, you shall leave us again, and so
make yourself more precious as an object of
desire.

§ 9. To Olympius.

(Olympius was Prefect of Cappadocia SecunOne letter to him against the
da in 382.
Apollinarians, has already been given ; the rest,
which are to follow are mainly recommenda
tions of various persons to his patronage.)

Ep. CIV.

All The Other favours which I have re
ceived I know to be due to your kindness ;
and may God reward you for them with His
own mercies ; and may one of these be, that
you may discharge your office of prefect with
good fame and splendour from beginning to
end.
In what I now ask I come rather to give
than to receive, if it is not arrogant to say so.
I personally introduce poor Philumena to you,
to entreat your justice, and to move you to
the tears with which she afflicts my soul.
She
herself will explain to you in what and by
whom she has been wronged, for it would not
be right for me to bring accusations against
any one.
is necessary for
me to say, that widowhood and orphanhood
have a right to the assistance of all rightminded men, and especially of those who have
wife and children, those great pledges of pity,
since we-ourselves only men-are
to
judge men.
Pardon me that I plead with you
for these by letter, since it is by ill health that
I am deprived of seeing a ruler so kind and so
conspicuous for virtue that even the prelude
of your administration is more precious than
the good fame of others even at the end of
their term.

But this much it

set

Ep. CV.

The time is swift, the struggle great, and
my sickness severer, reducing me almost to
immovability.
What is left but to pray to God,
and to supplicate your kindness, the one, that

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

He will incline your mind to gentler counsels,
the other that you will not roughly dismiss our
intercession, but will receive kindly the wretched
Paulus, whom justice has brought under your
hands, perhaps in order that it may make you
more illustrious by the greatness of your kind
ness, and may commend our prayers (such as
they are) to your mercy.

Ep. CVI.

Here is another laying before you a let
ter, of which, if the truth may be said, you
are the cause yourself, for you provoke them by
Here too is another
the honour you do them.
petitioner for you, a prisoner of fear, our kins
man Eustratius, who with us and by us en
treats your goodness, inasmuch as he cannot
endure to be in perpetual rebellion against your
government, even though a just terror has
frightened him, nor does he choose to entreat
you by anyone else than me, that he may make
your mercy to him more conspicuous through
his use of such intercessors, whom at all events
you yourself make great by thus accepting their
appeal.
I will say one thing, and that briefly.
All the other favours you conferred upon me ;
but this you will confer upon your own judg
ment, since once you purposed to comfort our j
age and infirmity with such honours.
And I
will add that you are continually rendering
God more propitious to you.

Ep. CXXV.

(Given above, § i.)

Ep. CXXVI.

(While Gregory was at Xantharis an oppor
tunity presented itself for seeing Olympius, but
. a return of illness prevented him from taking ad
vantage of it.
He writes to express his regret,
and takes the opportunity also to request that
Nicobulus may be exempted from the charge
of the Imperial Posts.)

I was happy in a dream.

For having been
brought as far as the Monastery to obtain some
comfort from the bath, and then hoping to
meet you, and having this good fortune almost
in my hands, and having delayed a few days,
I was suddenly carried away by my illness,
which was already painful in some respects and
And, if one must find
threatening in others.
some conjecture to account for the misfortune,
I suffered in the same way as the polypods do,
which if torn by force from the rocks risk the
loss of the suckers by which they attach them

selves to the rocks, or carry off some portion
of the latter.
Something of this kind is my
case. And what I should have asked Your
Excellency for had I seen you, I now venture
to ask for though I am absent.
I found my
son Nicobulus much worried by the care of
the Post, and by close attention to the Monas
tery. He is not a strong man, and has great
Make use of him for any
distaste for solitude.
thing else you please, for he is eager to serve
your authority in all things ; but if it be pos
sible set him free from this charge, if for no
other reason, at any rate to do him honour as
Since I have asked many
my Hospitaller.
favours from you for many people, and have
obtained them, I need also your kindness for
myself.

Ep. dxXXI.

(In 382 Gregory was summoned to a Synod
at Constantinople ; he wrote to Procopius, the
Prefectus Urbi, and declined to go, on the
ground of his great dislike to Episcopal Synods,
from which, he said, he had never known any
However he seems to have re
good to result.
ceived a more urgent summons through Icarius
and Olympius.
His reply to Icarius has been
lost ; that to Olympius is as follows.)

It is more serious to me than my illness,
that no one will believe that I am ill, but that
so long a journey is enjoined upon me, and I
am pushed into the midst of troubles from
which I rejoiced to have withdrawn, and al
most thought that I ought to be grateful for
this to my bodily affliction.
For quiet and
freedom from affairs is more precious than the
splendour of a busy life.
I wrote this yesterday
to the Most Illustrious Icarius, from whom I
received the same summons : and I now beg
your Magnanimity also to write this for me, for
you are a very trustworthy witness of my ill
health.
Another proof of my inability is the
loss which I have now suffered in having been
unable even to come and enjoy your society,
who are so kind a Governor, and so admirable
for virtue that even the preludes of your term
of office are more honourable than the good
fame which others can earn by the end of
theirs.

Ep. CXL.
Again I write when I ought to come : but
I gain confidence to do so from yourself, O
Umpire of spiritual matters (to put the first
thing first), and Corrector of the Common
weal-and both by Divine Providence: who
have also received as the reward of your piety
that your affairs would prosper to your mind.

Where is your ill-gotten gold ?

and that you alone should find attainable
what to every one else is out of reach.
For
wisdom and courage conduct your govern
ment, the one discovering what is to be done,
and the other easily carrying out what has
been discovered. And the greatest of all is the
is direct
purity of your hands with which all
ed.
There
it was the first thing you
never was any ;
condemned to exile as an invisible tyrant.
Where is illwill ?
Where
It is condemned.
is favour ?
Here you do bend somewhat (for I
will accuse you a little), but it is in imitating the
Divine Mercy, which at the present time your
soldier Aurelius entreats of you by me.
I call
him a foolish fugitive, because he has placed
himself in our hands, and through ours in yours,
sheltering himself under our gray hair and our
Priesthood (for which you have often professed
your veneration) as if it were under some Im
perial Image.
See, this sacrificing and unbloodstained hand leads this man to you ; a
hand which has written often in your praise,
and will I am sure write yet more, if God con
tinue your term of government-yours, I mean,
and that of your colleague Themis.

Ep. CXLI.

(The people of Nazianzus had in some way
incurred the loss of civic rights ;
and the
Order for the forfeiture of the title of City
had been signed by Olympius.
This led to
something like a revolt on the part of a cer
tain number of the younger citizens : and this
Olympius determined to punish by the total
destruction of the place.
S. Gregory was
again prevented by sickness from appearing in
person before the Governor : but he pleaded
the cause of his native city (using its official
Latin name of Diocasarea) in the following
letters so successfully as to induce Olympius to
pardon the outbreak.)

Again an opportunity for kindness : and
again I am bold enough to commit to a letter
my entreaty about so important a matter.
My illness makes me thus bold, for it does not
even allow me to go out, and it does not per
mit me to make a fitting entrance to you.
Pray receive it
What then is my Embassy?
from me gently and kindly.
The death of a
single man, who to-day is and to-morrow will
not be and will not return to us is of course
a dreadful thing.
But it is much more dread
ful for a City to die, which Kings founded,
and time compacted, and a long series of years
I speak of Diocsesarea. once a
has preserved.

City, a City no longer, unless you grant it
Think that this place now falls at
mercy.
your feet by me :
let it have a voice, and be
clothed in mourning and cut off its hair as in
a tragedy, and let it speak to you in such
words as these :

Give a hand to me that lie in the dust :
help the strengthless : do not add the weight
of your hand to time, nor destroy what the
Persians have left me.
It is more honourable
to you to raise up cities than to destroy those
that are distressed.
Be my founder, either by
adding to what I possess, or by preserving me
Do not suffer that up to the time of
as I am.
your administration I should be a City, and
after you should be so no longer : do not
give occasion to after times to speak evil of
you, that you received me numbered among
cities, and left me an uninhabited spot, which
was once a city, only recognizable by moun
tains and precipices and woods.

to be without

This let the City of my imagination do and
say to your mercy.
But deign to receive an
exhortation from me as your friend : certainly
chastise those who have rebelled against the
Edict of your authority. On this behalf I am
not bold to say anything, although this piece of
audacity was not, they say, of universal design,
but was only the unreasoning anger of a few
But dismiss the greater part of
young men.
your anger, and use a larger reasoning.
They
were grieved for
their Mother's being put
to death ; they could not endure to be called
political
citizens, and yet
rights : they were mad : they committed an of
fence against the law : they threw away their
own safety : the unexpectedness of the calam
ity deprived them of reason.
Is it really
necessary that for this the city should cease to
Most excellent, do
be a city?
not write the
this to be done.
Rather respect the supplication of all citizens
and statesmen and men of rank-for remem
ber the calamity will touch all alike-even if
the greatness of your authority keeps them
silent, sighing
Re
spect also my gray hair :
it would be
dreadful to me, after having had a great city,
now to have none at all, and that after your
government the Temple which we have raised
to God, and our love for its adornment, is to
become a dwelling for beasts.
It is not a ter
rible thing if some statues were thrown down
-though in itself it would be so-but I would
not have you think that I am speaking of this,
for more important
when all my care
is
things : but it
is dreadful if an ancient city
is to be destroyed with them-one which has

it were in secret.
for

Surely not.

order for

as

48o

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

splendidly endured, as I, who am honoured by
you, and am supposed to have some influence,
have lived to see.
But this is enough upon
such a subject, for I shall not, if I speak at
greater length, find anything stronger than
your own reasons, by which this nation is gov
erned-and may more and greater ones be
governed by them too, and that in greater
This however it was needful
commands.
that Your Magnanimity should know about
those who have fallen before your feet, that
they are altogether wretched and despairing,
and have not shared in any disorder with
those who have broken the law, as I am certi
fied by many who were then present.
There
fore deliberate what you may think expe
dient, both for your own reputation in this
world, and your hopes in the next. We will
bear what you determine-not indeed with
out grief-but we will bear it:
for what else
can we do?
If the worse determination pre
vail, we shall be indignant, and shall shed a
tear over our City that has ceased to be.

Ep. CXLII.

Though my desire to meet you is warm,
and the need of your petitioners is great,
Therefore I am
yet my illness is invincible.
lx>ld to commit my intercession to writing.
Have respect to our gray hair, which you have
already often
reverenced by good actions.
Have respect also to my infirmity, to which
my labours for God have in part contributed,
if I may swagger a little.
For this cause spare
the citizens who look to me because I use some
And spare also
freedom of speech with you.
the others who are under my care.
For public
affairs will suffer no damage through mercy,
since you can do more by fear than others by
punishment. May you, as your reward for this,
obtain such a Judge as you shew yourself to
your petitioners and to me their intercessor.

Ep. CXLIII.

What does much experience, and experi
ence of good do for men ?
It teaches kind
ness, and inclines them to those who en
treat them.
There is no such education in
pity as the previous reception of goodness.
This has happened to myself among others.
have learned compassion by the things which
And do you see my great
I have suffered.
ness of soul when I myself need your gentle
ness in my own affairs ?
I intercede for others,
and do not fear lest I should exhaust all your
I am writ
kindness on other men's concerns.

ing thus on behalf of the Presbyter Leontiusor, if I may so describe him, the ex-Presbyter.
If he has suffered sufficiently for what he has
done, let us stop there, lest excess become in
justice.
And if there is still any ' balance of
punishment due, and the consequences of his
crime have not yet equalled his offence, yet re
mit it for our sake and God's, and that of the
sanctuary, and the general assembly of the
priests, among whom he was once numbered,
even though he has now shewn himself un
worthy of them, both by what he has done
and by what he has suffered.
If I can prevail
with you it will be best ; but if not, I will bring
to you a more powerful intercessor, her who is
the partner both of your rule and of your good
fame.

Ep. CXLIV.

(Verianus, a citizen of Nazianzus, had l)een
offended by his son-in-law, and on this ac
count wished his daughter to sue for a divorce.
Olympius referred the matter to the Episcopal
to
arbitration of S. Gregory, who refused
countenance the proceeding, and writes the
two following letters, the first to the Prefect,
the second to Verianus himself.)

Haste is not always praiseworthy.

For this
reason I have deferred my answer until now
about the daughter of the most honourable Ve
rianus, both to allow for time setting matters
right, and also because I conjecture that Your
Goodness does not approve of the divorce, in
asmuch as you entrusted the enquiry to me,
whom you knew to be neither hasty nor uncircumspect in such matters.
Therefore I have
refrained myself till now, and, I venture to
think, not without reason.
But since we have
come nearly to the end of the allotted time,
and it is necessary that you should be informed
of the result of the examination I will inform
you.
The young lady seems to me to be of
two minds, divided between reverence for her
Her
parents and affection for her husband.
words are on their side, but her mind, I rather
think, is with her husband, as is shewn by her
tears.
You will do what commends itself to
your justice, and to God who directs you in
I should most willingly have given
all things.
my opinion to my son Verianus that he should
pass over much of what is in question, with a
view not to confirm the divorce, which is en
tirely contrary to our law," though the Roman
For it is neces
law may determine otherwise.
sary that justice be observed-which I pray you
may ever both say and do.

a The law of the Church.

MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS.

To Verianus.

Ep. CXLV.

Just

joyfully.

received

Public executioners commit no crime, for
they are the servants of the laws : nor is the
sword unlawful with which we punish crim
But nevertheless, the public executioner
inals."
is not a laudable character, nor is the deathbearing sword
so
neither can I endure to become hated by
the divorce by my hand and
confirming
It is far better to be the means of
tongue.
union and of friendship than of division and
parting of life.
I suppose it was with this in
his mind that our admirable Governor entrust
ed me with the enquiry about your daughter,
as one who could not proceed to divorce
abruptly or unfeelingly.
For he proposed me
not as Judge, but as Bishop, and placed me as
a mediator in your unhappy circumstances.
beg you therefore, to make some allowance for
my timidity, and if the better prevail, to use
me as a servant of your desire : I rejoice in re
ceiving such commands.
But if the worse
and more cruel course is to be taken, seek for
some one more suitable to your purpose.
have not time, for the sake of favouring your
friendship (though in all respects I have the
highest regard for you), to offend against God,
to Whom I have to give account of every ac
tion and thought.
I will believe your daugh
ter (for the truth shall be told) when she can
lay aside her awe of you, and boldly declare
the truth.
At present her condition is pitiable
-for she assigns her words to you, and her
tears to her husband.

To Olympius.

Ep. CXLVI.

This is what I said as if by a sort of proph
ecy, when I found you favourable to every
request, and was making insatiable use of your
gentleness, that I fear I shall exhaust your kind
ness upon the affairs of others.
For see, a
contest of my own has come (if that is mine
which concerns my own relations), and I can
not speak with the same freedom.
First, be
cause it is my own.
For to entreat for myself,
though it may be more useful, is more humil
And next, I am afraid of excess as
iating.
destroying pleasure, and opposing all that is
So matters stand, and I conjecture only
good.
too rightly.
Nevertheless with confidence in
God before Whom I stand, and in your mag-

nanimity in doing good, I am bold to present
this petition.

Suppose Nicobulus to be the worst of men :
-though his only crime is that through me he
is an object of envy, and more free than he
And suppose that my present
ought to be.
opponent is the most just of men.
For I am
ashamed to accuse before Your Uprightness
one whom yesterday I was supporting : but I
do not know if it will seem to you just that
punishment should be demanded for one man's
crimes from another, though these were quite
strange to him, and had not even his consent ;
from the man who has so stirred his household
and been so upset as to have surrendered to his
accuser more readily than the latter wished.
Must Nicobulus or his children be reduced 10
slavery as his persecutors desire ?
I am ashamed
both of the ground of the persecution and
of the time, if this is to be done while both
you are in power and I have influence with you.
Not so, most admirable friend, let not this be
suggested to Your Integrity.
But recognizing
by the winged swiftness of your mind the
malice from which this proceeds, and having
respect to me your admirer, shew yourself a
merciful judge to those who are being disturbed
-for to-day you are not merely judging be
tween man and man, but between virtue and
vice; and to this more consideration than by
an ordinary man must be given by those who
are like you in virtue and are skilful governors.
And in return for this you shall have from me
not only the matter of my prayers, which I
know you do not, like so many men, despise ;
but also that I will make your government
famous with all to whom I am known.

Ep. CLIV.

To me you are Prefect even after the ex
piry of your term of office-for I judge things
differently from the run of men-because you
embrace in yourself every prefectoral virtue.
For many of those who sit on lofty thrones are
to me base, all those whose hand makes them
base and slaves of their subjects."
But many
are high and lofty though they stand low, whom
virtue places on high and makes worthy of
greater government.
But what have I to do
with this ? No longer is the great Olympius
with us, nor does he bear our rudder-lines. We
are undone, we are betrayed, we have become
again the Second Cappadocia, after having
Of other men's
been made the First by you.

« I. e. who are accessible to bribery.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

matters why should I speak? but who will
cherish the old age of your Gregory, and ad
minister to his weakness the enchantment of
honours, and make him more honourable be- 1
cause he obtains kindness for many from you ?
Now then depart on your journey with escort
and greater pomp, leaving behind for us many

tears, and carrying with you much wealth, and
that of a kind which few Prefects do, good
fame, and the being inscribed on all hearts,
If you preside over
pillars not easily moved.
us again with greater and more illustrious rule,
(this is what our longing angurs), we shall offer
to God more perfect thanks.

INDICES.

S. GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

[Including the Introduction and Notes.]

heretic,

Abaris, tale of, 402.
Adam, old and new, compared, 210.
Acacius, heretic, 275.
/Eschylus, 318.
Aetians, heretical body, 281, 292.
professedly con
Aetius,
demned at Seleucia, 275 ; mas
ter of Eunomius in heresy, 280.
Aged, addressed and comforted, 235.
Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria,
273 ; opposed by Arius, 350.
Alexandria, the throne of S. Mark,
271 ; council at, under Athanasius, 283.

Altar, approached by Gorgonia, 243;
venerable table, 257 ; table of
God for the offerings to God,
412 ; where Christ is honoured,
243 ; God's altars and sacra
ments, 459 ; profaned by the
violent Arians, 329.

Alypiana, niece of Gregory Nazi-

enzen, 464, 476.

Amazonius, admired by Gregory
Nazienzen for learning, 465.

Ambrose, 311, 379.
Ammianus Marc, 234.
Amphilochius, Bishop of Iconium,
458, 468 ; defends Eulalius at
Parnassus, 469 ; Gregory's let
ters to, 458, 464, 468, 469.
Amphilochius (the Younger), 466,
467 ; Gregory's letter to, 467.
Anagoge, a method of interpreta

tion. 373-

Anarchia, as applied to God, 301.
Anastasia, a church in Constanti

nople, 334. 394-

Anaxagoras, 236.
Animals, so wonderful in their in

stincts, 297.

Blood, 243.

Antitypes of the Precious Body and

Anomcean Arians, 281, 284.
Anthimus, Bishop of Tyana, 195,
24S. 4'4. 45 2 ; opposes Gregory
at Sasima,
favors
195 ;
Gregory, 454 ; opposes Basil,
145. 245> 4i2> 452 sq-

Anthropolaters, name given to the

yet

Antioch,

Orthodox, 441.

church
schism, 198, 466.

troubled

with

Antony, founder of monasticism,

Argument, its conditions stated, 301.

270.

Apollinarian heresy, 196, 197, 199,
letters

Gregory's

308,
43B ;
against, 437 sq.

Apollinarians, at Constantinople,
197, 198 ;
at Nazianzus, 437 ;
conditions of their reception in
the Church, 459.

Apollinarius, or Apollinaris, Bishop
of Laodicea, 198 ; teacher of
S. Jerome, 198 ; his own teach
ing, 198, 3°8, 437. 438 ; Pos
sible meaning and purpose of
his teaching, 437 ; once much
favoured, 198; his error regard
ing Christ's humanity, 198, 199,
314;
by a
excommunicated
Roman Synod, 199.

Arianism, the mother of heresies,
called a madness, 212,
196 ;
236, 405 ; traced to a Jewish
source, 350 ; revolt from Sabellianism, 350 ; how suspected in
the Three Hypostases, 279 ; its
history and development, 350 ;
its teaching on the Trinity, 260,
272, 273, 275, 350 ; condemned
at the Council of Nicrea, 350.
Arians, their misuse of Origen's
writings, 192 ; were supported
by the emperors, 196,
197 ;
persecuted Gregory at Constan
tinople, 197, 471 ; boasted of
their numbers, 328, 428 ; were
troublesome and tumultuous,
328, 329, 406 ; perverted doc
trine of the use of words, 275 ;
were deprived by Theodosius,
198 ; their mobs were violent
and profane, 329, 406, 47 1 ; they
introduced bishops, 463 ; Greg
ory's oration against, 328 sq.
Ariminum Council issued an Arian

Creed, 192.
Aristophanes, 256.
Aristotle, 236.
Arius, heretic, 212, 272, 301, 350;
accused of madness in doctrine,
212, 258, 272, 405 ; his name
"a profane spot," 272 ; priest
of Alexandria, 350; his errors
on the Trinity, 272, 273 ; con
demned at Alexandrian Coun
cil and Nicsea, 350 ; his ex
communication and death, 272.
Arsenius, Meletian Bishop, said to
have been murdered by Atha-

nasius,
alive, 330.

273, 330 ; produced

Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria,
189, 271 ; his festivals in the
East, 269 ; compared with the
patriarchs and prophets, 270 ;
his habits and character, 270
sq.;
270,
his early training,
271 ; passed through the en
tire series of orders, 271 ; was
led in an orderly fashion to the
throne of S. Mark, 271, 272 ;
opposed George of Cappadocia, 273, 274 ; present at the
Council of Nicaea with his bish
op, 273 ; accused of murdering
Arsenius, 273, 330 ; his exiles,
189, 263, 275, 276, 279, 410 ;
retired to the Egyptian monks,
274 ; his constancy in aid of
the Church, 276 sq.; popularly
eulogized beyond even the em
peror, 277 ;
great writer and
controversialist, 199, 270 ; his
theme the Holy Trinity, 278,
279 ; reverence shown to him,
277, 278 ; harmonious in his
banished by
teaching,
Constantius, 278, 279 ;
exiled
by Julian and recalled by Jo
vian, 279 ; his death, 269, 280;
wrote the Life of S. Antony,
370 ; Gregory's oration upon,
269 sq.
Atheism as

related to theology,

277 ;

212 ; of Sabellius, 212.

Athens, its condition in the fourth

century, 190.

Atoms, ancient
291.

theories

of,

188,

Augustine, Bishop of Hippo, for a
time Manichean, 333 ; referred
to. 345, 428.

Austerities of Gorgonia, 242.

Balsamon, referred to, 426.
Baptism, names, 360 sq. ; our illu
mination, 212, 258, 352, 359,
360 sq., 368, 373 ; source of pur
ity. 242, 376 ; the Seal, 364 ; the
Gift, 364, 376 ; for the image
of God renewed, 371 ; type of
future glory. 397 ; its three im
mersions, 281 ; its ceremonial,
258, 259, 281 ; different kinds
of, 352 ; prepared for, 357, 365.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN

374 ; sin after, 359, 362, 365,
37-. 373 ; i>lcas for delay to363 sq. ; affusion and immer
sion, 363 ; desire for, 189, 367 ;
ambitions shown in, 369 ; our
benefits in the sacrament, 360
sq., 366 sq., 375 sq. ; of Christ,
35 1 sq-, 360 sq.; infant, 367,
370 ; times of administration
become limited, 368 ; Gregory's
oration on, 351 sq.

Semi-

Basil,

Bishop

of Ancyra,

Arian deposed, 276, 438.
Basil, Bishop of Cocsarea, a Cappadocian, son of Basil and Emmelia,
187, 398 ; educated at Caesarea,
and Athens,
Constantinople,
189, 399 ;
his friendship with
Gregory Nazianzen, 188 sq., 266,
395 sq., protected by Gregory at
the University in Athens, 190,
400, 401 ; visited the Holy Sep
ulchre, 191, 404 ; a solitary in
Pontus, 191, 404 ; formed his
monastic rule, 191, 415, 468 ;
studies history with Gregory,
192 ; was made a Reader, 404 ;
unwillingly ordained by Eusebius, 194, 404 ; probable mo
tive for the ordination, 194 ; re
tires to Pontus, 194 ; reconciled
195, 405, 408 ;
to Eusebius,
elected to succeed him,
195,
265, 408 ; asserted his rights
as Metropolitan, 195 ; erected
Sasima into a See and conse
crated Gregory for it, 195, 245,
453 ;
himself consecrated by
Gregory (Elder), Eusebius of
Samosata, and another, 408 ;
resisted Valens dividing Cappadocia, 195, 410, 414 ; con
duct as bishop, 408 sq. ; awes
even the emperor, 412 ; fights
with the
bishops, 412 ; en
counters the civil, 413 ; victory
over Valens' Prefect, 41 1 ; has
sentence of exile cancelled, 412 ;
fed the people in famine, 407 ;
supported by the monks, 405 ;
his
learning, etc.,
403, 415 sq. ; scene at his death
and burial, 196, 395, 460, 421,
422 ; dates, 395, 460; compared
with patriarchs, etc., 418 sq. ;
thought unsound on the Deity
of the Holy Ghost, 454 ; his
panegyric by Gregory, 395 sq. ;
present at the funeral oration
on Gregory (Elder) ; Gregory's
letters to, 446 sq. ; quoted, 226,
236, 284.

prudence,

Bees and spiders' instinctive skill,

297.

Begotten and Unbegotten in the
Godhead, 212, 272, 273, 301
sq. [God],
Benoit, Abbe, 193,
359. 38». 422-

245, 260, 345,

Bernard, 208.
Bethlehem, little, metropolis of the
world, 260 ; on the road to
Paradise, 351.

Billius, 206, 233, 364, 383.
Births, three, 360.
Bishops,

their

219; their
rule,
election in tumult, 265, 266 ;
consecration, 265, 266.

Blood of Christ, to whom offered,

431.
Blount, 354.
Body, Gregory's synonyms for, 214,
242 ; and soul, now and here
after, 236, 255.
Bishop

Bosporius,

Colonia,
friend of Gregory Nazianzen,
469, 470, 473 ; assisted at Eulalius' consecration,
469 ; ac
cused and acquitted, 469, 474 ;
called before the civil courts,
470.

Bright, opinion on fourth century
documents, 199; quoted, 199,
213,279.

of

191,

Nazianzus,

Cxsarea, wrath of Julian against,
265, 266 ; saved by the bold
ness of Gregory (Elder).
Coesarius, brother of Gregory Nazi
anzen, 188, 204, 229 ; educated
at Csesarea and Alexandria,
188, 229, 231 ; inherited true
training, 230, 231 ; renowned as
a student, 189, 231 ; court phy
sician at Constantinople, 191 ;
229, 232 ; returned with Greg
ory to
229,
232 ; went back to court and
191,
was tempted by Julian,
194, 201, 229, 232, 233, 457 ;
retires from the court, 194, 229,
233. 234. 457 J
his baptism,
195, 229, 234, 458, 459 ; has
preferment in Bithynia,
195,
229, 234, 458 ; offered appoint
ment by Constantius, 229, 233;
defeats
argument,
in
is to be tried on Julian's
229 ;
return, 234 ;
195, 229,
dies,
230, 234 ; leaves his property
to the poor, 195, 236,464, 465;
195,
is buried at
234 ; honoured in Constanti
nople, 232 ; on the roll of the
Saints, 254 ; panegyric by Greg
ory, 230 sq. ; Gregory's letters
to, 457 sq.
Cain, his sevenfold

punishment,

Nazianzus,

Julian

Cappadocia, the province divided,

187, 195, 245, 452.

Carterius, teacher of Gregory Nazi
anzen in Caesarea, 188.

Casuistry rules cases, 208 sq., 226,

265, 474, 480-482.

Catechumens, 258.
Chance, as a ruler, 248;
Chanting the Psalter, 242.
Chariot-racing described, 286.
Chastity, for men as well as for

women, 239 sq., 343.

Chorepiscopi, 473.
Christ, truly divine, 198, 199, 301
343. 353 stl-< 425; truly
human, 198, 199, 307 sq., 345
425. 426, 437 sq-;
sq-. 35°.

270 ;

Son of

256, 314,

a true sacrifice, 203, 223, 351,
429 ; to whom was he offered,
43 1 ; how truly incarnate, 209,
210, 437 sq.; born of a Virgin
mother, 210, 301, 308, 334,
345. 349. 357. 3°°. 377 ! the
Only Begotten
the
Father, 316 ; his Sacrifice com
memorated as Antitype, 223 ;
still present with His people,
255, 256 ; has more effectual
intercession,
315 ;
worshipped by the Arians, 239 ;
His title and power, 224 ; the
mediator,
the Second
Adam, 309 ; as a King and a
Servant, 310 ; suffering in obe
dience, 311,312, 339; suffered
being tempted, 312 ; His Can
and Cannot, 312, 313, 316, 317;
came to do His Father's will,
313, 339 ; has a human will,
314 ; His Ignorance, 315, 317 ;
His names considered, 317 ;
how like Melchisedec, 317 ;
subject of antinomies, 338 ; to
be honoured in his humility,
339 ; was betrayed and gave
Himself up, 350 ; an Example
honoured all
and aid, 351 ;
states by taking them, 360 ;
the true Paschal Lamb, 428 sq.;
typefied under the Law, 352 ;
true man in his Ascension, 380;
orations on his Baptism, 352

Christian, teaching so varied, 212 ;
priest's office and work, 223 ;
union with Christ, 228 ; trials
and difficulties, 233, 262 ; con
stancy not obstinacy or cowardreverence for holy
ice, 234 ;
things, 257 ; persecutions in
various forms, 262 ;
life for
eternity, 237, 255 ; our high
est title, 233.

,

and

Christians,

often rude

un
worthy, 206, 221 ; in hypocrisy,
206 ; objects of contempt, 221,
222 ; live for the future, 237,
255 ; have one heaven, hope,
and citizenship, 232.
Christmas called Theophany,
Chrysostom borrowed ideas from
Gregory Nazienzen, 194, 200 ;
unpopular at Constantinople,
287 ; quoted, 231, 344.
Church must have order and au
thority, 205 ; arrangements in,
226, 377, 404, 407 ! spiritual
status in, 226, 377 ; the mighty
Body of Christ, 271 ; not de
fined by numbers, 328 ;
its
teaching, how corrupted, 272 ;
likened
of
a
to
beasts, 2 14.
described, 267,
Church buildings
377- ,
.
Church of Anastasia in Constanti
nople, 336, 397 ; of the Holy
Apostles, 397 ; of S. Orestes
at Mt. Taurus, 414 ; of the
martyrs at Nazianzus, 459.

collection

. „

Cleanthes, 236.
Cledonius,

of

priest

CWmencet, ail, 226, 233, 252, 256,

Nazianzus,
199 ; two letters to, 201, 439,
443.
260, 415.
Clericus, 239.
Coenobites in communities, yet re
lated to hermits, ail, 274.

Combefis, 225.
Confession, as part of repentance,
252 ; its excellence, 253, 375 ;
self- conviction, 253 ; for heal
ing, 208, 209, 252, 375.
Confusion of tongues reversed at

Pentecost, 384, 385.

Consecration of Bishops, 265, 266,
267 ; by three Bishops, 267.

Constantine,

the Emperor, 212 ;

his equestrian statue, 330.
Constantinople, its religious condi
tion in the fourth century, 196,
286, 387 sq.; its court influ
ences, 191 sq., 232 ; harassed
by the Atians, 196 ; the second
General Council, 275, 281, 284,
387 ; the council's anathemas,
284.

Consubstantial, belonging to

the
Son, 102, 280, 281 ; and to the
Holy Spirit, 381.

Cornelius, Bishop of Rome, ban

ished, 358.

Corybantes in Greek Mythology,

Council of Niaea, 258, 275 ; of
Constantinople, 275, 281, 284.
Creation of the world by God, 290,
3°3. 347. 356i 36°. 424i of
angels and men, 360 sq., 383
sq. 424 sq. ; of plasma, 360 ;
man's purpose in, 433.

Creed (Arian), issued at Ariminum,
492 ; at Seleucia, 192 ; at Antioch, 260.

Cross represented by Moses, 245.
Cynics, their teaching, 288.
Cyprian, 269, 323.
Cyril, Alex., 213.
Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, deposed
by Constantius, 276 ; quoted,
213, 308.

443 ;

Daedalus, Gnossian choirs of, 298.
Damianus, Bishop of Rome, 199,
excommunicates

356,
Apollinarius, 199, 443.

Dead, their obsequies and treat
ment, 234, 235, 421, 422 ; annual memorials, 235 ; prayer
for their entry into bliss, 235,
244, 422 ; in unknown light,
225 ; not to be mourned for,
236 ; happier out of the world,
236 ; enter on a sense of hap
piness, 236 ; have anticipations
of happiness and receive new
visions, 236, 244 ; precede the
cultus
living, 269, 280 s
their
commenced in rhetoric,
268,
280, 422.

Death as regarded by Christians,

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

234 sq., 255, 268; not to be
feared in Christ, 268.

Degrees as applicable to Godhead,
in the priesthood,

260, 328 ;
404, 459-

Delphian tripod silent on its own

fate» 353Democritus, 236.
Demophilus,

Arian

ex
pelled from the see of Constan
tinople, 378.

bishop,

Demosthenes, Prefect of Valens,
411-413 ; Vicar of Pontus and
enemy of Gregory Nyssa, 460.
Dianius, Bishop of Caesarea, 265.
Diocoesarea, Roman name of Naz

Direction of souls so difficult, 208

ianzus, 187.

sq., 221.

Disciplina, penitential, 209 ; of the

secret, 221, 258.

Divine nature eternal, 235 ; studies
205, 266 ;
Christian,
for the
disobedience,
on
judgments
248 sq. ;
are averted by re
pentance, 250 sq. ; for the sake
of mercy, 252 ; judgments are
to be considered, 253 ; divine
things unchangeable and eter
nal, 268.

Earthquakes,

mystically

applied,

Easter, the day of the Resurrection,
203, 422, 423 ; great festival,
203, 368, 422, 423 ; queen of
days, 263 ; the Lord's Passover,
423 ; oration on, 422 sq.

Eclectics, 213.
Economy, a
teaching,
381 ;
senses, 308.

reserve

certain
in
247, 258, 287, 326,
its different theological

Egypt, fertility and favour, 334 sq.
308 ;
Egyptian
sailors addressed by Gregory,

destroyed,

idols

' 334 sq.

Eleusius, Bishop of Cyzicus, 428 ;
Semi-Arian, Macedonian, and
yet much respected, 438.
Elias Cretensis, 213, 215, 226, 295,
301, 302, 315, 328, 357.
Emanation, as a theological term,
3°'. 379 : Gnostic, 379.
Emmelia, mother of S. Basil, 398.
Enoch desired to know God, 394,

Epiphanius apologises for Apolli
narius, 437 ; quoted, 292, 308.

Ephesus, council of, 308.
Epicurus, Athenian philosopher, 236,
288 ; his teaching, 288, 291.

Epiphany, different
word, 344.

uses of

the

Episcopal elections, 265, 266, 271 ;
consecration by three bishops,
267 ; office parental and spirit
ual, 268.

Error, sources of, 213.
the
Essence, how predicated
Godhead, 279 sq.,
sq.,
355 ; how different from Hy
postasis, 279, 355.

of

Eternity of God, 347, 423, 424.
Eucharist, how honoured by the
faithful, 257 ; time and place
of mystery and intercession,
263 ; how celebrated by Greg
ory the Elder, 263 ; action in
consecrating, 264 ; grief mod
erated in the presence of, 257.

Euclides, 236.
Eudoxius, rhetorician and friend of
Gregory Nazianzen, 465.
Eulalius, succeeded Gregory at Na
zianzus,
458, 461,
198, 201,
473, 474 ; cousin of Gregory
and Cacsarius, 458 ;
election
contested, 469, 474.

196,

Eulogy, rules and conditions of,
230, 238 sq., 254, 268, 272.

Euuomian heresy,

197, 280
sq. ; opposed by Gregory, 280
sq.; whence and how devel
oped, 282, 286.

their

Eunomians favoured in Constanti
nople, 197 ; to be rebaptised,
281 ;
anathematised by the
council of Constantinople, 284 ;
Gregory's oration against, 284
sq.

Eunomius, Cappadocian Bishop of
his
Cyzicus, 281 ; some of
arguments, 281, 292; retired
to Chalcedon, 281.

against

Eunuchs, their influence, 275, 342,
343 ;
the
bribed
Church, 275 ; not meritorious
242, 243 ;
chastity,
in
Chamberlains of
Constantius,
275.; represent higher truths,
343. 344-

Euphrantes, Bishop of Tyana, 474.
Eupraxius, disciple of Eusebius Sam-

osata, 463.
Euripides, 353, 459.
Eusebius, Bishop of Csesarea, 194,
448 ;
his character sketched,
405 ; made bishop though unbaptised layman, 265 ; ordains
S. Basil, 194 ; quarrels with S.
Basil, 194, 405 ; succeeded by
S. Basil, 266, 408, 449 ; dies,
195, 408, 449 ; Gregory's letters
to, 448 sq.

Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata, 330 ;
champion of orthodoxy, 451 ;
Basil's conse
S.
assisted
cration, 330, 45 1 ; banished by
Valens, 463 ; appealed to by
the two Gregories on behalf of
S. Basil, 451 ; Gregory's let
ters to, 451, 462.

Eustathius of Sebaste, deposed, 276,
284, 468 ; his heretical teach
ing, 284, 438 ; shifting in opin
ion and policy, 468.
heretical

teaching,

at

Eutyches, his
2IO.

Euzoius, fellow-student of Gregory

Nazianzen, 189.
Evil, its definition, 347.
Exorcism, medicine of, 369, 373.
Experience teaches caution, 267.
Ezekiel

teaches warning to

the

priests, 218, 219.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN

Faith, a gift of baptism, 259.
Famine and pestilence, divine judg

ments, 248 sq.

Fatherhood, in relation to the son,
306 ; in relation to the Trinity,
193, 212, 288, 301 sq., 336 sq.

Fasting before Easter, 371.
Faustinus, Bishop of Iconium, 238,
243 ; witness toGorgonia'scure,

Female modesty, prudence, orna
ments, etc., 241, 257, 261.
Festivals for the remembrance of
God*, 355 ; annual for the saints,
235, 269 ; of different kinds,

.
Fire of eternal punishment, 373.
Fifth element suggested, 291.
Flavian, Bishop of Antioch, 466.
Forbes, Bishop, 308.
Foretaste of glory felt now, 244 ; of
bliss in the place of wailing,
236.

Forgiving spirit, its power and bless

ing, 262.

stroyed, 266.

Fortune, Temple of, at C£esarea, de

Friends should have justice done
them, 238, 243 ; have one soul
in two bodies, 402.

Gabriel, 209.
Generation of the Son, 283, 286,
301 sq., 310, 375 ; fear in using
the term, 375.

George of Cappadocia, Arian in
truder, 273 sq., 410 ; his con
duct at Alexandria, 410, ; his in
solence toward Athanasius, 274,
275, 410 ; deceived the emper
or and was supported by him,
275 ; bribed heavily, 275 ; over
ran Egypt and the East, 275,
410 ; was murdered at the death
of Constantius, yet not by Chris
tians, 277.

George, deacon of Nazianzus, 470.
George, layman of Paspasus, sent to
Gregory Nazianzen, 474.
God, Trinity in Unity, 193, 259,
272, 273, 279, 280 sq., 288 sq.,
301 sq., 336, 347, 351 sq., 375,
442 ; Three in Properties, 405 ;
immeasurable, 260, 272, 273,
290, 423 ; incorporeal, 291, 292;
infinite in all perfections, 345,
347, 423 ; in heaven and earth,
252, 388 ; cannot be Three, 322,
347, 405 ; rules the world in
His Providence, 248 sq.; can
not be defined, 289, 290, 294,
296, 315, 423; the names of
His essence, 316 ;
is beyond
reason, 290, 294 ; fills all things,
291 ; whether in place or out of
place, etc., 292; the form, what,
295 ; the council and essence,
295 ; the unbegotten, begotten
anil Proceeding One in, 272,
273, 301 sq., 316, 320 ; whether
anarchia, monarchia, or polyarchia, 301 ; beyond the idea of
time, 301, 346, 347 ; cannot do

evil, 313 ; not measured by
numbers, 326 ; not grasped by
human speech or thought, 324,
325, 367; conclusions regarding,
281 sq., 288 sq.; different terms
defined as belonging to, 280 ;
philosophisings upon, 285 sq.;
conceived by the Greek mind,
319; loves purity and truth,
405 ;
unapproachable,
223.

glory

God, crucified, 433.
God's house of many mansions dis

cussed, 283.

Gods in heathendom, whence de

rived and how, 293 sq.

238,

daughters,

Gorgonia, sister of Gregory Nazian
zen, 188, 201, 204 ; her husband
Alypius, two sons bishops and
three
464 ;
Faustinus, Bishop of Iconium,
her spiritual father, 238, 243 ;
trained in virtue at home, 239 ;
guide to her husband and ac
tive in acts of piety, 240 sq.;
miracles related of her, 242,
243 ; obtains baptism for her
husband, 244 ; death at Iconi
um and its scenes, 244 ; on the
roll of the saints, 254.

Greeks formed a conception of God,
319; believe in one godhead,
322 ;
worship demons, 322,
354> 378 ; deify bad passions,
378 ; their mythologies, 353 ;
their mythical tales, 402.
Gregory (the Elder), Bishop of Nazi
anzus, 187 ; belonged to the
sect of Hypsistarians or Hypsistians, 187, 239, 254, 256 ; con
verted through Nonna, his wife,
187, 239, 254, 256, 260 ; had
Gregory in his priesthood, 188 ;
in
his baptism was also or
dained, 258, 259 ; always just
and liberal, 256, 260 sq.; his
pastoral fidelity in a woodland
rustic church, 259 sq. ; thought
worthy of miracles, 263 ; night
ly austerities, 265 ; built the
Church of Nazianzus, 267 ; sub
scribed an Arian creed,
but
apologised and drew back, 192,
260; had need of Gregory's re
turn from Constantinople, 192,
204, 225 sq. ; has Gregory his
coadjutor at, Nazianzus,
195,
204, 225, 245 sq. ; referred to
in Gregory's writings, 204, 230 ;
much revered by his son Greg
ory, 204, 229 sq., 245 sq., 255
sq.; resisted Julian, 265, 266;
saved
Ccesarea from Julian,
266 ; promoted the election of
S. Basil to Csesarea, 451 ;died,
195, 248, 254, 267, 376 ; was
forty-five years in the priest
hood, 267 ; funeral oration pro
nounced upon, 255 sq.

Gregory (the Younger) Bishop of
Nazianzus, his life,
187 sq. ;
father Gregory, mother Nonna,
sister Gorgonia, brother Csesa-

189,

193,

scl > 395

to Nazianzus,

rius, 187 sq., 229 sq., 238 ded
icated to the priesthood before
his birth, 188, 258 ; first edu
cated at Csesarea, under Carterius, 188, 231 ; his friendship
commenced with S. Basil, 188,
s1- > went to
Alexandria and Athens, 189 ;
dedicated himself in a storm to
baptism,
264 ; date of
baptism uncertain, 189 ; pro
tected S. Basil at the Univer
sity in Athens, 189, 400 ; un
popular among the students,
196 ; his opinion of young Ju
lian,
190, 227, 387 ; went to
Constantinople. 191, 232 , had
a desire for solitude, 191, 206,
245, 267, 453 ; studied Script
ure with S.
Basil, 192, 402,
472 ; cent a copy of Origen's
PhilocaJia to Theodore, Bishop
of Tyana, 192, 472 ; was in
Basil's monastery, 192, 194 ;
returned
192,
200, 204, 225 sq. ; guided his
father from Arianism, 192, 193,
260 ; was unwillingly ordained
to the priesthood,
194,
204, 268 ; considered it an act
of tyranny, 207, 222 ; escaped
but returned
to
to
Pontus,
Nazianzus,
193, 204 sq., his
first sermon there, 193, 204 sq.,
227 sq. ; writes on the priestly
office, 194, 200, 204, 208 sq. ;
aids his father against Julian,
194 ; Vicar-General under his
father, 226, 245, 406 ; recon
ciled Basil and Eusebius Caesarca, 195, 405, 408 ; promoted
Basil's
Caesarea,
195, 268, 449 sq., 462 ; unwill
ingly consecrated to Sasima by
195, 268, 453 ; feeling
Basil,
against Basil,
195, 453 ; re
sisted by Anthimus, 195, 245,
454 ; made coadjutor to
his
father at Nazianzus, 195, 225,
245 sq., set free at his father's
his
death,
father's
195,
254 sq. ; withdrew to Selcucia,
196 ; called to Constantinople,
and his work there, 196, 197,
385 sq. , 471 ; was unpopular,
198, 329, 471 ; proposed
to
leave, 198, 385 ; enthroned by
Theodosius the Emperor, 198,
378,
of the
Second
Ecumenical Council,
198, 385 ; resigned the presi
dency, 198, 385, 469 ; retired
to Nazianzus, 198, 268, 461,
469, 473, 475 ; then to Arianzus, 198, 422, 473 ; his death,
199, 422 ; his dates, 188, 192,
193. 196, 204, 281, 376, 422 ;
was opposed to Episcopal sy
nods, 478 ; wrote against the
military tax, 466; his usual
titles,
187, 280 ; his appear
ance and character, 199 sq. ;

195 ;
preached
funeral oration,

president

election

385 ;

at

'97,

felt himself unfit to rule, 207,
222 ; bequeathed his property
to the poor, 200 ; had charge
of Caesarius' property for the
same, 464, 465 ; his writings
and its literature, 200, 201 ; as
a teacher on the Incarnation,
'93.
199. 279 sq.. 393 ;
as a teacher on the Trinity,
197 sq., 280 sq. ; opposed to
the Eunomians and Macedo
nians, 280 ; persecuted by the
Arians, 329 sq., 460 ;
early
collections of letters from him
and Basil, 477 ; Theological
Funeral
Orations, 280 sq. ;
orations on his
195,
254 sq. ; on Gorgonia, 238 sq. ;
on
195, 230 sq. ;
Orations on the Theophany,
344 sq. ; on the Holy Lights
and Baptism, 352 sq. ; on Pen
tecost, 378 sq. ; on returning to
Nazianzus from Pontus, 193,
204 sq., 227 sq. ; on leaving
Constantinople, 385 sq. ;
sy
nopsis of the Theological ora
tions, 282, 284.

Caesarius,

father,

187,

459 ;

Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa, Cappainduced
docian,
Gregory to go to Sasima, 245 ;
professor of rhetoric, 459 ; was
in Basil's monastery, then con
secrated to Nyssa, 459, 460 ;
Gregory Nazienzen, letters to,
459 ; quoted, 239, 254, 308.
Gregory the Great, borrowed from
Gregory Nazienzen for his work
on the priesthood, r94, 200, 208.
Gregory, deacon, friend of Gregory,

Gregory, Arian, nominated for Alex

Grief moderated before the Eucha

200.

andria, 273.

rist. 257.

Gyges, King of Lydia, 402.

Habakkuk denouncing wickedness,

217.

249.

Harvest, picture of an unseasonable,

Heavenly glory and blessedness,
239, 240 ; One to all, 331.
Helladius, Bishop of Caesarea, ac
cuses Eulalius of heresy, 469,
474, 475Heraclitus, 236.
Heretics oppressed the Catholics,

Hermaphrodite god of Marcion,

Hermits, and how related to Coeno

Heron, philosopher, 236.
Hesiod, 256.
Hippocrates, 210.
History a guide to conduct, 227.
Holy Ghost, in relation to the Trin
ity, 193, 301 sq., 381 ; is God,
247, 318, 321, 382 ; His ema
nation and emission, 301 ; by
procession, 301,320 ; the Para
clete, 327 ; as related to Christ

406 sq.

320.

bites, 211.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

and no strange god interpo
lated, 318, 327, 384; reserve
in teaching His divinity, 247,
381, 382 ; an object of direct
worship, 318, 321, 382 ; as an
other comforter, 383 ;
not a
creature,
319, 321, 381 sq. ;
blasphemy against, 327 ; a gift
in confirmation, 327 ; the guide
of life. 245 ; as taught by Greg
ory, 283, 284, 380 sq. ; shares
with the Son in creation and
resurrection, 384 ; beyond the
idea of time, 301, 31S ; theo
logical oration upon, 318 sq.
Holy Lights, oration upon, and its

date, 351 sq.
Homceon, Acacian, 275.
Homceousion, Arian, 275.
Homo-ousion, Catholic. 275, 280.
Hope greater than our deserts, 237 ;

one for all, 331, 332.
Horse-racing, 343, 392, 400.
Hosea, teaching on false teachers,

217.

Hospitality a Christian duty, 241.
Human nature, how related to evil

Humanity of Christ, false teaching

and good, 207.

upon, 198.

Hypostatis,

theological term de
fined, 279, 280, 301 sq., 355,
39«-
Hypsistarians or Hypsistians, 187,
254 ; were they idolaters, 239,
256 ; tenets professed once by
Gregory the Elder, 187, 239,
254, 256 ; their tenets, 256.

Idolaters of Egypt, 335, 353 ;

of
Grecian mythologies, 353 ; how
developed
they
ideas,
fled from Gregory the
293 ;
Elder, 239. •

Illumination of baptism, 212.
Illustrations, imperfect and danger

their

ous, 328.

Immaculate conception of Mary un

known, 349.
Immortality, 296, 297.
Impossibilities in God, 312, 313.
Incarnation of Christ true and com
plete, 198, 199, 308, 338, 349.
439 scl* > n°t a mere grace, 440 ;
depraved by heresies, 210 ; for
■what purpose to humanity, 210,
440, 441 ; for the second Adam,
309 sq.,
348, 425 ; through
the human soul, 210, 440, 441 ;
Apollinarian, against, 198.

Infinity as seen in God, 347.
Instinct, so powerful in brutes, 297.
Instruction easy on the pure mind,
213 ;
difficult on the impure
and on false teaching, 213, 214.
Intercession, public, 243, 254, 263 ;
parental, 230-232, 240, 254J
allowed to the deceased, 253256, 268 ; mingling with the
sacred rites, 263.

Jerome

at

Constantinople,

quoted, 344, 353.

198;

1 Jerusalem, the heavenly, 239, 240.
Jew did not pronounce God's name,

Jewish sacrifices and offerings, 426,

3'S427.

Job, an example of suffering, 275.
Joel, on penitence,
John the Baptist as Christ's fore

runner, 270, 357.
John Clirysostom, 379.
Jonah, as messenger to Nineveh,

225, 226.
Jovian, the Emperor, 197, 223, 279,
283 ; pious and gentle, 279 ;
recalls Athanasius and receives
a synodal letter, 278, 279.
Judaism, its poverty in theology,

J

212.

265,

Judgments, divine, 248, 249 ; their
causes to be considered, 253,

Julian, Emperor, contemporary of
Gregory Nazianzen, 188, 457 ;
190,
his character and aims,
200, 233, 265 ; Gregory's opin
ion of him, 190, 277, 387 ; the
apostate, 265 ; made Emperor,
194,
457 ; undermined
Christianity, 194, 233, 265, 277,
457 ; apparently impartial, 197,
233, 265 ; of unhappy memory,
233 ; tried to seduce Caesarius,
194, 233, 457 ; threatened Nazi
anzus, 194, 265 ; threatened all
opposing him, 194, 233, 265 ;
persuaded by cruelty, 233, 265 ;
incensed at the Caesarea elec
tion, 266 ; was cruel to
the
Catholics, 267, 386, 387 ; re
newed the military tax, 466 ;
194,
was defeated and slain,
279.
his
of
387 >
death, 200.

incidents

Kiss of peace, how guarded, 257.
Knowledge, man's advance in, 348,

Kronos in Greek mythology, "353.

Labyrinth of Crete, 403.
Lavers at church doors for ablu

tions, 396.

Law, the, its spiritual purpose, 427,

Leaven, why cast out, 428.
Legal prefiguring the Christian, 352,

Lent, the fast of forty days, 371.
Leo, 308.
Leontius, Bishop of Caesarea, 258,

259.

Leuenclavius, 311.
Liddon, 213.
Light is in God and in other beings,
361 ; as related to baptism, 212,
258> 352, 359 sq., 368, 373 sq.
"Like" in godhead, a term of

semi-Arianism, 275.

Life, short, sometimes a blessing,
210 ; short always compared
with eternity, 235, 255 ; and
death in succession, 268.

Little things made honourable, 330

Mourners,

comfort to

Christian,

sq.

Liturgical forms, 257, 267, 407.
Liturgy, 267, 407 ; of St. Basil and

Loaves,

of St. Chrysostom, 407.
pure
crossed in blessing, 264.
Logos in relation to God, 316, 320.
Low Sunday, how named in the

basket

white,

of

fourth century, 264.

Lucius intruded at Alexandria, 329.

Mansel, 379.
Marriage, good one is God's gift,
256 ; forms the closest union,
25S.

Martyrdom not to be sought, 397 ;
Basil,

attained by S.

nearly

Martyrs in Politus, 397.
Matter not eternal, 291.
Melchisedec, a type made good in
Christ, 317, 345 ; patristic in
terpretation, 345.

Melelius, Bishop of Antioch, pre
at Second Ecumenical

sided
Council, and died, 198.
Men, different classes to be differ

ently dealt with, 211.

Methodius, 225.
Micah's

argument
teachers, 217.
Midas, tale of, 402.
Ministry required in the Church,

against

false

205.

Minos, King of Crete, 403.
Miracles in God's Providence, 242 ;
Gregory the
267 ; connected

connected with
Elder,
263,
with Gorgonia, 242 sq.
Mixing wine and water, 214.
Models by examples, 207, 240 sq.,
of being

256 sq. ;
such, 208.
Molione, sons of, 403.
Monarchia as related to God, 301,

difficulty

Monasteries of Egypt and the The-

3=2, 347-

baid, 274.

of

Monastic communities in Egypt.
274 ; rule of S. Antony, 270 ;
rule of S. Basil, 191, 405, 415,
468.

Money applied by S. Nonna, 261.
Monks as related to Coenobites and
211, 270; the over-
■hermits,
zealous
Gregory's
part
church, 260, 276 ; their influ
ence, 455 ; their share in Epis
copal elections, 266 ;
called
at
Nazarites, 266,
Nazianzus opposed their Bish
op's Arianism, J92 ; received
Alhanasius in exile, 274, 275 ;
were received by Basil
into
cells, 415, 459.
Mono-ousion, 280.
Montant, 211.
Montanus, Phrygian enthusiast and

394. 405 ;

Mother of God, its legitimate mean

heretic, 333.

ing, 199.

235 sq., 255, 267 sq.

Mozley, 347.
Mysteries.,

the

great,
related to
223 ; how
sacrifice,
Christ's
performed in the fourth cen
tury, 263 ;
celebrated by the
priest, 263 ; Grecian and Egyp
tian, 353.

Mystery, christian use of the word,
203; " time of the mystery,"
263 ; of human life, 240.

Mystic numbers, 379, 428.

Name of Christ, its power, 222.
Nature, used as to God, 28 ; the
first
nature, 293 ; two natures
in one Person by the Incarna
tion, 338 ; Manichsean differ
ences of, 341.
Nazianzus, called

Diocoesarea by
the Romans, 187 ; maintained
the faith, 194 ; suffered from a
hail, 247 ; was a
plague of
small poor place,
330, 346 ;
had church built by Gregory,
267 ; was to lose its civil rights,

Neale and Littledale, 373.
elected
catechumen,
Nectarius,
Bishop of Constantinople, 198,
469 ; Gregory's letters to, 201,
438, 469 sq.

Nestorius' teaching, 210, 308.
Newman, 270, 279.
Nicaca, shaken by earthquake, 229,
234, 458 ; Council of, 258, 275 ;
council of men united by the
Holy Ghost, 273.

Nicetas, 203, 204, 347, 349, 379,

423. 427-

Nicobulus, Gregory's nephew, 464,
476, 477 ; published a collec
tion of Basil and Gregory's let
ters, 477.

Night hours of prayer at Constan

tinople, 287, 382.

187,

Nonna, wife of Gregory the Elder,
and mother of Gregory Nazianzen,
Cresarius and Gorgonia,
187, 195, 204, 230, 239 ; charac
ter sketched by Gregory, 230
sq., 239, 256 sq., 261; had pray
erful care of her children, 230232, 264 ; aided in her hus
239,
band's conversion,
254, 258 ; survived her hus
band, 254 ; received Cresarius'
honoured remains, 234 ; a good
partner to Gregory the Elder,
256, 257, 260 ; sought piety for
ornament, 257 ; her reverence
for holy things, 257, 261 ; liber
ality to the poor, 261 ; interced
ing for her husband's recovery,
263 ; miraculous feeding in a
vision, 264 ; dies, 195.

Notus, author of Sabellianism. 350.
Novatian, a priest, friend of Novatus, intruded at Rome, 333,
358.

Novatian heresy, 196, 197, 333, 358,

Novatians at Constantinople,

197,
359 ;
violent at Rome, 333 ;
called themselves Cathari or
Puritans, 333, 358.
heretic,

rebelled
against his Bishop S. Cyprian,
333. 35»-

Numbers, honours to, 379 sq., 428.

Novatus,

first

Oecumenius, 345.
Olympius, governor of Cappadocia
Secunda, 437 ; correspondent
of Gregory, 437 sq. ; letters to,
445. 477. 478, 479. 480, 481.

Orders, minor, 271.
Ordination, how a mystery, 203.
Orestes and Pylades, 402.
Origen, as a Commentator, 192 ; his
Philocalia, 192, 472 ; not Arian,
192 ; quoted, 215, 225.

Ornaments, female, 241, 257, 261,

476.

261.

Orthodox persecuted by Constantius, 274, 275 ; by Julian, 267,
386,
"'. 387

Painters by words, 207, 272.
Painting the human face, 241, 257,

Paradise of Eden interpreted, 348.
Parties in teaching, 2 1 5, 279.
Pascha explained, 426.
Passover explained for Christians,

426 sq.

Pastoral care requires good judg

ment, 210-212.

Paul, the Apostle, his life and teach
in the Third

ing, 215-217 ;
Heaven, 295, 338.

Paulinus, Bishop of Antioch, 443,

469.

Pegasus, tale of, 402.
Pelops in Greek mythology, 353.
Pentecost, festival of, 368 ; oration
on, 378 sq. ; the coming of the
Spirit, 380 sq.

People, uneducated, should leave

deep questions, 229.

Person, defined in theology, 355, 391 ;
three in one Godhead, 272, 273,
353 ; their relations, 288, 355.
Petavius, 208, 210, 212, 279, 301,
306, 308, 311, 315. 405.
Peter, Bishop, expelled from Alex
andria, 329 ;
sent Bishop to
place Maximus at Constanti
nople, 334.
Philosophizings

God, the

about

world, etc, 285-288.

Philosophy as understood by the

fathers, 205.

Philagrius, Cappadocian consul in

Alexandria, 277.

Photinus and his heresy, 334.
Physicians of soul and body com

pared. 208-210.

Pindar. 262. 402.
1 Pious arc sensitive as to truth, 213.
! Plato and his archetypal forms, 236,
288 ; quoted, 205, 225, 289,
292.
Pliny, 402.
Pneumatomachi, 283, 284 381.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

221.

Polyarchia as to God, 301.
Prayer for Caesarius after death,
235 ; and for Gorgonia, 244 ;
the lime and place for prayer
set, 257, 371 ; houses of, 371
sq.

Priest, set apart from the people,

Priestly office, how so important,
208-210 ; its duties and diffi
culties, 208 sq., 255, 404 ; its
responsibility, 220 ; reproached
in the had,
357 ;
cither authority or service, 229,
271 ; respected in the worthy,
257. 223, 357, 413; prepara
tions for, 259, 261, 271, 404;
reached by training, 404.

221, 271,

Priests,

their

Jewish,

reproved, 219 ;
rules, 219 ;
Christian,
sacrifice, 223,
made a living
271 ;
in
223 ;
truded priests unworthy and
insolent, 27 1 ; bad, have more
need to offer for themselves,
271.

consecrated,

Procession of the Holy Ghost, 273,
284 ; from the Son, 284 ; dou
ble procession, 356.

Proclus, 213.
Procopius, Prefectus urbi at Con

stantinople, 478.
Properties of Godhead, 405.
Prophecy, none of itself from an

Prophets, their teaching applied,

oracle, 353.

217 sq.

Providence directs all, 248 sq.
Psalter chanted, 242, 394, 412 ; on
Gorgonia's dying lips,
244 ;
thundering roll of, 412.

Ptolemaeus, 236.
Punishment of the ungodly, 244.
Purity necessary for conceiving di
vine truths, 213, 285 sq., 288,
354- 355Pyrrho, 236, 272.
Pythagoras and his discipline for ini
taught mystic
288;
tiation,
numbers, 379.

Rank gained by good service, 205.
Reformation, a part of repentance,

250 sq.

Regeneration, a gift of

cleansing
and perfection, 244, 258 ; from
the Holy Spirit, 244 ; a seal or
a gift of grace, 244; by the
water and the spirit, 258.
Repentance, to meet God's judg
ments, 250 ; joined with refor
mation of life, 250, 254 ; as a
public act and its philosophy,
252.

Reserved sacrament, 243.
Responsive service, 257.
Resurrection, celebrated on Easter,
203 ; great moral and spiritual
power, 203, 235 sq.; given to
the dead, 236 ; completion to
the Blessed, 236. 237 ; pictured
by Gregory, 236 sq.

Retirement, its purpose to Basil,

191.
Reynolds, 327.
Rhadamanthus, King of Lycia, 403.
Rhea in Greek mythology, 353.
Rich and people equal in baptism,

etc., 369.

Rule difficult but necessary, 207,
214 ; rule and service unite,

Sabellianism, 197, 212, 259, 273,
279. 3", 32°. 336> 35°. 355 :
atheistic, 212 ; how suspected,
279 ; condemned at Rome, Nicoea, and Constantinople, 350.
333,

Sabellius, heretic, 212,

320,

Sacrament,

35°. 355anti
reserved, 243 ;
types of the Lord's B.idy and
Blood, 243 ; change in cus
toms from Christ's, 371 ; how
celebrated in Gregory's time,

Sacramental blood mixed with blood

of massacre, 329.

Sacrifice of Christ, 203, 223 ; of
self, 203, 223 ; of a contrite
heart, 247 ; of praise, 247.

Sadducees

denied

the

spiritual

world, 319.

Salamander, tale of, 402.
Salt, pledge of fidelity, 239, 257.
Sanctuary, equivalent to sacrament,
271 ; profaned by Christians,
206, 271 ; for different orders
of clergy, 404, 412; its order
and dignity, 412.

Sarcolaters, 441.
Sasima, described,

Gregory's dio
195 ; resigned by Greg
filled by Kulalius,

cese,
ory, 268 ;
199, 201.

Satan, as Lucifer, fell, 347 ; how to

be defeated, 362, 363.
Schaff, 281, 320, 334. 344.
Schism, threatened at Nazianzusand
healed by Gregory, 192 ; as
seen in Constantinople, 197.
Schools of philosophy, etc., 236.
Scripture, its silence, 324, 327.
See, suffragan, 266.
Seleucia, Council at, Arian,

192,

269, 275.
Self-examination,

for amendment

and forgiveness, 253, 254.
Scmi-Arian party, 192, 197 ; allied
with Macedonians, 197 ; their
terms for covering heresy, 275.

Severity, unchurchlike, 359.
Sextus Empiricus, sceptical teacher,

272.

Simonians, Gnostic sect, 379.
Sin, confessed for removal, 209 ;
the destruction of the soul, 268 ;
actual and potential, 351, 425.

Sinlessness is divine alone, 252.
Siricius, Bishop of Rome, 368.
history,
Socrates,

192,

234, 272,

Solitary life, its benefit to S. Basil,

284, 330.

191, 192, 206.

240.

Son in relation to Trinity, 193, 212,
301 sq., 343, 349 ; the Only
Begotten, 212, 301 sq., 316;
how named in Scripture, 307,
Incarnate, 301 sq.,
349; as
309 sq., 349; subject to the
Father, 311; the second Adam,
309, 349 ; His obedience, 311 ;
Logos, Ratio, Sermo, Verbum,
316 ; in relation to the Father,
306, 343Sophocles, 318.
Sophronius, Cappadocian Prefect of
Constantinople, 464 ; letters to,
464, 467, 477.

spirit,

Soul, its quality as from God and
united to the body, 208 ; of
great value, 210 ; responsibility
of guiding, 208 sq., 221 ; dif
ferent from
at
death has sense of happiness,
236 ; may then have fuller
knowledge, 244, 245.

Souls, the direction of, the art of
arts, 208 ; laid bare for cure,
208, 209 ; one soul
in two
bodies, 402.

Sozomen, 234.
Spiritual pride and worldliness, 221.
State of life no barrier to godliness,

356 ;

Statues in church, 267.
Stoics, their teaching, 288.
Studies of Basil and Gregory, 192,
231 ; ancient course of, 231.

Suicer, 206, 426.
Suidas, 344, 349, 426.
Sun as an image of God, 300.
Supreme Being, God, 213.
Swainson, 350.
Swete, 301, 356.
Sycamore culture, 384.
Symmachus, 384.
Synesius, 425.
Synods, the age of, under Constan-

tius, 192.

Table, the venerable, 257 ; the pro
fane or unholy, 257 ; the holy.
261, 413 ; table of God for the
offerings to God, 412 ; holy
table a place of sanctuary, 413.

Taming of animals, 214.
Tantalus, the Greek myth of, 368.
Teacher must be pure, 207 sq., 214 ;

not self-appointed, 2 1 5.

Teaching religious truth by degrees,
215 ; not by the unfit, 215.

Temple, man a living, 241.
Terms used once and disused, 210.
Ter-sanctus, 347, 351.
Thekla, virgin
275.

saint of

Seleucia,

Theocritus, 205.
Theodore, Bishop of Mopsuestia,

Theodore, Bishop of Tyana, 192,
474 ; native of Arianzus, 471 ;
friend of Gregory Nazianzen,
192,471, 473, 474.

Theodoret, 234. 272, 329, 345.
Theodosius. Catholic emperor, 196;
deprived the Arians, 198; sum

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

moned the Second Ecumenical
Council, 284 ; made Gregory
archbishop, 378 ; restored the
churches to the orthodox, 389 ;
was for peace, 466 ; by edict,
A.D.
all
384-385, withdrew
clerics from the civil courts, 470.
Theology, various meanings of the
word, 326 ; necessary study,
212 ; depraved by Atheism,
Judaism, Polytheism, 212.
Theophany, name for Epiphany,
344 ;
to Christmas,
344, 345 ; also to Christ's bap
tism, 351 ;
oration on, when
delivered, 344.

applied

its

radical meaning,

Thcos (fleos).
316.

Theosebia, sister of Gregory Nyssus,
461 ; letter of condolence on
her death, 461, 462.
Thomas Aquinas, 290, 308,

347. 405Tillcmonl, 215.
Tischendorf, 323.
Touto-ousion, 280.
Trees, the two in Eden, 348, 354,

322,

Truth,

Christian, taught by de

425.

grees, 215.

Unbegotten One, the, 212, 272, 273,
304, 305. 316, 325, 391.

Uninitiated, the, 206.
Unity, in the Godhead, 193, 212,
270, 322, 323 ; in doctrine and
office, 271.

University life pictured, 190, 400,

Virgins, outraged at Alexandria by

Vitalius

or

the Arians, 329.
Vitalis,

Apollinarian
Bishop of Antioch, 443 ; de
ceived Damasus at Rome, vis
ited Nazianzus, was convicted
by Paulinus, 443.

402.
Unmarried, a

married, 240.

higher state

than

Valens, Emperor, an Arian,

195,
197, 387, 405, 460 ; oppressed
the Catholics,
197, 387, 410,
460, 462 ; divided Cappadocia,
195, 245, 410 ; ordered eighty
priests to be murdered, 330,
410 ; had a form of Christian
ity, 387, 410 ; opposed and other
Catholics, 410 sq. ; was awed
by Basil
412 ;
favoured Csesarius, 458 ; abol
ished the military tax, 466 ; his
dates, 233.

in Church,

Valentinus, Egyptian heretic, 320,

Vanity of hitman life and its con

333. 379ditions, 235, 236.

Ventriloquists, 214.
Vertanus, citizen of Nazianzus, 480 ;

Virginity, compared with marriage,
341, 349, 365 ;
favoured by
Basil, 415 ; honoured even in
baptism, 365, 394.

241.

Wealth, the best, is good example,

Wine and water mixed, 214.
Witnesses, the passage in 1 John v.,

7, 8, discussed, 323.

Wizards, 214.
Woman, not always a help-meet,

257.

'

Word of God, 355 ; the name re

vered, 337, 355.

Wordsworth, 310.
Worlds, visible and invisible, 212 ;
when created, 212, 345, 347 ;
created by God, 290, 303, 347 ;
filled with created life, 296 sq.;
adapted by divine wisdom, 347,
a
395 *!•
Wrongs done and punished, 253,

218.

Zechariah denounces the priests,

Zeus in Greek mythology, 353.
Zeuxippus, an uncertain allusion to,

33»-
,
Zonaras, 420.

Tyana, capital of Cappadocia Se-

letters to, 481.

cunda, 187, 195.

Ullman, 192, 193, 239, 281, 356,

357. 437-

*

S. GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

INDEX OF TEXTS.

Gen. i. 2 .
i. 16 .
i. 26 .
i. 27 .
.
ii. 7

.
.
.
.
.

PAGE
.
.
.
. 209, 250
229, 419

.

.

.

.

.
.

•
.
.

•
•
.
■
.
•
•

.
210, 317, 348, 360
.
210, 317
34°
4-32
294, 419
47l
275, 418

.
ii. 8 .
.
ii. 16.
.
ii. 18.
.
iii. 3 .
.
iii. 5 .
iii. 0 .
.
iii. 6-23 .
.
iii. 15
iii. 19
. '
iii. 24
iv. 24
iv. 26
.
v. 21 .
.
v. 22 .
.
v. 24 .
.
vi. 8 .
.
vi. 13
.
viii. 11
.
viii. 21
.
xi. 4 .
.
xi. 7 .
.
xii. I .
.
xii. 6 .
.
xiii. 12
.
xiv. 14
.
xv. 16
.
xviii. 2
xviii. 5
.
xviii. 10 .
xviii. 18 .
xix. 1
xix. 15 sq.
.
xix. 17
xix. 17, 23
xix. 24 .

.
•
■
.
.
•
•
•
.
•
•
.
•
.

•
•
•
•
■
■
■

.
.

.
.

XIX. 20 .
xxi. 19
.
xxii.
xxii. 8
xxii. II
xxiv. 3
xxvii. 21 sq
xxvii. 28
xxviii. 2 .
xxviii. 12
xxxi. 19 .
xxxii. 28
xxxvii. 28
xii. 1 sq.
xii. 29 sq.

.
•
.
•
•
■

373. 4i8
43°
387. 472
4"7

•
•
•
■
■

•
•

Gen. xii. 39 .
xii. 40
.
xlix. 22 .

ii. 12 .
ii. 15 .

iii. 2 .

iii. s .

.
.

•

•

iii. 14
iv. 10
iv. 10, 13, 27 .
iv. 27
v. 6
.
vii. 1 .
vii. 8 sq.
vii. 19
vii. 22
ix. 10
x. 21 .

.
.

.

.

.

Lev. iii. 4

Ex. xxi. 2
xxiv. 1
.
xxiv. I, 2
xxiv. 8 .
>
xxiv. 15, 18
xxv. 32, 37
xxv. 40 .
xxvi. 33 .
xxix. 4
.
xxx. 33, 38
xxxi. 2
xxxi. 3
xxxii. 1 1 .
xxxii. 15 .
xxxii. 20 .
xxxii. 26
xxxiii. 19
xxxiii. 20, 23 .
xxxni. 23
xxxiv. 1 .
xxxiv. 30
xxxvii. 7
xxxviii. 28

PACE
361, 441
43°
255. 441
43°
364, 37°
36'
292 345
397. 43°
259 Num. i. 3
xi. 29
xii. 3
xii. 7
407. 431
xvii. 8, 10
xx. 17
.
xxi. 9
.
xxi. 22
.
xxiv. 7
.
xxxv. 7
Deut. iv. 24 .
v. 27
.
vi. 7
.
xxiii. 3
xxvii. 5
.
xxviii. 39
xxxii. 5
.
xxxii. 15

PAGE
. 223, 230
47 1
33°
354- 36'
223, 245
• 255,441
43'
47«
26a
3l6> 383

vi. 16 sq.
vii. 14, 32
.
vii. 34
viii. 2
viii. 31
.
viii. 33 .
x. 1
.
.
XL 44, 45
xii. 40 .
xiv. 8
.
xvi. 34 .
xxi. 17
.
xxii. 19 .
xxiv. 1 LX)
xxvi. 27, 28

•

.

PAGE

-
.
.
.
.
.
•
.
.

Deut. xxxii. 21 .
.
xxxii. 25
.
xxxii. 34
.
xxxii. 49
.
•
■
.
.

Josh. i. 2

iii. 15, 16
iii. 10
.
v. 14
vi. 4 sq. .
vi. 2o
vi. 23
vii. 21
x. 12
x. 13
xiv. 6
xviii. 1
.
xxiv. 12 .

,

.

.

.

.

'.
•
•
•
•
•
•
.
.
•
•
.
-
.
.
■
.
.

;
•
•
•
•
•
' «I
.
Jud. vii. 5
.
xiii. 6
xiii. 22 .
-
•
xiii. 23
.
.
xvi. 19 .
•
1 Sam. i. 10 .
.
.
i. 20 .
is- S
•
-
3°°
.
•
11. 6 sq. .
.
.
ii. 8 .
.
ii. 11 .
.
ii. 12, 15, 23 .
.
.
ii. 19
.
.
ii. 30
vi. 1
■
■
.
.
vii. 5
.
.
ix. 3 .
.
.
ix. 9 .
.
.
X. II
.
.
X. 22
.
.
xv. 26
3'4
•
xv. 28
•
■
xvi. 7
■
.
xvi. 13
.
.
.
xvi. 16
.
xvi. 23 .
.
.
xvii. 14 .
.
•
xvii. 32 .
3°5
•
xvii. 49 .
■ 222, 376
•
xviii. 7
.
•
.
.
xix. 20
2of)
.
.
xix. 24
.
.
xxiii. 23
•
•
2 Sam. i. 21 .
.
.
.
.
v. 1
•
•
vi. 6 .
.
■
•
vi. 14
.
.
xii. 16
.
xv. 5
t- 273
•
2ip
.
.
I Kings iii. 12

.
.

.
.

.

.
xii. 11
.
xii. 15
.
xii. 22
.
xii. 29
xii. 37
.
xiii. 20 .
xiii. 21
.
xiv. 15
xiv. 20 .
xiv. 21
.
xiv. 22 .
xiv. 28 .
xv. 20
xvi. 2 sq.
xvi. 4
xvi. 13
.
xvi. 14 .
xvi. 15
.
xvi. 18 .
xvii. 6

xvii. 10, II
xvii. 11 .
xvii. 12 .
xix. 10, 15
.
xix. 13
.
xix. 14
xix. 16
.
xix. 16-18
xix. 24
xx. 19
XX. 21

259. 264, 431
43 1
2 58
3'8, 376
3°7

Ps.

3&>
3^
*54

.

1 Kings iv. 29
viii. 6
x. 1
xi. 14
«• 33
xii. 2
xvii. 4
xvii. 6
xvii. 8 sq.
xvii. 14
xvii. 21
xviii. 33
xviii. 42
xviii. 44
xix. I z
.
xix. 11, 12
xix. 18
2 Kings i. I
ii. 11

.

J3. IS
ii. 13, 1
25 LXX
iv.
xvii. 21
xviii. 33
xx. 1 sq.
.
XXV. II
1 Chron. xi. 4
2 Chron. xxxiii
•

Job i. 3

.

383. 420
37°
3*9
*ll
3«7
*74
*74
3'o
274, 287
287, 430

*3 •
xxxvi. 32
xxxviii. 12
.
.
i. 21 .
.
ii. 7 sq. .
iii. 8 .
.
111. 9 .
iv. 7 .
iv. 8 .
v. 19
v. 26
ix. 9 .
ix. 23 LXX
ix. 24
xii. 14
xvi. 2
xvii. 16
xix. 6
xx. 8
xxi. 18
xxvi. 10 LXX
xxviii. 14
xxix. 2
.
xxix. 15 .
xxxi. 32 .
xxxiii. 4 .
xxxvii. 9, 10
xxxviii. 1
xxxviii. 3
xxxviii. 4
xxxviii. 31
xxxviii. 36 LXX

•

*97
■
■ 2n
■
•
.
210, 302
3'2

•
•

■
.

•

xxxix. 16
xl. 3 LXX.
xl. 20
xliii. 3
.
Ps. i. 2
ii. 1
.
ii. 8 .
ii. 12
iv. 3 .
v. 10 .

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

228,

*99l

220,

.

.

.
.

.
.
.

vi. 5 LXX.
vi. 6 .
viii. 1
viii. 3
viii. 5
ix. 6 .
ix. 18
x. 7
.
xi. 6 .
xii. I .
xii. 7
xiii. 3
xiv. 3
xvi. 6
xviii. 8 .
xviii. 9 .
xviii. 11 .
xviii. 12 .
xviii. 32 .
xviii. 33 .
xviii. 39 .
xviii. 40
xix. 1
xix. I, 3
xix. 4 LXX.
xix. 5
xix. 0
xix. 10
xx. 7 .
xxii. I
xxii. II
xxiii. 2

204,
.
xxiii. 5
xxiv. 3
.
xxiv. 7, 10
xxvi. 4 LXX.
xxvi. 7 LXX.
xxvii. 4
xxix. 9
xxxi. 6
xxxi. 16
xxxii. I
xxxii. 6
xxxiii. 6

xxxiii. 19
xxxiv. I .
xxxiv. 5 .
xxxiv. 8 .
xxxiv. 16
xxxvi.
xxxvi. 6 .
xxxvi. 7 .
xxxvi. 9 .

220,

238,

318,

337.

308,

224.

xxxvii. 4
xxxvii. 7
xxxvii. 27
xxxviii. 5
xxxviii. 9
xxxix. 4, 5
.
xl. 2 .
•
xl.3.
xl. 9 .
.
xii. 2
xlii. 4
xlii. 8
xliii. 1
xliv. 19 LXX
xliv. 20 .
xlv. 2

.
.
.

Ps.

3p289
*37
«93
43°
4'7
4>7
3"

3«7
35"

3«
25a

37*
a37
23Z

334.

247.

xlv. 4
xlv. 6
xlv. 7
xlv. 14
xlvii. 1
1. 14 .
1. 21 .
1. 23 .
U. 5 •
Ii. 8 .
Ii. 10
li. 12
lii. 2 .
Iii. 4 .
liii. 5
Iv. 6 LXX.
Iv. 7 .
Iv. 9 .
Iv. 17
lvii. 4
lvii. 9
lviii. 4
Iviii. 4,
lviii. 5,

LXX.
•
•
6 LXX.

lix. 3
lx. 2, 3
lxi. 10
Ixiii. 1
lxiii. 8 LXX
lxiv. 32 .
lxv. 2
lxv. 9
.
lxvi. 6
lxvi. 7
.
lxvi. 12 .
lxvii. 6 .
lxviii. 4 .
lxviii. 9 .
lxviii. n
lxviii. 35
lxix. 2
lxxii. 6 .
lxxii. 6, 7
lxxiii. 2 .
lxxiii. 9 .
lxxiii. 20 .
lxxiii. 23,
lxxv. 8 .
lxxv. 9 .
lxxv. 10 .
lxxvi. 4 .
lxxvii. 20
Ixxviii. 15,
Ixxviii. 24
Ixxviii. 25
Ixxviii. 50
Ixxviii. 70
Ixxix. 4 .
lxxix. 6, 13
lxxix. 12 .
Ixxx. 8 Sq.
lxxx. 9 .
Ixxx. 12 .
Ixxxi. 10
Ixxxi. 11
lxxxii. 1 .
lxxxii. 8 .
lxxxiii. 13
lxxxiv. 5
Ixxxiv. 6
lxxxiv. 7

222,

249>

Ps.

34«
*47
35«
3Z4383
3Z4
3*5

3»4
a»3
43«
a53
aS4
37a
25«

3"

.

.

.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

43°
3'3
249. 276
47 1
221, 343
227, 404
3°7
1, 372
31°
220, 374
223, 245

lxxxv. 8 .
Ixxxv. 13
lxxxvii. 7 LXX
.
xc. 10
xci. 5
xci. 14
.
xcii. 13 .
.
xciii. I
xciv
.
.
xciv. 17 .
xcv. 2 LXX.
.
xcv. 3
.
xcv. 5
XCV. II
.
xcvi. I, II .
xcvii. 11
xcix. 6
ci.
.
ci. 6 .
ciii. 15
civ. 2
civ. 3
civ. 4
civ. 4, 5 LXX
.
civ. 6
.
civ. 15
.
civ. 30
.
cv. 15
.
cv. 18
cv. 32
.
cvi- 23. 3°
<=vi. 30, 31
.
cvi. 39
cvii. 9
.
cvii. 32 .
cvii. 40 .
ex. 1
.
ex. 3
ex. 3 LXX.
cxi. 7
cxi. 10
cxii. 5
cxii. 9
cxiii. 7
cxiv. 6
cxvii. 12
cxviii. 19
.
cxix. 6
cxix. 21 .
cxix. 60 LXX.
cxix. 81 .
cxix. 103
cxix. 105
cxix. 131
cxix. 164
cxx. 4
cxxiL 1
.
exxii. 2 .
exxv. 3 .
exxv. 4 .
exxvi. 5 .
exxvii. I
exxvii. 2
exxix. % LXX.
exxix. 6 sq. .
exxix. 7 .
exxxii. 1 LXX.

43°
242, 252

«4

.
.
.

.
.
.

.
•
.

.
.

.
•
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.

.

.

exxxii. 4
.
exxxii. 13, 14 .
.
exxxii. 15
.
exxxiii. 2

.
.

262, 420

Ps.

,
.

.
cxxxvi. 12
cxxxvii. 6
.
cxxxviii, 9 .
cxxxix. 6
cxxxix. 7, 8
cxxxix. 7-15
cxxxix. 8 sq.
.
cxxxix. n l.XX.

r.\<;E
38*

.

■

.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.

cxxxix. 16 .
cxl. 3 ... 221
.
cxli. 3
.
*45
cxli. 4 .
.
cxli. 4 LXX. .
cxli. 5
.
.
3'9
cxli. 10 LXX.
*ZS
cxlii.
.
cxliii. 5 .
cxliii. 8 .
37.4
cxliii. 10
cxliv. 1
.
cxliv. 2 .
47*
cxlv. 19 .
cxlv. 21 .
44a
cxlvi. 8 LXX.'
.300,333
cx vii. 4.
cxlvu. 6 .
3»7
cxlvii. 8 .
cxlviii. 4.
.
cxlix. 6 .
.
Prov. i. 7 sq.
.
.
L 11 .
.
.
i. 16 .
•
•
!.': 3 •
.
.
111. 12
.
.
iii. 24
i». 28
.
.
.
•
'v. 7 •
>v- *5... 374
.
.
iv. 27
.
•
v. 17 ■
34o
.
•
vi. 9 ■
vi. 23
.
.
307, 3'°
viii. 22 .
.
viii. 25
.
ix. I .
•
ix. 5 •
.
.
.
x. 1
x. 7 LXX. .
.
.
xi. 18
.
.
xi. 26
xiii. 9
.
.
xiv. 30 .
xiv. 30 LXX. .
xv. 7 LXX.
.
xvi. 3t
xviii. 3 LXX. .
xviii. 17 .
.
xix. 17
.
XX. 10
xxii. 20 LXX.
xxv. 3
.
XXV. 12 .
xxv. 16 .
xxvi. 12 .
xxvii. 1 .
xxix. 20 .
xxx. 15
.
xxx. 29, 30, 31
xxx. 33 .
.
xxxi. 7, 10 .
.
xxxi. 10 .

248. 255
33o
254, 261
34^

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.

.

.

INDEX OF TEXTS.

.

.

.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
•
.
.
.

Isa. i. 3

PACE
.
Eccles. i. 14 .
.
.
i. 18 .
.
.
.
iii.
"5. 275. 286 4J 7
.
iii. 1 sq.
.
v. 9 .
.
vu. 23
vii. 24
.
ix. 11 ... 342
x. 5 ... .
x. 16 ... 220
260, 379
.
xi. 2 .
xi. 28
.
.
.
xii. 8 ... 236
.
xii. 13
.
xii. 14
37*
Song of Sol. i. 3
v. 16 .
.
xi. 15
.
.
.
35'
i. S LXX. .
*53
203 253
i. 6
.
27'. 276
i. 9
•
i. 10 .
i. 12 .
i. 14 ■
.
i. 17, 18
.
i. 22 .
.
.
j. 23 .... 217
.
.
iii. 7 .
.
.
iii. 12
.
iii. 34
.
.
v. 2 sq.
253, 429
.
v. 8
.
.
v. 10 .
259, 295
vi. I sq. .
vi. 3 .
.
vi. 6 .
vi. 6, 7 .
vi. 8 .
.
vi. 10 ... 223
vii. 23
viii. 14 .
214, 321
vin. 19
.
.
Vlll. 21
ix. 1
.
.
ix. 6 (l)is)
ix. 13
.
ix. 15 ... 217
ix. 16
.
.
x. 3 ... .
x. 22 .
.
.
x. 22, 23. LXX.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.
.
.
.

xi. 1-3 .. .
xi. 2 .
379, 383
•
Mil. 3
.
.
xiii. 14
.
.
xvi. 3
.
xix. 11
.
.
XX. 12 ... 244
xxi. 2
.
.
xxi. 2 LXX. .
.
.
xxi. 6
xxiii. 4 .
.
xxiv. 2
.
xxiv. 18 .
xxvi. 6 LXX. .
xxvi. 11 LXX. 249

.
.

.

PACK
Isa. xxvi. 13 LXX. 386

,
xxvi. 18 .
.
xxvi. 20 .
xxviii. 1 LXX.

.
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

xxviii. 11
xxviii. 16
xxviii. 17 LXX. 248
xxviii. 19 LXX. 364
.
xxviii. 25
2SS
xxix. 9
.
xxix. 10 .
xxix. 21 .
3S7
.
xxx. 17
.
xxxii. 20
.
xxxvii. 31 LXX.

xxxviii. 8
217 249
xl. 2 .
xl. 3 .
xl. 9 .
xl. 12 ... 220
xl. 18, 25
307 325
xii. 4 .
.
xiii. 1 ... 310
xiii. 8
.
xiii. 14 .
xliii. 10 .
.
xliv. 2
3IO
xiv. 3 ... 224
xlvii. 14 LXX.
xlviii. 4 .
xlviii. 16
3IQ
xlviii. 29
3IQ
xlix. 3 sq.
xlix. 6
.
xlix. 18 .
1. 4
1. 6 ... .
.
1. 11 .
.
li. 17 LXX.
Hi. 5 ...... 222
386, 430
.
hi. 7 .
In. 13
.
liii. 2 ... 308
liii. 4
390, 428
.
liii. 7 LXX. .

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.

.
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

227. 3°9, 442
.
.
liii. II
3'°
.
.
liii. 12
.
.
liii. 23
.
.
liv. 2 .
.
.
liv. 8 .
.
.
liv. 13
.
.
lv. 1
.
.
Ivii. 13
.
.
lvii. 14
.
.
lviii. 5
lvni. 7
.
Win. 9 LXX. .
•
.
Ix. 4 -
.
.
lxi. 1 .
.
.
lxli. 3
lxii. 4
.
.
lxii. 4 LXX. .
lxii. 6
.
.
lxii. 10 (bis)
.
lxiii. 1
.
lxiii. 10 .
.
lxiii. 14 .
.
lxiii. 16 .
.
lxiii. 19 .

37°
254, 407
3?3

.
.
.
.
.

•
.
.
.

.

.

.

.

•
.

.
•
•
•

.
.
.
.
.
.

•
.
.
.
.
•
•
.
.

•
.
.
.
.
.
■
.
.

PAGE
Isa. Ixiv. 4
29O
.
lxiv. 5
lxiv. 12 sq. •
•
lxv. 2
lxv. 8
■
lxv. 9
• - 3f8
220, 388
lxvi. 1
Ixvi. s
Jer. i. 5
•
203, 227
.
i. 6
i. 10 .
i. 11 .
i. 18 .
ii. 8 .
ii. 10
ii. 21
iii. 9 .
iii. 14
iii. 15
iv. 3 .
288, 3SS
iv. 19
285, 374
iv. 22
2SI
iv. 24
•
v. 3
•
.
v. 7 .
v. 8 .
.
vi. 29 ..
viii. 5
.
ix. 1
.
.
x. 16 .
222, 323
219, 276, 287
x. 21
.
xii. i .
•
.
xii. 10
.
.
xiii. 23 .
.
xv. 10
xviii. 12 LXX. 250
xxii. 14 .
xxiii. 24 .

■
.
.
•
.
.
.
.

•
.
.
•
.
.
.
.

•

.

.

.

.

.

■
•
•

■
.
.

Lam. i.

xxiii. 29 .
xxv. 34 .
.
xiii. 16
.
I.25.
•
1. 31 •
li. 34 .
.
1 .
iii. 19
iii. 28
iii. 34
iv. 7 .
Ezek. i. 4-28
iii. 18
iii. 20
vii. 26
xiii. 14 .
xiv. 5
xiv. 14-20
xviii. 31 .
xxi. 9
xxiii. 24 sq.
xxiii. 26 .
xxiii. 42 .
xxviii. 12
xxxi. II .
xxxiii. 2 .
xxxiii. 3 .
xxxiii. 8 .
xxxiv. 2 sq.
xxxiv. 6 .
xxxiv. 8 .
xxxiv. 12
xxxiv. 14

252 291, 388
.
.
•
•
204, 386

.
.
•
•

.
■
■
.
.

■
.
■

.
.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

PAGE

.

.

.

•
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

Ezek. xxxvii. 3 sq. .
xxxvii. 7, 10
xxxix. 17

Dan. iii. 5
iii. 12
v«3 ■
v. 12 .
vi. 22
vii. 9
ix. 5 .
ix. 9 .
ix. 18
ix. 23 LXX
x. 11 .
"iv. 33
Hos. iii. 4
iv. 6 .
iv. 9 .
iv. 13
V. I, 2
vi. 1, 2 .
.
vi. 4 .
.
vi. 5.
vi. 6 .
.
vii. 7
viii. 3
.
viii. 4 ..
vin. II LXX. .
ix. 10 LXX
x. 1
.
.
x. 12 LXX
xi. 1
.
xiii. 7, 8
xiii. 14 .
.
.

384, 420
3'4
37S
227. 3»9
»43
222 387
43 1
Joel i. 4 .
3«7
i. 10 .
i. 13 sq.
1. 19 •
11. 3 .
u. 5
.
ii. 14
ii. I5
222, 251
u. 17
ii. 23
2?4
ii. 28
3»3
iii. 18
37°
Amos ii. 7
iv. 7 .
iv. 9 .
iv. 13
.
3«3
v. 8 LXX. . 23». 387
v. 10
.
v. 26
vi. 4-6 .
vii. 14
.
viii. 5
viii. II
335- 408
.
ix. 6 .
Jonah i. 3 (bis) .
.
.
.
ii.
.
iii. 5 .
.
.
iii. 7-10 .
.
.
iii. 10
47'
.
.
iv. 8 .
.
Micah ii. 3
iii. 10-12
228, 368
.
v. 2
.
vi. 3 .
.
vii. 1 LXX.
vii. 1-4 .
.
vii. 6
Nahum i. 1, 2

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

•
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.

.
.
.

.
.

.

.

.

•
.

Nalium ii. 10
Hab. i. 2 sq.
•
i. S
i. 16 .
ii. 1
ii. IS
ii. 16
iii. 13

Hagg. i.
•
!;9
•
.
ii. 6 .
.
ii. 7 .
ii. 8 .
.
ii. 12 sq.
I !>q.
.

Zecli. iii.

iii. 9 .
iv. 7 .
v. 1 LXX.
v. 8 .
.
vii. II, 13
•
x. 3 •
.
xi. 2 .
.
xi. 3 .
xi. 5
.
xi. 5, 6 .
xi. 15
xiii. 7

.

.

•
.
■

.
•
.

.
.
'
.
•

•
•
.
-

.
.
•
•
•

•
.
.
.
.
■
.
•
•
.
.
.

tags
. 253 422, 473
.
.
■
33'. 43°
3S!
254, 388
218, 310
21S
274. 425
32°
215. 285
35'
3Si
339. 345

.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
•
.

■
•
.
•
•
■

•
.
•
■
.

•
■
•
.

.
.
.

.
.
.

■
■
•

.
.
.

.
.

.
•

■
•

•

•

.

.

.
.

.
.

1 sq.
Mai. i.
.
i. 6
.
■
i. 13 •
"■ 5. 7
•
11. 13
iii. 2, 3 .
.
iii. 6 .
.
iii. 8 .
iv. 2 .
Judith v. 6
Wisdom i. 2 .
.
i. 6
i. 7
.
ii. 24
iii. 7 .
iii. 15
iv. 8 .
v. 9 sq.
v. 10 sq.
vii. 26
ix. 15
Ecclus. i. 2
iii. 9
iii. 10
iii. II
xxv. 9
.
xxxii. 3 .
xxxviii. 16 .
xlix. 14 .
Baruch iii. 35, 3;
.
iii. 37
Susanna, verse 5
Bel, verse 33
2 Mace. vii. 1
.
Matt. ii. 9
ii. 9, 10 .
.
ii. 11
•
ii. 13
.
ii. 16
.
iii. 3 .
.
iii. 4 .
.
iii. S .
.
iii. 11
.
iii. 12
.
iii. 13

.

.
.

■
•
•

•
•
■

PAGE
Matt. iii. 13, 17 • 210, 351
210, 307
312, 374
219, 247
13». 4i6
45°
358, 374

iii. 14
iii. 17
iv. I - 1 1
iv. 2
iv. 6
v. 6 .
v. 13 •
v. 14 .
v. 15 .
v. 18 .
vi. 19
vi. 22
vi. 26
vii. 2
vii. 6

.
•
.
.
.

•
•
•

•
•
•

.
■

.
•

.

.

213, 221 289, 429

vii. 13
vii. 14
vii. 36
viii. 8
viii. 17 .

.

.
.
■

.
.
•

2§7

216, 359, 390
307. 3°9

.

.

.

.
.
.

■
.
.
•
•

vin. 24 .
viii. 32 .
ix' 6 .
ix. 13
ix. 14
ix. 20
ix. 25
x. 7, 8
x. 9 .
x. 23 •
*• 35
xi. 11
xi. 12
xi. 20
xi. 28
xi. 29
xii. 31
xii. 34
xii. 35
xii. 36
xii. 42
xiii. 5
xiii. 7
xiii. 21 .
xiii. 25 .
xiii. 31 .
xiii. 43 .
xiii. 46 .
xiv. 10
xiv. 19 .
xiv. 25, 30 .
xiv. 29 .
.
XV. 21
xv. 27
.
xvi. 1
xvi. 16, 17 .
xvii. 2
.
xvii. 24 .
xviii. 6 .
xviii. 12 .
xviii. 20 .
xviii. 21 .
xviii. 22 .
xviii. 23 sq.
xviii. 28 sq.
xix. 10 .
xix. 24 .
xix. 26 .

.
.
.

.
.

.

.
.
.

'
•

•
•
.

•
•

'
•
■

.
:

•
•
.

•
•
•
•
•
•

3°^
35'
243. 372
35'
35»
219, 420
357. 421
3°9. 368
3'3
3'4
3°9
3?2,
3°8
3°9
359. 379
340 1
3'3
3»3 1

.
•
■
•
•
•
.
.
•
•
■
■
.
•
•
•
.
.
■
.

•
.
■
•
•

Matt. .xx. 1 sq.
xx. 14
.
xx. 20 sq.
xxi. 10
.
xxii. 10 .
xxii. 13 .
xxii. 32 .
xxiii. 7 .
xxiii. 12 .
xxiii. 23 sq
xxiii. 25, 26
xxiii. 27
xxiv. 12 .
xxiv. 50 .
XXV. 2
.
XXV. 8
xxv. 15
.
xxv. 26 .
xxv. 33 .
xxv. 41 .
xxvi. 15 .
xxvi. 39 .
xxvi. 67 .
xxvii. 28
xxvii. 34
xxvii. 35
xxvii. 51
xxviii. 19
xxviii. 20
Mark ii. 15, 16
ii. 19
iii. 17
iii. 29
iv. 3, 14
iv. 38
v. 3 •
v. 13
vi. s .
vii. 5 .
vii. 32
.
ix. 44 sq.
.
x. 21 .
xiii. 32
.
xiv. 51
XV. 21
Luke i. 17
i. 23 .
'• 33 ■
'• 35 •
i. 41 .

.
•
■
.

.
.

.
■

.

t8: :
.
i. 76 .
.
i. 78.
.
ii. i-s
.
ii. 7
.
.
ii. 9 .
ii. 14 .
.
ii. 14, 15
.
ii. 41 .
.
ii. 52 .

iii. 9, 29
iii. 22
iii. 23
iii. 34

.
.

iv. 1, 18

iv. 23
.
iv. 29, 30
.
v. 8 .

■

.

.
.

.

PACK
3«
3-424S

$
3«4
35»
35'
35'
3"
2<>2
3*7
37^
3 '3
37^
307. 315
43'
43?
13^
3»
308, 33'
35'
3*5«
210, 4?3
35'
308, 420
307, 408
3S0
3*7
3*8
295. 354

INDEX OF TEXTS.

.

.
.

.
.

.
.

*

.
.
.
.

'215

Luke v. 29
vi. 6 .
vi. 12
vi. 16
vi. 44
vii. 26
vii. 38
viii. 6
viii. 14 .
viii. 28-33
viii. 31
viii. 44
'X. 32, 34
ix. 54
ix. 60
x. 18.
x. 19 .
x. 30 sq.
xi. 3 .
xi. 24
xii. 18
xii. 46
xii. 42
xii. 44
xii. 47
xn. 49
xiii. 7
xiii. 8
xiii. 10 sq.
xiii. 11
xiv. 16
.
xiv. 16 sq.
xiv. 28 .
XV. 2 .
.
xv. 4, 5 .
xv. 4 sq.
xv. 8, 9 .
xv. 8, 10
xv. 9 .
xvi. 9
xvi. 19 sq.
xvi. 24 .
xvii. 12 .
xviii. 1 sq.
xviii. 13 .
xviii. 14 .
xviii. 19 .
xix. 1 sq.
xix. 3
xix. 9
xix. 35
.
xxi. 20-24
xxii. 44 .
xxii. 50 .
xxiii. 9 .
xxiii. 42 .
xxiii. 43 .
xxiii. 52 .
xxiv. 32 .
xxiv. 51 .

PACE !
35°
3°7
»73
, 220
34«
43°
3°9
373 410
3'5
373. 429
35». 362
43°
35»
3'4
43 1
47 1
35'
3°9. 432
307, 337. 338
32t
.
•
•
269, 352. 36'
.
35 2, 361
3l8>
.
37'
.
3°7
.
382. 442
.
270, 3°9 1

John i.
i. 2
.
i- 3
•
i. 4
•
i. 5
•
1. 8
.
•
>• 9
i. 11 .
i. 12 .
i. 14 .
i. 18 .
i. 23 .

"

•
•

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.
l-li .
.
.
.

John i. 27 .
ii.
ii. 15 .
ii. 25 .
iii. 3 .
iii. 4 .
iii. 8 .
iii. 13
iii. 18
iii. 24
iii. 29
iii. 34
m. 39
iv. 7 .
iv. 24
iv. 34
v. I sq.
v. 14 .
v. 17 .
v. 19 .
v. 19, 30
V. 22 .
v. 23 sq.
v. 29 (bis)
■
v- 35 •

.
.
.

.

.

.

I'AGB

3°9. 365
278. 35«
352 384
3'3
3*°
43S
250, 440
27a
37°
32 J
3°7
3"3
3'2, 3'3

.

.

■
.

270. 357. 420, 432
VI. 10
vi. 27
3°7. 374
334, 362
vi- 33
vi. 38
3>3
vi. 40
vi. 45
vi. 57
3«3
vii. 7
3»3
vii. 12
3°7
vii. 17
vii. 37
viii. 12
viii. 48 .
3°9. 433
viii. 54 .
.
viii. 59
.
.
ix. 5
3°7
.
x. 1
.
255, 349. 432
x. II .
x. 14 .
.
347. 424 :
.
X. Ig .
.
x. 18 .
3°7. 409
.
x. 30 .
.
x. 36 .
3°7
xi. 34
309. 37». 444
xi. 43
xi. 47 sq-
.
xii. 35
.
xii. 48
xii. 49
.
3'5
xiii. 4, 5 .
xiii. 9
357 j
xiv. 6
3°7
xiv. 9
3'6
xiv. 16
307. 3S4
xiv. 16, 17
xiv. 23
.
xiv. 24 .
xiv. 28
.
xiv. 30 .
xiv. 31
.
3°7
xv.
3»3
xv. 26
xvi. 7
xvi. 8
296, 326
xvi. 12
xvi. 14, 15

.

•
.

.

.

John xvi. 15 .
xvi. 26
xvi. 33
xvii. 2
xvii. 3
•
xix. 1
•
.
xix. 17
xix. 19
•
xix. 22
■
xix. 29
■
.
xix. 39
•
xx. 3 .
.
.
xx. 3, 4 .
•
xx. II sq.
•
xx. 17
.
•
xx. 17, 28 •
.
xx. 25
•
xx. 28
.
•
xxi. 15 sq.
•
.
xxi. 17
•
.
.
xxi. 25
.
.
Acts i. 18 .
.
.
ii. 3
■
.
11. 4
.
.
ii. 6 .
ii. 36 .
.
iii. 21
iv. 8
v. 3 sq.
v. 15
VI. 2 .
vii. 14
■
v'i- 43
.
vii. 58
.
vii. 59
viii. 36 .
.
ix. 3 .
ix.3-8
.
ix. 25
x. 9 .
xiii. 2
xiii. 41
xvi. 3
xvii. 21 .
xvii. 28 .
xx. 35
.
xxi. 26 .

•
•
•
.
.
.
.

.
•
•
.

.
.
■

.

.

•

■

.

.

.

Rom. i. 3
i. 6
i. 20, 25
1. 22-31 .
■
i. 23 •
.
i. 27 .
.
i. 28 .
ii. 24
ii. 25, 29
iv. 17
iv. 18
v- 3
•
v. 20 .
vi. 4 .
vi. 13
vii. 23
viii. 11
.
viii. 26 .
viii. 29 .
.
ix. 3 .
ix. II
ix. 16
ix. 17
ix. 27
ix. 28

■
.
.
.

.

•

■
•

■
.
■

.
-
•
.

•
•
.
•
•
•
•
■
•
•
•
•
■
•
•
•
.
.
•

IAGE
3«3
233. 408
3'2, 442
3°9
327. 393
3°7. 3TM
3!°
277. 421
262, 332
259, 361
3!7. 386
37°
34°
39f
382, 388
••
.
•
3°2
.
.
.
•
315. 321
248, 285

•
.
•
■
■
•
•
•
•
.
.

•
■
•
•
.
.
.

.
.
.
•
.
•

•

•
.
•
•
•
•
•
■
•
.
.

•
.
•
.
.
.
•

.
.
.
•
.
■

.

.

PACK
275, 394

Rom. ix. 33 .
.
x. 2
.
.
.
x. 15 .
.
.
x. 18 .
.
.
xi. 4 .
.
.
xi. 16
.
.
xi. 23
.
.
xi. 33
225, 292, 427
.
.
xi. 35
xi. 36 ...

.
.
.
.
.
.

.

237. 338. 35°

Xll. 1 ...

223, 254, 375

.

.

xiii. 1-3 .
xiii. 13
346, 374
.
xiv. 2 ... 214
.
xiv. 3, 6

.

.
.
.
.
.
.

.
xv. 16, 19
.
.
xv. 19
.
1 Cor. i. 17 .
34S
.
.
>• 23 .
.
.
i. 24 .
i. 27 .
.
.
ii. 6 . 214, 248, 355
216, 374
ii. 7 .
.
237, 290
.
ii. 9 .
ii. 10 ...

.
.

221, 290, 382, 417
.
.
224, 443
216, 224

ii. 11 .
ii. 13 .
ii. 16 .
.
ii. 17 .
iii. 1,2. .
iii. 2 .

.
.
.
.

.
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.
.
.

.
.
.

i». 7 • ••• 354
iii. 9 .
207, 229
iii. 12
iii. 12-19
iii. 13-15
.
iii. 18
210, 255
.
iv. 1
.
216, 222
iv. 9 .
.
216, 332
iv. 12
216, 229, 248
iv. 15
216, 272
iv. 21
v. 5
v. 8 .... 203
v. 17 ... 345
.
.
vi. 1, 7 .
.
.
.
vi. 19
vii. 3, 8, 25, 31 .
vii. 40 ... 443
viii. 2
3S2
viii. 3 ... 235
338, 388
.
viii. 6
ix. 3 .
.
.
ix. 7 ... -
.
IX. 18
.
394, 417
.
ix. 22
ix. 27
.
x. 2 .... 358
.
x. 10 .
.
x. 33 .
. .205
xii. 12
xii. 20
xii. 23
xii. 29
237, 339
xiii. 7

.
.
.
.
.
.
.

..
.

.
.
.

.
.

.

.

.

.

49«

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

I Cor. xiii. 9
xiii. 12

294,

384,

xiv. 2
xiv. 8
xiv. 15
xiv. 19
xiv. 22

xiv. 24
xiv. 28
xv. 9 .
XV. 10
xv. 19
XV. 22
xv. 28
xv- 35
xv. 41
xv. 45
xv. 47
xv. 49

\

210.

xv. 52
xv- ss
2 Cor. ii. 7
ii. 8 .
ii. II
ii. 16, 17
iii. 1, 6
Hi. 3 .
iii. 6, 7
iii. 10
iii. 18
iv. 10
iv. 18
v. I, 6
v. 4 .
v. 16 .
v. 17 .
v. 20 .
V. 21 .
vi. 1
.
vi. 2 .
vi. 6 .
vi. 10
vi. 16
vii. 6
viii. 6
viii. 9

ix. 22
x. S
■
xi. 6 .
xi. 16
xi. 17
xi. 23
xi. 2
xi. 2!
xii. 2

23 sq.
28, 29

217, 289,

xii. 7
xii. 9, 10
xii. 13

•

■

29S
216, 246,
295, 424
»47
3*1
»47
386, 407
206, 274
394 i
237. 3°7 I
3«° :
3» 1
438, 440 1

237. 443
43'
3S9
36a
38a
»3
»37
3*5
247. 423. ;
3°9 I
210 I
224.
3S9

237- 415
216, 295
2l6
2l6

295. 338
394> 422

.
•

216,

Gal.

2 Cor. xii. 17
xiii. 3
xiii. 4
i. 10 .
ii. 2 (bis^
ii. 7
.
II. 8, 9
ii. 9 .
iii. IO, I
iii. 13

.

Epli.

iii. 24
iii. 27
iii. 28
iv. 26
v. 10
v. 12
v. 16
V. 22
vi. 14
vii. 7-17
i. 17
'■ 23
ii. 8 .
ii. 10
ii. 14
ii. 22
iii. I
iii. 13
iii. 17
iv. 11
iv. 13
iv. 14
iv. 15
iv. 16
iv. 22 sq
iv. 24
iv. 26
v. 6 .
v. 14
v. 22 sq.
v. 22, 25
v. 27
v. 32
vi. 1-4
vi- 5. 9
VI. II
vi. 12
vi. 16
Phil. i. 11
i. 23 .

216, 237,

209, 2.

ii. 4
ii. 7

ii. 8 .
ii.9
.
ii. 15
ii. 15,
ii. 16
ii. 17
III. 3
iii. 4

343. 375
332. 335

311, 442
37'
312 j
205, 224 1
354 ;
205, 374
«47
364. 43°
208, 222
3S4
243. 421

307. 444
3°7
3'°. 3i5
asi

Phil. iii. 8
iii. 14
iii. 21
iv. I
iv. 7
Col. i. 5
i. 11
i. 18
i. 20
ii. II
ii. 12
ii. 19 .
iii. 3 .
iii. 5 ■
iii. 10
iii. 11
iv. 18
1 Thess. ii. 19
iv. 16
v. 18
v. 19
2 Thess. iii. 5
1 Tim. i. 17 (bis)

.
ii. S
It. 7
.
ii. 8 .
iii. 2, 3
iii. 2 sq
iii. 16
v. 21
vi. 10
vi. 15
vi. 16
vi. 19
vi. 20

220.

2 Tim. i. II
i. 14
''• 3
»• 5
ii. 16
iii. 8
iv. 2
iv- 3
iv. 7 .
.

Tit. i. 7

ii. 14
iii. 4 .
Heb. i. 3 .
ii. 4 .
ii. 14
ii. 18
iv. 12
iv. 14
iv. 15
.
v. 2
v. 7
.
v. 7 sq.
v. 8
.
v. 9 sq.
v. 12 .
v. 12-14
v. 14 .

222, 248

Heb. vii. 3
vii. 10
vii. 13
vii. 23
vii. 25
vii. 27
viii. 2
ix. 3. 24
ix. 7 .
ix. 10
ix. 14
ix. 19
x. 1
x. 4 .
x. 20 .
x. 31 •
x. 38 .

^
»37
3*4
3'5
»47
3S2
3r4* 36'
, 395
216, 259
3f9382
3°7

o 372
428, 444
3«5
307. 3"
348, 381
214, 215

•

xi. 38
xii. 2
xii. 15
xii. 18
xii. 22, 2
xii. 23
xii. 26
xii. 27
xii. 29
xiii. 4
xiii. 8
xiii. 15
xiii. 20
James ii. 17
ii. 19
ii. 25
iv. 6 .
iv. 8 .
v. 16, 17

1 Pet. i. 7
i. 19 .
■

246,

ii. 9
ii. 21
iii. 4
iii. 19
iv. 19
v. 2
v- 4
v. 6
v. 8

i. 17 sq.
iii. 10
I John i. 7
ii.
.
v. 7, 8

Jude 14
Rev. i. 7 .
.
i. 8
.
ii.
ii. 5
.
ii. 7 .
xix. 14

209, 246 j 2 Pet. i. 4

.

.

•
.

3«5
223, 271
43»
33°. 386
209, 246
239, 431
276, 325
236, 276
3S7
3°9
389, 409
•13a31
227, 249
228, 310
3'2
43»
3»5
3S9
43»
no

