 Rev. D.Th. Dorin Octavian Picioruş 

 The Sight of God 
 in the Theology of 
 Saint Symeon the New 

 Theologian 

Theology for Today 
Bucharest 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Rev. D.Th. Dorin Octavian Picioruş 

 The Sight of God 

in the Theology of 

 Saint Symeon the New 
 Theologian 

 (Doctoral Thesis) 

The translation from romanian 
in english belongs to the author. 

Theology for Today 
Bucharest 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Dedicated, 

with all the love 
and 
gratitude, 

 to Felicitous Ilie the seer of God, 

my ghostual Father, 
the highest mystic of the twentieth 

century. 

The man who lived days on end in 
the glory of God and confessed to me 
about his ecstatic sights. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Introduction 

The present thesis is an anttempt of 
synthetic presentation of the steadfast 
character and, in the same time, dynamic 
of experience and of orthodox thinking. 
Any ghostual reality and theological 
subject must rethought, reactualised in 
the dimension of present, for as to be an 
active factor of dynamization of our 
personal life and communautaire. 

But the theological actualization 
does not presuppose and the dilution of 
the Church's teaching, but its perception 
at real parameters of orthodox experi- 
ence. For the ghostual experience is the 
foundation of the theological elaborations 
and the one keeps us in Church, as men 
with living faith and lucid, attentive at 
the changes of the world in which we 
live. 

Being sustained in the frame of the 
discipline Orthodox Dogmatic Theology, 
at the section Systematics, our theme will 
be debated into a regime of research 
proper to the afferent discipline. 

The theme of the sight of God will be 
presented as component part of personal 
soteriology, intending to put in evidence, 
into a systematic mode and concise, the 
contribution of Saint Symeon the New 
Theologian in this question. 

We consider that the experience and 
the theology elaborated by the one who is 

 
 
 

surnamed the third theologian of the 
Church are a norm and a unlying guide in 
our demarche. 

The choosing of theme came from a 
profound interior need, from the desire to 
deepen the coordinates of the symeonian 
theology too little debated at academic 
level. 

The knowledge of the experience 
and of the theology of Saint Symeon 
seems to us an immense avail for the 
theologians and our believers, as long as 
we confront, in direct mode, with the 
depersonalized consequences of secula- 
rization and of mondialization. 

As shield of protection in the face of 
the eroding of conscience of ecclesial 
appurtenance and of the understanding 
of person and of interpersonal relations, 
Saint Symeon proposes us a theology of 
experience, in which God descends to 
man, showing him His glory, for as to 
raise on man at the level of Trinity, to 
open him to the trinitarian communion. 
And this, for that Symeon sees on 
man as having his center of gravity in God 
and does not in he himself. 

The closure in himself of the man, 
into a subjectivist perspective, cannot 
present a mystical experience, a personal 
experience with God, but for Symeon the 
true relation with God means 
the 
communion of man with God, in and 
through His glory, as ecstatic sight. 

 

Enrolling in the personalist lode of 
the Fathers of the Orthodox Church, 
Saint Symeon the New Theologian keeps 
at a place the interpersonal character and 
objective of our relation with God. 

Therefore, for him, the orthodox 
believer experiences the uncreated grace 
and eternal of God, without to close in 
himself and without to tear of the 
community of Church. And the sight of 
God is not an escape from time and nor 
can we to force the being as it to produce, 
but is lift of ours, by God, through His 
glory, for to fill us of the brightnesses of 
His glory, and for that this thing makes 
us to become fervent believers in the 
frame of the life of Church. 

The fundamental consequence of 
God's sight is a life full of dynamism, of 
dedication in the service of Church, a 
continuous search to sanctify us the life, 
ie so many positive attributes for the life 
of Church and of society in which we 
unfold the existence. 

Therefore, the choosing of the 
theme of face, we consider it a gain of 
everyone, an ecclesial gain, because the 
symeonian theology 
is a continuous 
recourse at experience, equilibrium and 
fidelity towards the Tradition of the 
Church. 

Our work will be composed from 
three distinct chapters but which have 
interior links between them. 

 

The first chapter will treat the 
problem of the biblical and patristic 
premises of man's deification and of the 
sight of God in the orthodox theology. 

We will seek to present the fact that 
the seen world has a rational foundation 
and ghostual, for that is the personal 
creation of the divine Logos through 
Whom all things are made [pa,nta di' 
Auvtou/ evge,neto, Jn. 1, 3, acc. GNT]. 

The rational and ghostual foun- 
dation of the world must seen in relation 
with the existence of God's uncreated 
energies, which penetrate and sustain all, 
both the unseen existences but and on 
the seen. 

For that the man can impart of grace 
in Church and 
the grace of God 
penetrates, in real mode, the being of the 
man, therefore we can speak, in the same 
the sight of God and 
time, about 
deification, both having internal link. 

The second chapter will treat the 
theme of the sight of God at Saint Symeon 
the New Theologian and its implications 
in the personal salvation and it will be the 
chapter of force of our thesis. 

 In the frame of this chapter, after 
an introduction in the ecstatic termino- 
logy of Saint Symeon, we will present the 
racordations of the experience of God's 
sight with the triadology, the christology, 
the pnevmatology, the ecclesiology, the 
sanctology and the eschatology. Step by 
step we will show how advised and how 

 

is 

included Symeon 

in the 
organic 
teaching and the experience of the 
Church, for that his own experience 
affirms and does not infirm the theology 
of the Fathers. 

As servant of the Holy Liturgy and 
of the Mysteries of the Church, as starets 
of monastery, as writer and theologian, as 
confessor of the orthodox faith and as 
man persecuted on unjust 
for the 
deepness of his theology and of his love 
for Church's Tradition and for the Saints 
of God, Saint Symeon proves, through 
deeds and words, that he is the fulfiller of 
his proper theology. Therefore he has 
remained as an authentic landmark of life, 
experience and theology for our Church. 
The third chapter will have righ the 
thematic theme the receptation of the 
theology of glory in the orthodox space 
and of the importance of its assuming in 
the postmodern world. 

Here we will debate the theology of 
the sight of God at the Father Professor 
Dumitru Stăniloae, beloved and our 
venerable theologian, considered, on 
right word, the greatest theologian of the 
twentieth century, alongside the theology 
of glory at Professor Vladimir Lossky, 
which was received very warmly 
in 
Occident for his patristic reactualizations 
in the domain of the mystical theology. 
The last sequence of our work will 
in 
vise 
postmodernity and will be a succinct 

the condition of 

the man 

 

debate on the mode in which can salve an 
orthodox believer, of diverse ideological 
traps, through the experience and the 
theology of the Church. 

We give thanks to Father Professor 
Dumitru Popescu, our coordinating, for 
the special attention on which he has 
granted us and for the real support and 
the vision of ensemble on which he 
offered us. 

Alongside of his Holiness and of his 
effective support, decisive in the systema- 
tization of the theological informations, 
we could elaborate this thesis, which we 
hope to be of avail to those who will 
consult it. 

 
 
 
 

1. The Biblical and Patristic 
Premises of the Deification of the 
Man and of the Sight of God in the 
Orthodox Theology 

For to understand into a clear mode, 
without dubieties, the theology of the 
sight of God at Saint Symeon the New 
Theologian, we believe that we must 
begin with a synthetic presentation of the 
premises of the deification of the man. 

Because the sight of God appears in 
the divine-human process of deification 
as a direct consequence and real of it. 

In the frame of the uninterrupted 
strivings of to cleanse us from passions, 
the sight of God is a gift of God, a descent 
of God to us for to raise us at the 
impartation of His divine life. 

The premises of the deification and of 
the sight of God on which we will debate 
are the following: 

1. The person of the divine Logos as 
Creator and Pantocrator of the entire 
creation. 

2. The 

rational and ghostual 
foundation of the seen world, which 
makes it to be „open towards God"1. 

1 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Popescu, Christ, 
Church, Society [Hristos, Biserică, Societate], Pub. 
IBMBOR, Bucharest, 1998, p. 124. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3. The uncreated divine energies, 
which spring from the being of God and 
which are „of the being-making and 
deifying works"2 of the man. 

2 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, The 
Orthodox Dogmatic Theology [Teologia Dogmatică 
Ortodoxă], ed. II, vol. 1, Pub. IBMBOR, Bucharest, 1996, 
p. 113. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

1. 1. The Person of the Divine 
Logos and His Relation with the 
Creation and with the Man 

The first verse of Scripture testifies 
the frame that „in beginning made 
[evpoi,hsen] God the heaven and the earth" 
[Gen. 1, 1, acc. LXX], in consequence, that 
the world has a beginning, it is not 
eternal, but its beginning stands in the 
will of God of to make/ of to create the 
world unseen and seen. 

For that God has created the world, 
this cannot be confused with Him and 
nor is a part of Him3, but it was made by 
God ouvk evx [from nothing], according to II 
Maccab. 7, 28. 

But the expression „from nothing" 
does not want to say that the nothing 
would be a particular substance from 
which God would be molded the world 
but that before as the entire existence to 
be created by God, it did not exist in fact. 
Thus, the world being made by God 
from nothing and in time4, the creation 
proves, in fundamental mode, dependent 
of God, for that He is the cause of its 
existence and the One which keeps it in 
existence. 

3 Rev. Prof. Acad. D.Th. Dumitru Popescu, Iisus 
Hristos Pantocrator [Jesus Christ Pantocrator], Pub. 
IBMBOR, Bucharest, 2005, p. 142. 

4 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, The 
Orthodox Dogmatic Theology [Teologia Dogmatică 
Ortodoxă], second edition, vol. 1, ed. cit., p. 226. 

 
 
 
 

The world is theonomy, dependent 
of God and not autonomous, independent 
towards Him. Of fact, „the world cannot 
become autonomous, because it has no 
conscience and nor liberty for to break its 
internal link with God"5. 

We understand in what consists the 
internal link of creation with God, if we 
understand, in correct mode, Gen. 1, 2. 

The expression: „and the Ghost of 
God bring upon water" [kai. Pneu/ma Qeou/ 
evpefe,reto evpa,nw tou/ u[datoj] 
the 
testimony of uncombatable of „the 
presence of 
in 
creation"6. 

the Ghost of God 

is 

For the orthodox exegesis, this 
presence of the Ghost of God in creation is 
translated through the fact, that the 
foundation world is an active one, is the 
light of God and that the uncreated 
energies are the internal link between 
God and His creation. 

The creation of the man by God 
after the face/ image/ icon of God [kat' 
eivko,na Qeou/, Gen. 1, 27] and the breath of 
life [pnoh.n zwh/j], breathed over his face 
by God, these show on man as living soul 
[yuch.n zw/san] [Gen. 2, 7] in his relation 
with Him. 

God creates on man as living soul, ie 
He creates on man with a real possibility 

5 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Popescu, The Man 
Without Roots [Omul fără rădăcini], coll. Alpha and 
Omega [Alfa şi Omega], Pub. Nemira, Bucharest, 2001, 
p. 59. 

6 Ibidem. 

 
 

of to open to his Creator, the men being, 
after the expression of Father Professor 
Dumitru Stăniloae, „souls clothed in 
bodies"7. 

But God „made on man not only as 
reason, but as reason clothed with flesh"8, 
the body of the man being „a palpable 
rationality, concrete, special, in link with 
the palpable rationality, concrete of 
nature. 

ceases once with 

He represents the most complex 
system of plasticized rationality...[But, 
while] the body, as the plasticized 
rationality, 
the 
death...the soul, of which presence gives 
to palpable rationality of the matter the 
quality of body proper-said, 
is a 
subjective rationality, conscious, excee- 
ding all rationality and the passive 
sensibility of nature"9. 

Hence we deduce that the man is 
the one who personalizes the matter into 
himself, which understands the differen- 
ce between himself and the creation, 
which does not understand its internal 
rationality. He assumes his condition of 
being with body, which lives in the world 
and, in the same time, he assumes the 

7 Dumitru Stăniloae, Jesus Christ: the Light of the 
World and the Deifying of the Man [Iisus Hristos: 
lumina lumii şi îndumnezeitorul omului], edition tended 
by Monica Dumitrescu, Pub. Anastasia, Bucharest, 
1993, p. 5. 

8 Idem, p. 7. 
9 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, The 
Orthodox Dogmatic Theology [Teologia Dogmatică 
Ortodoxă], ed. II, vol. 1, ed. cit., p. 258. 

 
 

understanding of the world, which does 
not have conscience of self and of its 
conscience is he himself. 

The relation of the man with God 
implies the assuming of the life in body 
but and the asssuming and his care 
towards the entire creation. 

But, through sin, says the Father 
Professor Dumitru Popescu, „the man 
failed to give expression to his vocation, 
received from part of the Creator, of to 
transform the heaven and the earth in 
Paradise, and to raise he himself with the 
entire creation towards the immortality 
of the Aker, but he had fallen in the 
corruption of world, knowing a process of 
involution, which approached him of the 
beings inferior to him. [...] 

falling of 

Of course, 

the 
the 
ancestors does not destroyed the face of 
God from man, because Adam continued 
to speak with God and after his falling in 
sin. But the face of God from man was 
the man 
altered progressive, until 
reached to confuse, 
in pantheistical 
mode, the Creator with the creation and 
to worship to the creature in the place of 
the Creator"10. 

The oldtestamentary Revelation 
speaks to us about God, about the Lord 
God, about the Lord or about the Ghost of 
God11. But only once what the Logos of 

10 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Popescu, The Man 

Without Roots [Omul fără rădăcini], op. cit., p. 69-70. 

11 Acc. LXX, the name of God appears of 1795 
times in 1583 verses, the syntagma the Lord God appears 

 
 

God incarnates, we find that God is 
Trinity of persons. 

In the epiphanies of the Baptism 
[Mt. 3, 13-17, Mk. 1, 9-11, Lk. 3, 21-22] and 
of the Transfiguration of the Lord [Mt. 17, 
1-8, Mk. 9, 2-8, Lk. 9, 28-36], we see that 
the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost 
are the three persons of the Godhead and 
that They are our God. 

Our God is from eternity Trinity, but 
only the incarnated Son makes known to 
the men the Trinity, that God is Trinity of 
persons, because „Three are Those who 
confess in heaven: the Father, the Word 
and the Holy Ghost and these Three are 
one" [I Jn. 5, 7, acc. GOC]. 

If Gen. 1, 1 speaks to us about God as 
about the Creator of the world, then Jn. 1, 
1-3 reveals to us the report between the 
Father and the Son or between God and 
His Logos in the frame of the creation of 
the world and of the man: 

„In beginning was the Word, and 
the Word was towards God, and God was 
the Word. This was in beginning towards 
God. All through This were made and 
nothing from what was made was not 
made without Him", acc. GNT. 

But connexing Jn. 1, 1-3 with the 
place from Gen. 1, 2, we observe that the 
Father makes the entire creation through 
the Son, but into the Ghost of God. 

of 566 times in 534 verses, the word the Lord of 3663 
times in 3298 verses and the sintagma the Ghost of God 
of 15 times in 15 distinct verses. 

 
 

Therefore, the Tradition of the 
Orthodox Church will talk about the 
Logos of God, about the Son, that about 
the Creator of the world and as about the 
Pantocrator of the entire creation12. 

From 

lexical point of 

view, 
Pantokra,twr has the significance of the 
All-Ruler or of the Almighty13. But in the 
life and the orthodox theology, the greek 
word Pantocrator was understood as 
being an equivalent of the All-Sustainer, 
designating through this thing, that the 
Logos „is the One from Which come all, 
in Which are held all and in Which will 
show contained and lighted all, the 
Pantocrator, the Sustainer of all"14. 

If 

the prime signification was 
pretaken in the heterodox theology and 
the Pantocrator was understood as 
remaining „closed into an inaccessible 
transcendence"15, the Pantocrator, in the 
orthodox tradition, as the All-Sustainer, 
was seen as the One what „fills with His 
presence both the Church but and the 
universe"16 in its integrality. 

12 The name Pantocrator in the LXX, accorded 

the Lord God, appears of 126 times in 121 verses. 

13 Acc. A Patristic Greek Lexicon, edited by G. W. 
H. Lampe, Pub. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1961, 
p. 1005. 

14 Rev. Prof. Acad. D.Th. Dumitru Popescu, Jesus 
Christ Pantocrator [Iisus Hristos Pantocrator], Pub. 
IBMBOR, Bucharest, 2005, p. 193-194. 

15 Dumitru Popescu, Orthodoxy and Contempora- 
[Ortodoxie şi contemporaneitate], Pub. 

neousness 
Diogene, Bucharest, 1996, p. 196. 

16 Ibidem. 

 
 

The link of the Logos with His 
creation consists in that, that „exists...an 
inexhaustible common sense of the 
things, a sense which links them, a sense 
of indefinite wealth towards which the 
sense 
forward. Their unique 
man 
supreme is the divine Logos. In Him are 
the meanings of all. 

Only This explains on all, only in 
Him the man finds the proper sense of 
his existence. Especially one who believes 
seizes this supreme sense through a 
general act of intuition, through his 
spirit"17. 

The creation, being the work of the 
Logos of God, full of His energetic 
footprint, of His glory and of the 
rationality planted by Him in things, for 
to be understood we must resort at 
Revelation and at the personal relation 
with Him. As long as the senses of the 
things lead us at the creator Logos and 
our life finds the explanation only in 
is a transparent 
Him, the creation 
medium for His understanding. If the 
created things send us, through their 
senses, at the Creator of the world, then 
the creation is not and cannot be a closed 
environment in itself. 

Saint Irenaeus of Lyon speaks, in the 
second christian century, about the 
creator Logos as being identical with the 

17 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, The 
Orthodox Dogmatic Theology [Teologia Dogmatică 
Ortodoxă], second edition, vol. 1, ed. cit., p. 239. 

 
 

savior Logos of the world: „For that the 
Maker of all things, the Word of God, 
Which gave face from beginning the man, 
when the work of His hands has 
weakened through malice, This gave 
healing in many ways. And He has 
appointed a time in which to separate the 
members, which He made them and 
again another time when to restore the 
whole man in full mode, making himself, 
through Himself, perfect through His 
resurrection"18. 

Precisely because we are His 
creation, the Logos was incarnate and 
became man like us, except sin, for that 
to restore us into Himself and to perfect 
us through His resurrection, through 
which He has deified our nature. 

The same Father of the Church 
accentuates the fact that we are created 
by the Logos of God for that „He is the 
One through Which were founded all 
things, Which chose to make them, 
Which has beautified on all and Which 
keeps all. And when I speak of all things, 
I refer at ourselves and at our world. [...] 
For not the Angels made us, nor give 
us these the form on which we have, nor 
made us after the face of God any 
heavenly Power, namely any [heavenly] 
Power very distant from the Father of all 
things. 

18 Irenaeus, Against Heresies V, 12, 6, in coll. The 
Ante-Nicene Fathers. The Writings of the Fathers down 
to A.D. 325, edited by Rev. Alexander Roberts and 
James Donaldson, volume 1, Oregon, 1996, p. 1114. 

 
 

No one else made us, but only the 
Word of God. For that God does not need 
of these beings, for that to create the 
things which He Himself has established 
them, more beforehand, as to be made. 

This would happen if He would not 
have His hands [ie on the Son and on the 
Ghost - our note]. But always are with 
Him the Word and the Wisdom, the Son 
and the Ghost, through Which and into 
Which, in free mode and immediately He 
made all the things about which He said, 
saying: Let Us make man after the face 
and Our likeness [Gen. 1, 26]. 

For He took from He Himself the 
matter of the created beings and the 
model of things which He made and the 
beauty of each thing in part of the 
world"19. 

In consensus with the Scripture, is 
observed that Saint Irenaeus speaks of 
the creation of the world as about a work 
done by the Father through the Son into 
the Holy Ghost. 

The creation is witnessed as a direct 
work of God and not as a work through 
the intermediation of heavenly Powers, 
which are not uncreated beings but 
created by Him. 

In 

the 

fourth 

century, Saint 
Athanasius the Great, in Kata. `Ellh,nwn 
[About Greeks], also spoke about the 
Creator of the world as being the Logos of 
God: 

19 Idem, IV, 20, 1, p. 1006-1007. 

 
 

„And if the world was made through 
word and wisdom and knowledge, and all 
was adorned, is necessary then as He who 
leads and adornes it not to be other than 
the One is the Word of God"20. 

And for to be perfectly understood 
by his readers, Saint Athanasius comes 
and makes clarifications about who is this 
the Word of God: 

„I speak about the Word of Himself 
[Auvtolo,gon], living and work of God, of 
the One who is good and God. This is 
another than those created and than all 
creation. For He is of Him and He is the 
only Word of the good Father, Which 
lights all through His 
adorned and 
demeanor of care [pronoi,a|]. 

Being the good Word of the good 
Father, This adorned all with ordeliness 
[th.n dia,taxin], uniting those who are 
some against others [contrary] and 
through this [working] the ornament of a 
unique harmony"21. 

In the same apologetic work, Saint 
Athanasius the Great continues to speak 
to us about the Pantocrator of all 
creation, about the divine Logos, saying 
the following magisterial things: 

20 Athanasius Theologus, Kata. `Ellh,nwn, 40, acc. 
TLG # 001 40. 19 - 001 40. 23/ Saint Athanasius the 
Great, Word Against the Greeks [Cuvânt împotriva 
elinilor], 
in coll. PSB [Fathers and Ecclesiastical 
Writers], vol. 15, with greek translation, introduction 
and notes by Rev. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, Ed. 
IBMBOR, Bucharest, 1987, p. 75-76. 

21 Idem, acc. TLG [Thesaurus Linguae Graecae] # 

001 40. 29 - # 001 40. 38/ Idem, p. 76-77. 

 
 

„For the Same Word almighty and 
all-perfect saint of the Father, dwelling 
and expanding His powers in all and 
everywhere and luminating on all the 
ones shown and on all the ones unseen, 
keeps them in Himself and gathers them, 
not leaving nothing empty of His power, 
but [being] through all and in all and in 
each in part, giving life to all and 
guarding them on each in part22. [...] 
[Because] the Wisdom of God, 
carrying the entire [universe] as on a lyre, 
and gathering the ones from air with the 
ones from earth and the ones from 
heavens with the ones from air and 
uniting thus the entire with the parts and 
leading them on all with the command 
and His will, constitutes a single universe 
and a unique ordeliness, beautiful and 
harmonious of it, He being unmoved 
through the power of the Father, but 
moving them on all the ones created by 
Himself, for each are of Him, through the 
will of the Father"23. 

From the words of Saint Athanasius 
is observed that the divine Logos, as the 
One who created all things and the 
existent beings, do not leave them of self, 
autonomous, but He enlightens them and 
He supports them on all through His 
grace, uniting on all with Himself and 

22 Idem, acc. TLG # 001 42. 1 - # 001 42. 7/ Idem, 

p. 79. 

23 Idem, acc. TLG # 001 42. 26 - # 001 42. 34/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

bringing them on all at the unity with 
Himself. 

His presence in world through His 
grace draws the world at Himself, as One 
who exceeds all and is outside of all after 
His being, together with the Father and 
with the Holy Ghost. 

Saint Maximus the Confessor will 
speak about the divine Logos in the terms 
of Church's Tradition, seeing in Himself 
the entire 
the supreme Reason of 
existence. 

In Quaestiones ad Thalassium 
[Answers to Thalassius], Saint Maximus 
sees the fulfillment of all existence in the 
divine Logos, as One who has into 
Himself all the senses/ the reasons of the 
world. 

into 
Says this: Christ „showed 
Himself the end, the one for which have 
received the ones created the distinct 
beginning of their existence. 

Because for Christ or, better said, for 
the mystery of Christ [Cristo.n musth,rion] 
have received existence all centuries and 
that are happening within the 
all 
centuries, for He is the beginning and 
their end"24. 

24 Maximus Confessor Theologus, Quaestiones 
ad Thalassium, 60, acc. TLG # 001 60. 46 - # 001 60. 51/ 
Saint Maximus the Confessor, About Various Heavy 
Places from Divine Scripture or Answers to Thalassius 
[Despre diverse locuri grele din Dumnezeiasca Scriptură 
sau Răspunsuri către Talasie], 60, în coll. FR [Romanian 
Philokalia], vol. 3, second edition, with translation, 
introduction and notes by Rev. Prof. Acad. D.Th. 

 
 

As creator and savior Logos of the 
world, Christ God is the One which gives 
stability into Himself those who grow in 
Him through virtues. 

This thing tells us Saint Maximus in 
the same chapter cited anterior, when 
talking about the role of the revelation of 
humanity of the mystery of Christ: 

„This, for as all the ones which move 
after nature to stand from the cause of 
nature of the One unmoved, through 
their move towards self and of the one to 
the other. 

And so [each] to take the experience 
of knowledge from work, through the 
One into Which he was worthy to stay in 
unchangeable mode"25. 

In the expression of Father Professor 
Dumitru Popescu, Saint Maximus the 
Confessor showed „that this rational 
order of creation is based on the divine 
ideas of all the things seen and unseen, 
which arise from Logos and return in 
Him as into a unifying center of theirs. 

The unity of creation is based on the 
existence of a single Creator, the Father 
through His Logos, Which is All-sustainer 
or Pantocrator. 

This is the principal motive for 
which on the highest vault of each 
orthodox dwelling guards the icon of 

Dumitru Stăniloae, Pub. Harisma [Charisma], Bucha- 
rest, 1994, p. 332. 

25 Idem, acc. TLG # 001 60. 56 - # 001 60. 60/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

Christ, the Pantocrator of the entire 
universe"26. 

In conclusion, the existence of the 
person of the creator and savior Logos of 
the world is the first premise of the 
deification of man and of the sight of God, 
for that the One which creates on man, 
He embodies and deifies His human 
nature taken from the Ever-Virgin Mary. 
He showed into Himself that the 
matter allows itself to be crossed by the 
glory of God, that there is no opposition 
between the sensible and intelligible in 
Christ27, but into Him we see „the glory of 
the Only-Begotten from the Father" [Jn. 1, 
14, acc. GNT]. 

26 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Popescu, Jesus Christ 
Pantocrator [Iisus Hristos Pantocrator], op. cit, p. 12-13. 

27 Idem, p. 13. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1. 2. The Rational and Ghostual 
Foundation of the Seen World and 
its Interior Relation with the Salva- 
tion of Man and the Transfigu- 
ration of Creation 

The second premise of our deifi- 
cation and of the sight of God has interior 
link with the prime, with the existence of 
the creator and savior Logos. 

For that the One which created the 
world is the Logos of the Father, from 
this motive the cosmos and the man are 
full of rationality, and both the man and 
the cosmos have their existence and the 
remaining in existence through the work 
and His grace. 

This thing is one very important in 
the orthodox theology, fundamental, for 
that „the rationality of creation in Christ 
exceeds the dilemma between man and 
creation, showing that Christ, as creator 
and savior Logos, has not come to save 
only the man, but the entire creation. 

The salvation brought by Christ has a 
cosmic dimension. Beginning from Pente- 
cost, the Church constitutes the mean 
through which Christ forwards with the 
man and the creation towards the heaven 
the God's 
and 
Kingdom"28. 

the new earth of 

The fact that all creation is destined 
to the transfiguration tells us Rom. 8, 19, 

28 Idem, p. 15-16. 

 
 
 
 

„For 

the creation awaits with 
21: 
eagerness the discovery of the sons of 
God. [...] For and the creation itself will 
deliver/ release of the bondage of corrup- 
tion into the liberty of glory of the sons of 
God" [acc. GNT and GOC]. 

With other words, when the Saints 
will be filled with glory and the creation, 
in its integrality, will be filled by the glory 
of God, for that through the body of 
Christ, on which deified it and with 
which He ascended at the right hand of 
the Father, comes to us all the brightness 
of God's glory. 

Speaking about the consequences of 
Christ's resurrection in the life of the man 
and of the existence of the cosmos, 
Father Professor Dumitru Stăniloae 
writes in his Dogmatics: 

„Through the resurrected body of 
the 
irradiates, untrammeled, 
Christ, 
power of the One who made this body 
incorruptible, leading on all those who 
will impart with Him at resurrection and 
incorruptibility, nay leading the entire 
incorruptibility and at 
creation at 
transparency, ie at the maximum transfi- 
guration and comunicability between 
persons through the Ghost and at a total 
personalization of the cosmos, in Christ 
and in men; for that exists an ontological 
continuity between the matter of the body 
and the matter of the cosmos"29. 

29 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, The 
Orthodox Dogmatic Theology [Teologia Dogmatică 

 
 

On the basis of this ontological link 
between our body and the materiality of 
future 
founded 
the cosmos 
transfiguration of creation. 

the 

is 

Rev. 21, 1 speaks to us about the 
sight of a „new heaven and new earth" 
[acc. GNT], ie about a heaven and an 
earth transfigured through the glory of 
God. 

Philip. 3, 21 says that the Lord „will 
change at appearance the body of our 
humiliation after the body of His glory, 
through the work of His power and He 
will subdue to Himself all" [acc. GNT]. 

Because the creator Logos has 
created our body and the matter is open 
to His eternal irradiation, therefore we 
can deify us. 

And for that through His grace we 
can cleanse us the soul and the body of 
passions, therefore we can see on God, if 
we will be „clean with the heart" [Mt. 5, 8, 
acc. GNT]. 

Discussing about what means for 
man and cosmos this transfiguration of 
the body, Father Professor Dumitru 
Stăniloae says: 

„The body will not cease [to exist], 
but it will be transparent, that we will see 
through it, unmediated, on God into 
glory, being total ghostualised, all and all 
will belong to all, beyond the division in 
subjective and objective, beyond the 

Ortodoxă], ed. a II-a, vol. 2, Pub. IBMBOR, Bucharest, 
1997, p. 119. 

 
 

reasons of nature, of the passional fight 
for to master the nature and on others, 
seen as exterior objects, of the fight of 
each for to defend of others. 

Single the resurrection opens us the 
perspective of escape the fatality of 
nature which leads at death, it opens a 
dignified plan of us and of our 
aspirations; and once with 
it, the 
perspective of a deeper sensibility and 
delicacy"30. 

Our deification and the sight of the 
glory of God are, of fact, the ones which 
give us our statute of ghostualised beings 
in eternity. Once with the resurrection of 
the dead and the transfiguration of all 
creation begins the mystic wedding of the 
Son of God with His creation. 

Speaking of this moment, Father 
Professor Dumitru Popescu writes in his 
Dogmatics: „the coming of Christ and the 
premaking of the world means a raising 
of it into a new state, transfigured by the 
Ghost, Which is in Christ. The Ghost will 
not work in hidden face in the world, but 
He will bring at sight the effect of His 
work. 

The entire creation becomes pnev- 
matic, incorruptible, deified, transparent 
through the light and the glory which 
arise from the being of the Trinity, as 
fullness of the uncreated energies. In its 
state of resurrection, the matter remains 
all matter, but matter fully transfigured. 

30 Idem, p. 120-121. 

 
 

The light of the resurrected body of 
Christ will 
fill the world and will 
overwhelm it. 

This premaking of the creation in 
Ghost will 
the world an 
unspeakable beauty. The luminous face 
of Christ will light on all and on all. 

confer 

The things will no longer appear as 
independent from the persons, but as 
medium of manifestation of the love of 
Christ and of the angelic and human 
persons, into a personalism of the perfect 
communion. 

The face of the new world will be 
the result of the event of supreme power 
of the universal Pentecost, and the 
brightness from the Tabor will extend 
over the entire world as generalized 
Tabor"31. 

Saint Maximus 

But the matter can be deified for 
that „is not amorphous uniformity but 
plasticized rationality, which can be 
transfigured by the power of the Ghost"32. 
the Confessor, 
speaking in Ambigua about the creation 
and the role of man, says that „the man 
was made by God, from His goodness, 
from soul and body, for that the rational 
and mental soul given him, being after 
the face of the One who made him, 
through desire and through his entire 
love, to tend with strength and from all 

 31 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Popescu, Jesus 
Christ Pantocrator [Iisus Hristos Pantocrator], op. cit, 
p. 419-420. 

32 Idem, p. 420. 

 
 

the power towards God and towards the 
knowledge of Him and to deify through 
likeness"33. 

The dynamism of the relation of 
faithfulness and love between man and 
God represents just the advancement of 
the man towards the likeness with his 
Creator. 

For that the human body is always 
personalized by its soul, through the 
grace of God, just therefore we can be 
„mystically guided, in unspeakable face 
and unknown, towards the power and the 
glory of God, by all creation uncontaina- 
ble"34. 

the 
But we can speak about 
salvation or the deification of man in 
Orthodoxy for that we do not separate, in 
this synergic work, on man from nature35. 
If we separate on man from cosmos, 
we can no longer explain how it occurs, 
in fact, the deification of man, which is a 
personal reality. 

For, said Father Professor Dumitru 
Stăniloae, „the entire nature is destined 
to the glory of which will impart the 
people in the Kingdom of Heavens and 
still from now it refeels of the quietness 

33 Saint Maximus the Confessor, Ambigua, with 
translation from greek, introduction and notes by Rev. 
Prof. Dumitru Stăniloae, Pub. IBMBOR, Bucharest, 
1983, p. 93. 

34 Idem, p. 158. 
35 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, The 
Orthodox Dogmatic Theology [Teologia Dogmatică 
Ortodoxă], second edition, vol. 1, ed. cit., p. 223. 

 
 

and of the light which irradiate from the 
holy man. 

The glory of Christ on Tabor has 
covered and the nature. But it can remain 
hidden for the eyes and the feeling of 
many and the nature can be demeaned 
and affected of the wickedness of some of 
the people. 

 At its row, the nature can be the 
environment through which the man 
who believes, receives the divine grace or 
the uncreated energies beneficial, but 
through which are 
and 
exercised over him influences, which 
push at evil"36. 

the place 

Thus, the cosmos is destined to be 
filled with the glory of God and, likewise, 
and the man is destined to be an 
irradiated environment by the glory of 
God and from which to irradiate, then, 
this. 

But the rationality of the cosmos 
and of human nature can be perverted, as 
long as we infest, with our passions, our 
proper nature and the environment in 
which we live. 

We can personalize the environ- 
ment in which we live through our 
ghostual irradiation, after how we can, all 
alike of easy, to vitiate it through our 
passions or to vitiate the relations on 
which we have with other neighbors of 
our. 

36 Idem, p. 224. 

 
 

and 

returns 

From here 

„our 
responsibility to the nature given by 
God...as a duty of to use the resources 
with sparing and does not alter through 
pollution. This thing protects us and it of 
passions and of the searching of an 
infinite satisfaction in world"37. 

Discussing the problem of the 
existent relations between the reasons of 
the things and the human reason, Father 
Professor Dumitru Stăniloae talks about 
the creation of the things as about 
„plasticisations and sensiblenesses of His 
reasons"38, of the divine Logos. 

The reporting of the man towards 
the reasons planted by God in things 
must be a gnosiological one, for that God 
„created on man with an adequate 
reason"39 for the knowledge of the world. 
Because he observes the fact that 
the things created by God have and 
rationality and elasticity40, therefore our 
theologian says: „All is rational in things 
and in the component energies, as and 
between them"41. 

However, the rationality of the world 
is not a reality closed in itself but „is for 
man and it culminates in man, [and] not 
the man is for the rationality of the 
world"42. 

37 Idem, p. 226. 
38 Idem, p. 240. 
39 Ibidem. 
40 Idem, p. 241. 
41 Ibidem. 
42 Ibidem. 

 
 

But the reasons of the things have, 
for Father Stăniloae, a double importance 
in the life of the man, bodily and ghostual 
in the same time, for that they are „of 
avail of the man 
for to maintain 
biological, but [they have]...and...the 
scope to enhance spiritual [on man] 
through the knowledge of the meanings 
and of the conformity increasingly higher 
of them with him and of the last sense of 
their, which is God"43. 

In their ghostual sense, the reasons 
of the things „are seen as mean of God's 
love, so of the dialogue of God with us 
and of the dialogue between us"44. 

Thus, in the perspective of the 
knowledge of God, the deification of man 
is the reality into which discovers us 
unsuspected of vast virtualities of the 
matter of our body but and of the 
spirituality of our soul. 

The sight of the glory of God is, on 
the one hand, a filling of us with the glory 
of God and, on the other hand, a raising 
of us at the communion with the Most 
Holy Trinity, at the experience of the 
divine life. 

in 

itself 

But there where the matter is seen 
„the 
closed 
transcendence of God with His absence 
from creation"45 and 
is 
understood as having an autonomous 

the man 

confused 

is 

43 Idem, p. 243-244. 
44 Idem, p. 244-245. 
45 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Popescu, The Man 

Without Roots [Omul fără rădăcini], op. cit., p. 15. 

 
 

existence, without „his roots thrusted 
deep in the transcendent reality of the 
Creator and in the immanent reality of 
the cosmos"46, in the same time. 

is possible 

But there where the man is seen as 
the 
dependent of God 
advancement in the communion with 
God, for that the man is created to fulfill 
in God and for that the souls of men and 
the matter are open to God's glory. 

In conclusion, if the matter does not 
have a rational and ghostual foundation, 
planted in it by the creator Logos, we can 
not talk about the deification of man, as 
relation always progressive 
the 
knowledge of God, but nor about the 
sight of God, as brightness of the divine 
light in our lives. 

in 

46 Ibidem. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1. 3. The Uncreated Divine 
Energies and Their Presence in the 
Synergistic Acts of the Deification 
and of the Sight of God 

The third premise of the deification 
of man and of the sight of God has and it 
interior 
link with the two anterior 
discussed. Only if our Creator is the 
divine Logos, and only if our body and the 
cosmos are rational and transparent 
environments, we can speak about the 
deification of man and the sight of God. 
The Scripture speaks about God as 
about the living God [Qeou/ zw/ntoj]47, ie 
about God, Which irradiates us with His 
glory. 

Is arhipresent 

in Scripture the 
indication of the existence of God's glory 
and of God's uncreated energy48. The 
living God manifests His eternal glory in 
the life of faithful people for to rise them 
at the communion with Himself. 

47 To see Deut. 4, 33; 5, 26; I Kings 17, 36; Hos. 2, 
1; III Maccab. 6, 28, acc. LXX and A. Ap. 14, 15, acc. 
GNT. 

48 The syntagma the glory of the Lord appears at 
Exod. 16, 7; Numb. 12, 8; Ps. 17, 31; Habak. 2, 14; Is. 26, 
10; 35, 2 etc., acc. LXX, but about the divine light it 
speaks in many modes. 

In fact, any revelation of the Scripture is made in 
ecstatic mode and is a revelation, in the light of God, of 
what God transmits to us. 

In GNT, we find referrings at the glory of God in 
Mt. 16, 27; 25, 31; Mk. 8, 38; 10, 37; Lk. 9, 26; Rom. 1, 23; 
4, 20; I Pet. 5, 10; Rev. 11, 13 etc. 

 
 
 
 
 

Speaking about of our relation with 
resurrected Christ and ascended at the 
right of the Father, Father Professor 
Dumitru Stăniloae writes: 

„The light of the Trinity, which is 
proper and the Son of God, it will show 
and through the body what He will take, 
through the words and His loving deeds, 
but it will show full in His body after 
resurrection. And from His body will 
spread in those who will believe in Him 
and will make deeds, like Him, in the 
earthly life, but fully in their body after 
their resurrection [from the dead]. 

If the body can be environment, 
through which spread wise words and are 
made good deeds, it's natural can be and 
a seen environment of the spiritual light, 
and from it to irradiate this light and in 
the universe with which is connected, 
although this apparation of spiritual light 
through matter is a great mystery"49. 

Is possible our irradiation by the 
glory of God for that the matter is open to 
the uncreated energies and eternal of 
God and through the sight of God's glory, 
we see on those around of God and not 
the being of God. 

Therefore, Father Professor Dumitru 
Popescu speaks about the distinction 
between the being and the works of God, 
wroting the following: 

49 Dumitru Stăniloae, Jesus Christ: the Light of 
the World and the Deifying of the Man [Iisus Hristos: 
lumina lumii şi îndumnezeitorul omului], op. cit., p. 201202. 

 
 

„The eastern theology considers... 
that God can be known after His works, 
but not in His being, thus that the 
uncreated energies, as expressions of 
God's work, come to protect the mystery 
which surrounds the being of God, ie to 
substantiate the trinitarian apophatism. 

All 

realized 

is not 

thus, 
that 

the eastern theology 
considers 
the 
the process of 
perfection of believers in Christ and 
through 
Church 
constrainable 
external means...but 
through the transfiguration of the entire 
human nature from interior, through the 
energy of the Holy Ghost, thus that the 
uncreated energies come to base the 
deification of man in Christ"50. 

But the sight of the divine light or of 
the uncreated energies does not mean a 
closing 
itself of the man for to 
contemplate His glory but an opening of 
us to the overwhelming greatness of God's 
life. 

in 

For that „the uncreated energies 
remain, in the same time, both exterior of 
the human nature, but and interior. They 
remain exterior, because they spring from 
God's being, and interior, because they 
have the role to deify the human nature. 
[But] the uncreated energy does not 
remain just exterior of the human nature, 
because it is not added entity from 

50 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Popescu, Christ, 
Church, Society [Hristos, Biserică, Societate], op. cit., p. 
101. 

 
 

exterior of the human nature, but divine 
power which penetrates in the human 
nature for to transfigure it in Christ"51. 
Polemizing with the false dogma of 
the created grace, Father Professor 
Dumitru Popescu shows here that the 
grace is not parallel with the man or does 
not embrace on man in exterior mode, 
but deifies him inside, for that the man 
which is depassioneting himself is an 
transparent environment of the glory of 
God. 

Therefore, in the process of our 
deification, „the human nature remains 
created nature, [but] it acquires through 
the uncreated energies some supernatural 
qualities which make as the process of 
deification of the human nature does not 
remain only a pious metaphor, but a true 
reality"52. 

Through 

the presence of 

the 
uncreated energies of God in our life, 
received in the Holy Mysteries, in the 
personal ascetic life and in the frame of 
the sight of God, we realize the endless 
advance in the near to God, in deification, 
which is a divine-human reality what is 
acquired in Church. 

If we deny the foundation of our link 
with God and namely the divine grace, we 
have only a hypothetical link with God. 
The real link with God is the personal 

51 Idem, p. 105. 
52 Ibidem. 

 
 

link with God through His glory of which 
we impart into a fervent ascetic life. 

Saint Gregory Palamas speaks about 
the distinction between the divine being 
and His energies and about our imparting 
of the eternal energies of God in the 
context of the Change at face of the Lord, 
saying: „the entire Church of God 
declared that the grace seen by the 
Apostles [in] unspeakable [mode] in 
Tabor is uncreated, as being divine light 
and unspeakable and brightness of the 
divine nature, but not nature, for this is 
above 
and 
impartation"53. 

any manifestation 

of 

We do not impart of the being of 
God in ecstatic mode but the glory of God, 
for „the soul sees on God in light, 
through body, through the intermedium 
of the body"54. 

Talking about what is happening in 
ecstasy with us, Saint Gregory Palamas 
writes the following: 

in 
„When see the Pious men 
themselves that divine light - and they 
see it when they are worthy of the 
deifying impartation of the Holy Ghost, 
when they are researched unspeakable by 
the perfecting rays - then they see itself 

53 Rev. Prof. Acad. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, The 
Life and the Teaching of Saint Gregory Palamas, with 
four treates translated [Viaţa şi învăţătura Sfântului 
Grigorie Palama, cu patru tratate traduse], second 
edition, with a preface reviewed by the author, Pub. 
Scripta, Bucharest, 1993, p. 265. 

54 Idem, p. 203. 

 
 

their deification garment, their mind 
being filled of glory and of brightness 
unsaid of beautiful what springs from the 
grace of the Word, so as the body of the 
Word was filled with glory on mountain 
through the divine light what flowed 
from His deity. 

For the glory on which His Father 
gave Him, and He gave it to those who 
obey Him, as says the word of Evangel; 
and He wanted as to be those with Him 
and they see His glory [Jn. 17, 22, 24]"55. 
Saint Gregory speaks about the 
filling of the glory of God of those which 
clean of passions and, in the same time, 
of the fact that the glory of the Son is 
identical with the glory of the Father and 
with of the Holy Ghost. 

But he specifies that Christ gives us 
His glory, to those who obey Him, filling 
us with His divine life and lifting us to 
the union with Himself through the 
Ghost and, through Himself, with the 
Father. 

Father Professor Dumitru Stăniloae 
tells us about the divine grace as about 
the divine power which comes to us from 
the transfigured humanity of Christ, 
saying the following: 

„Speaking of grace we must 
the 
emphasize both 
inexhaustible power what comes to us 
from the infinite deity dwelt in Christ's 
humanity, and the perspective of light 

its quality of 

55 Idem, p. 178. 

 
 

the 

infinity of 
in 
what opens us 
communion with the person of Christ or 
with the Holy Trinity, Which has opened 
to us in Christ, from love. 

The grace is the open window to the 
infinity of God as person, or as [and] the 
trinitarian communion of persons, once 
what God has put us through grace in 
relation with Himself"56. 

The relation with God, stresses our 
is done through His grace, 
author, 
through His uncreated energies and in 
relation with Him we impart of the 
infinity communion with Christ or with 
the Most Holy Trinity. 

 Also Father Professor Dumitru 
Stăniloae, in the discussion about the 
personal salvation, speaks to us about the 
creating of a unique link, deep personal 
between us and Christ through the sight 
of His divine glory: 

„The glory of Christ communicated 
to us, those who are in relation with Him, 
believing Him, is unending and do not 
scare us, but manifests a great intimacy 
toward us. Those who look at Christ and 
insist in communion with Him, become 
ever more righteous, more imprinted of 
the glory of Christ, of Christ Himself as 
model: <But we all, with the open face, 
reflecting as a mirror the glory of the 
Lord, prechange us towards the same 

56 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, The 
Orthodox Dogmatic Theology [Teologia Dogmatică 
Ortodoxă], vol. 2, second edition, ed. cit., p. 200. 

 
 

face, from glory in glory, as from the 
Ghost of the Lord> [II Cor. 3, 18]"57. 

On the one hand, emphasizes the 
sight of the glory of God in the frame of 
our relation with Him and, on the other 
hand, that exists a continuous imprinting 
of ours by the glory of God behind our 
frequent ecstatic sights. 

in 
On measure what we grow 
deification, we are imprinted by the glory 
of Christ and we become more proper for 
our relation with Him. 

But our relation with God, through 
His glory, is not only a vertical relation 
but, in the same time, is the horizontal 
one. 

Therefore, Father Professor Dumitru 
Popescu warns about the danger of 
oversize the vertical or the horizontal of 
our relation with God: 

„It would be absurd to believe that 
the uncreated energies establish only a 
vertical link between God and believers, 
inter- 
without to establish and the 
personal link between believers. 

The uncreated energies are not 
entities separated between them, as 
though would be separated from God and 
the work of the Ghost [is not] included 
individualistic in every human person, 
but superior ghostual power which 
embraces in Christ the community of 
believers 
and 
perichoretic. 

in dynamic mode 

57 Idem, p. 225. 

 
 

The uncreated energies are dynamic 

interpersonal decks"58. 

Thus is emphasizes the active role of 
the presence of the uncreated energies of 
God in the personal salvation but and in 
relations between 
the 
members of the Church of Christ. 

interpersonal 

For us to be of God we must be into 
His grace and to see His glory, on the one 
hand, but, on the other hand, we 
manifest as people of communion and of 
brotherhood in Church and in world. 

In conclusion, the three premises of 
human deification and of the sight of God 
discussed by us and namely: the person of 
the creator and savior Logos, the rational 
foundation and ghostual of the world and 
the presence of the uncreated energies in 
life must be seen as reciprocal 
our 
interpenetrating and being the starting 
point towards the understanding of 
experience and of theology of Saint 
Symeon the New Theologian. 

For that, only when we see on man 
and the cosmos as works and direct prints 
of the divine Logos and the world, in its 
totality, as rational and transparent for 
the uncreated energies of God, we can 
understand that the deification through 
grace is the scope of the orthodox life and 

58 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Popescu, Christ, 
Church, Society [Hristos, Biserică, Societate], op. cit., p. 
107. 

 
 
 
 

the sight of God is the receiving in act of 
the light of God in our life. 

 
 

2. The Sight of God at Saint 
Symeon the New Theologian and its 
Implications in the Personal Sal- 
vation 

The Ecstatic Terminology 

2. 
Terminology 

1. The Symeonian Ecstatic 

The first stake of our research is that 
of to dismount the extremist conjectures, 
which peripatetises in baneful mode in 
the row of the contemporary theologians, 
made on account of person and of opera 
of Saint Symeon the New Theologian. 

And one of them is that Saint 
Symeon would not enroll, in full mode, in 
the row of the Holy Fathers of the 
Orthodox Church59. 

59 If Jean Darrouzès (who is not too sympathetic 
with Saint Symeon), in the introduction at SC [Sources 
Chrétiennes] 51, p. 30, said that Saint Symeon did not 
try to be an innovator in the domain of the theological 
language, and that he is a theoretician of the spiritual 
life doubled of a mystic one, which is inspired from his 
personal experience, but and the fact that „we can 
recognize [at him] a traditionally engaged faith and 
current notions of the oriental spirituality" (Acc. Idem, 
p. 32), however there is a baleful current of opinion 
among the orthodox theologians and, equally, hete- 
rodox, of discrediting of Saint Symeon the New 
Theologian, which is seen as out from the patterns of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

this, 

Besides 

stay other 

two 
affirmations, totally unfounded, and 
namely, that he would be a precursor of 
the protestantism and a mystic with 
strong accents of singularization. 

For to respond to the prime grave 
accusation at his address, that he would 
not fully enroll in the Tradition of the 
Fathers of the Church, we must examine 
his theological issues and the mode in 
which he exposes the faith and his 
mystical experience. 

Orthodoxy, through the writing and through his very 
personal approach of the spiritual life. 

Father Ică jr. sketches, in the introductory article 
at Ică jr. 1, entitled Saint Symeon the New Theologian 
and the Mystical Challenge in the Byzantine Theology 
and the Contemporary, the dispute Trembelas vs. Teoclit 
(Ică jr. I, p. 28), which, for us, is an explicit paradigm of 
the motives of the unfavorable reception of Saint 
Symeon. 

And any names we want to enumerate here, as 
opposers of the symeonian theology, all of them would 
have something in common: the helplessness or the lack 
of desire of to receive full on Saint Symeon in their 
lives, for that they do not receive, in full mode, the 
exigences of salvation. 

His exigences are the exigences of holiness. 
Who fight with Symeon, struggle with what he is 
not or with what he cannot and he does not want to do. 
Saint Symeon is not the source of the frustrations 
of these opposers, but he is who gives voice to the 
painful truth of their remoteness from the path of 
salvation. 

For that Saint Symeon, although „a bunch of 
paradoxes" for contemporaries and his followers, he 
was credited by the Church as „an authoritative 
expression of the faith", acc. Rev. Lect. Univ. PhD. 
Călin-Ioan Dușe, The Integration of Saint Symeon the 
New Theologian in the Eastern Spirituality, in rev. The 
Theological Horizons [Orizonturi teologice], Oradea, 
2001, p. 140, 145. 

 
 

Just therefore, we will begin the 
discussion of the theological opera of 
Saint Symeon with an analysis of the 
ecstatic semantics of our Father, for to 
observe which are the words on which he 
uses for to express his ecstasies and as he 
is situated, from this perspective, in the 
ecstatic patristic theology area. 

Symeon exploits the significances of 
o`ra,w, the verb which expresses the sight 
having, very often, mystical connota- 
tions60. 

In Chapters I, 1, those who see bodily 
(swmatikw/j o`rw/sin)61 are put in opposition 
with those who understand ghostually 
(pneumatikw/j noou/si)62. 

This opposition is the paradigm in 
which he discusses always the difference 
between sight and unsight. 

60 To see SC 51, Chapters, I, 1, p. 40; I, 51, p. 54; I, 
52, p. 54; I, 101, p. 70; II, 8, p. 73; II, 19, p. 76; III, 21, p. 
86; SC 156, Hymns, II, 18, p. 178; II, 104, p. 184; IV, 89, p. 
196; VII, 2, p. 208; XIII, 72, p. 262; XV, 51, p. 280; XV, 54, 
p. 280; XV, 91, p. 284; SC 174, Hymns, XVII, 346, p. 38; 
XVII, 374, p. 40; XVII, 527, p. 50; XVIII, 8, p. 74; XVIII, 
109, p. 84; XVIII, 119, p. 84; XIX, 21, p. 96; XIX, 29, p. 96; 
XIX, 140, p. 106; XX, 223, p. 126; XXI, 105, p. 138; XXI, 151, 
162, 170, p. 142; XXI, 495, p. 168; XXII, 5, 8, p. 170; XXII, 
157, 165, p. 182; XXII, 173, p. 184; XXIII, 232, p. 204; 
XXIII, 483, p. 220; XXIV, 248, p. 244; XXIV, 367, p. 252; 
XXV, 43, p. 258; XXVII, 104, p. 286; XXVIII, 60, p. 298; 
XXVIII, 179, p. 308; XXVIII, 196, p. 310; XXIX, 8, p. 314; 
XXIX, 67, p. 318; XXIX, 92, p. 320; XXIX, 108, 116, 128, p. 
322; XXIX, 214, p. 328; XXX, 196, p. 354; XXX, 391, p. 
366; XXX, 415, p. 368; XXX, 524, p. 376; XXXI, 4, p. 384; 
XXXIV, 17, p. 428; XXXV, 76, p. 446; XL, 1, p. 484; SC 
196, Hymns, XLII, 77, 78, p. 42; XLII, 85, p. 44; LI, 2, p. 
184; LIII, 10, p. 212. 

61 SC 51, Chapters, I, 1, p. 40 / Ică jr. 3, p. 365. 
62 Ibidem / Ibidem. 

 
 

The understanding of God's presence 
or the personal knowledge of Him, 
whereof speaks Saint Symeon, is for him 
identical with the sight of the divine light 
(tou/ qei,ou fwto.j)63. 

Therefore, Christ is the One who 
enlightens (fwti,zei) on man64, for that 
the clean heart sees the light (fw/j) of 
Trinity65. 

63 Idem, Chapters, II, 13, p. 74 / Idem, p. 393. 
64 About lightenment as result of the sight of the 
light, to see in SC 51, Chapters, I, 2, p. 40; I, 4, p. 41; I, 
34, p. 49; II, 15, p. 75; II, 16, p. 75; III, 42, p. 92; III, 84, p. 
107; SC 156, Hymns, I, 144, 146, p. 168; I, 211, p. 174; XV, 
98, p. 284; XV, 105, p. 284; XV, 187, p. 292; SC 174, 
Hymns, XVII, 66, p. 18; XVII, 237, p. 30; XVII, 338, p. 36; 
XVIII, 97, p. 82; XXI, 12, p. 132; XXI, 104, p. 138; XXI, 145, 
p. 140; XXI, 147, 156, 164, 168, p. 142; XXIII, 223, p. 202; 
XXIII, 262, p. 206; XXIV, 243, p. 244; XXIV, 368, p. 252; 
XXV, 11, p. 254; XXV, 43, p. 258; XXVI, 100, p. 276; 
XXVIII, 176, p. 308; XXVIII, 197, p. 310; XXIX, 13, p. 314; 
XXIX, 201-202 (lightened by the divine Ghost), 209**, 
214, p. 328; XXX, 161, p. 352; XXX, 578, p. 380; XXXI, 
101**, p. 392; XXXII, 14 (divine lightenments), 18, p. 402; 
XXXIII, 64, p. 418; XXXIII, 142, p. 424; XXXIV, 70, p. 
432; XXXIV, 80, 81, p. 434; XXXIV, 106, p. 436; XL, 1, p. 
484; SC 196, Hymns, XLII, 201, p. 52; XLIV, 155, p. 82; 
XLVIII, 139, 152, p. 142; XLIX, 10, p. 146 (ghostual 
lightenment: fwtismou/ pneumatikou/); L, 158, p. 168; L, 
244, p. 174; LI, 8, p. 184; LIII, 7, p. 212; LV, 6, p. 252; LV, 
192, p. 268. 

65 Idem, I, 2, p. 40 / Ibidem. 
In Idem, Chapters, III, 26, p. 88, Symeon speaks 
about the cleansing of the eye of the soul. In Idem, III, 
29, p. 88, he shows that the clean heart is the one works 
all the virtues and lead them until perfection. About the 
clean heart or about the cleansing mind's eyes to see 
and SC 51, Chapters, III, 32, p. 89; III, 35, p. 90; SC 156, 
Hymns, XI, 46, p. 234 (mind's eye: to.n o`fqalmo.n tou/ 
noo.j); XV, 53, p. 280 (o[mmasi noeroi/j); SC 174, Hymns, 
XVII, 525, p. 50 (clean with the heart); XXII, 107, p. 178 
(mind's eye); XXII, 108, p. 178 (soul's eyes); XXIII, 429, 
p. 216 (in ecstasy we see only Trinity); XXVII, 134, p. 

 
 

For as to understand, in authentic 
mode, the exposing of the symeonian 
theology we must retain that o`ra,w has 
right content on fw/j. And when Symeon 
speaks about sight, he refers at the sight 
of the light of Most Holy Trinity and not 
to any kind of light. 

The sight of the light, he expresses 
when as an impartation of it, using the 
verb mete,cw and its derivatives66, when as 
an union (sun + o`ra,w/ suna,feia/ e[nwsij67) 
with the light68 or with God69. In Hymns 
42, 202 appears and the substantive koi- 
nwni,a (union/ communion)70, expressing 

288; XXXII, 15, p. 402 (mind's eyes); XXXII, 82, p. 406 
(heart's eyes); XXXIII, 62, p. 416 (Ibidem); XXXIII, 63, p. 
418 (Ibidem); XXXIV, 78, p. 434 (Ibidem). 

66 See SC 51, Chapters, I, 2, 3, p. 40; II, 13, p. 74; II, 
16, p. 75; III, 4, p. 81; SC 156, Hymns, VIII, 84, p. 220; SC 
174, Hymns, XVI, 31, p. 12; XVIII, 120, p. 84; XXIX, 362, 
p. 338; XXX, 266, p. 358; SC 196, Hymns, L, 149, 158, p. 
168. 

In the Hymn 50, Saint Symeon uses the 
substantive metousi,a (participation/ communion) for to 
indicate the union with light. See the places from SC 
196, Hymns, L, 58, p. 160 şi Idem, L, 201, p. 170. 

67 SC 174, Hymns, XXIX, 283, 285, p. 334; XXX, 
157, 158, p. 350; XXX, 460, p. 372; XXXI, 119, p. 394; 
XXXIII, 128, 422 (ineffable union: avporrh,tw| evvnw,sei); 
XXXIV, 16, p. 428 (union made in knowledge and 
sensation); XXXIV, 27, p. 428 (ineffable union); XXXIV, 
60, p. 432; SC 196, Hymns, XLII, 204, p. 52; XLII, 225, p. 
54 (ineffable union); XLVI, 33, 116; L, 28, p. 158; LI, 58, 
p. 188 (mysterious union); LI, 142, p. 196. 

68 See SC 51, Chapters I, 3, p. 40; III, 60, p. 98; SC 

156, Hymns, I, 107, p. 164. 

69 SC 51, Chapters, I, 101, p. 70; III, 21, p. 86 (God 
reveals Himself to men in the measure of the intimate 
union with them); III, 58, p. 97 (the ecstasy is union 
with God); III, 78, p. 104; SC 156, Hymns, VI, 13, p. 204. 

70 SC 196, Hymns, XLII, 202, p. 52; L, 200, p. 170. 

 
 

the union in sensation, conscious, with 
the divine glory and in 46, 32 we find 
another of its correlative and namely: 
sunousi,a (union/ communion/ connecti- 
on)71. 

the divine 

The verb avnable,pw, with the sense to 
see before 
light, before 
eschatology, punctuates one of the 
principal coordinates of the symeonian 
theology72. 

this 

from 

to begin 

For Symeon, the sight must to 
life73. 
produce, 
Therefore, the discussion of avnable,pw, as 
and of other symeonian ecstatic verbs, 
must be connexed with the reality of the 
sight as gift from God or as enworthiness 
of light74. 

The sight of the light is at Symeon 
and evnoi,khsij, ie dwelling in us of the 
Trinity75. 

71 Idem, Hymns, XLVI, 32, 116. 
Father Ică jr. translates in this context from 46, 
32, on sunousi,a with togetherness [împreunare in 
romanian] acc. Ică jr. 3, 248, for to show that the union 
with light is entire, beingly, total. See also its use in SC 
196, Hymns, XLIX, 26, p. 148. 

72 See SC 51, Chapters, I, 4, p. 41. 
73 See SC 156, Hymns, I, 84-87, p. 164. 
74 See SC 51, Chapters, I, 4, p. 41; I, 40, p. 51; SC 
156, Hymns, V, 22, p. 202; SC 174, Hymns, XXV, 66, p. 
260; XXV, 90, p. 262; XXX, 388, p. 366. 

75 See SC 51, Chapters, I, 7, p. 42/ Ică jr. 3, p. 366. 
In SC 51, Chapters, I, 79, p. 64, Symeon called the 
seer of light as „home of the Trinity" (oi-koj th/j Tria,doj). 
For the indwelling Trinity in us to see also SC 51, 
Chapters, III, 72, 102; SC 174, Hymns, XIX, 54, p. 98; XX, 
201, p. 126; XXVII, 1-2, p. 278 (the soul is the dwelling of 
Christ); XXVIII, 61, p. 298 (Christ dwells in us); XXVIII, 
176, p. 308; XXX, 392, p. 366; XXIX, 165, p. 326 (Holy 

 
 

The descent76 of the light in our 
being is, in the same time, the ascent 
towards the light and in the light of God. 
The ecstatic ascension is expressed by 
Symeon in paradoxical terms because the 
descent of light to us is, in the same time, 
our ascent to God. 

At him we find, most often, the 
divine condescension as ray (avkti,j) of 
light77, as brightness (ai;glh|)78 or as bright 

Trinity in us and in all); XXIX, 166-167, p. 326 (God 
dwells in His Saints in especially); SC 196, Hymns, 
XLIV, 153, p. 82 (The Holy Ghost lives in us); XLVIII, 
140, p. 142, LI, 134, p. 194. 

(„small 

„fw/j mikro.n" 

76 SC 156, Hymns, XIII, 71, p. 262. 
77 We find in SC 51, Chapters, I, 35, p. 50 the 
light"). This 
expression 
expression does not designate that divine light is tiny, 
but that his spiritual power, the his power to receive 
the light is low (see Chapters, II, 11, p. 74). The detail 
that we point out here is very important to Saint 
Symeon, because through it our author speaks of the 
sight as a divine reality, we receive in the measure of the 
personal cleansing. 

About the rays of the divine light to see and SC 
174, Hymns, XXIII, 233, 246, 252, 255, 256, p. 204; XXIII, 
260, p. 206; XXIII, 362, 368, 370, 373, p. 212; XXIII, 385, 
397, p. 214; XXVII, 99, p. 286; XXIX, 224, p. 330; XXXII, 
19, p. 402 (the divine rays of Your deity); XXXV, 52, 59 
(the deity rays) p. 444. 

78 See SC 51, Chapters, I, 86, p. 66; II, 8, p. 73; SC 
156, Hymns, VII, 5, p. 208; SC 174, Hymns, XVII, 325, p. 
36; XVII, 334, p. 36 (the light bearing brightness: ai;glh 
fwtofo,roj); XVII, 344, p. 38; XVII, 354, p. 38; XVII, 358; 
p. 38; XIX, 17, p. 96; XX, 29, p. 112 (brightness of 
immortality: ai;glh| avqanasi,aj); XXII, 8, p. 170 (small 
brightness: ai;glh mikra.); XXII, 19, 33, p. 172; XXII, 157, 
p. 182; XXII, 171, p. 184; XXVIII, 175, p. 308; XXVIII, 217, 
p. 312; XXIX, 7, p. 314; XXIX, 173, p. 326 (shines in the 
heart); XXIX, 179, p. 326; XXIX, 193, p. 328; XXX, 160, p. 
352; XXX, 243, 245, 247, p. 356; XXX, 267, p. 358 (the 
divine spark); XXXII, 15, 19, p. 402; XXXIV, 59, p. 432; 
XXXIX, 62, p. 480; SC 196, Hymns, XLIV, 14, p. 78; 

 
 

lightning79, dazzling, that comes soon in 
man. 

We find in the symeonian writing 
and the coming of light as arrow (be,loj)80 
or the entering light in heart as wound 81. 
In Hymns, 11, 71, the ecstatic sight is 
as a ovph/j mikra/j (small hole) in heaven82, 
while in Hymns, 12, 63, the ecstasy is 
described as a mikra.n auvgh.n (small bright- 
ness)83 
life of the 
orthodox believer. 

in the ghostual 

In Hymns, 17, 326, the ecstasy is 
described as a covering of him by a fwto.j 
nefe,lh (cloud of the light)84 and in 
Hymns, 18, 63, we find the sight as 
e;kstasij (ecstasy/ wonder/ the change of 
the status)85. 

We can observe at Symeon and the 
recurrence of qewri,a86. The sight as 

XLIV, 155, p. 82; XLV, 5, p. 102; XLV, 29, p. 104; XLIX, 
26, p. 148; L, 238, p. 174. 

79 See SC 51, Chapters, III, 54, p. 96; III, 59, p. 98; 
SC 156, Hymns, II, 5, p. 176; II, 130, p. 186; VIII, 64, p. 
218; XV, 55, p. 280; SC 174, Hymns, XVI, 24, p. 12; XVII, 
35, p. 16 (the flashing light: to. fw/j to. avpastra,pton); 
XXXIV, 79, p. 434; XXXV, 76, p. 446 (flash); SC 196, 
Hymns, XLI, 104, p. 18 (flash of glory); XLVII, 18, p. 122. 

80 SC 156, Hymns, V, 23, p. 202. 
81 Idem, Hymns, VI, 15-16, p. 204. 
82 Idem, Hymns, XI, 71, p. 238. 
83 Idem, Hymns, XII, 63, p. 246; SC 174, Hymns, 
XVIII, 62, p. 78 (the thin and very small brightness: 
lepth. ai;glh kai. mikrota,th). 

84 SC 174, Hymns, XVII, 326, p. 36. 
85 Idem, Hymns, XVIII, 63, p. 78. 
86 See SC 51, Chapters, I, 34, p. 49; II, 10, p. 74; II, 
11, p. 74; II, 14, p. 75; II, 15, p. 75; II, 18, p. 76; III, 23, p. 
87; III, 61, p. 99; SC 156, Hymns, I, 150, p. 168; XI, 53, p. 
236; XII, 15, p. 244; XIII, 67, p. 262; SC 174, Hymns, XXV, 
2, p. 254; XXVIII, 8, p. 294; XXVIII, 60, p. 298; XXXIV, 

 
 

contemplation which presupposes qewri,a, 
expressses both the ghostual understand- 
ing of the world as well as the sight of the 
realities of the ecstatic light. 

The contemplation as sight produ- 
in man. 
ces a ghostual knowledge 
Therefore, Symeon speaks of the divine 
light as about „to. nohto.n fw/j" („a light 
thought [with the mind]")87. 

But he uses this expression, not as if 
talking about a cerebralization of the 
divine light or as though the divine light 
would be a reality which the mind 
possesses and scientifically inventories, to 
say, but in the sense that the mind 
understands the light on the measure of 
its illumination by God and knows that 
the light is of God, that is divine and that 
it is God's love for itself. 

The symeonian expression want to 
say, that divine light is not illogical, 
irrational and ambiguous visual effect, but 
is the divine energy that illuminates the 
that 
mind, 
sanctifies man in his totality, not the man 
to exhaust it with his mind. 

that reveals 

the mind, 

The ecstatic vision is a crystal, clear, 
bright, clean, simple view88. The adjective 

26, p. 428 (the real vision: avlhqou/j qewri,aj); SC 196, 
Hymns, XLIII, 73, p. 62 (the mystical contemplations: 
qewriw/n tw/n mustikw/n); L, 58, p. 160; L, 161, p. 168 (the 
mystical contemplation); L, 234, p. 174 (contemplation 
of the mind); LV, 14, p. 254. 

87 SC 51, Chapters, I, 38, p. 51/ Ică jr. 3, p. 374. We 
find the expression and in SC 174, Hymns, XVI, 2, p. 10; 
XXIII, 222-223, p. 202; XXIII, 464, p. 218. 

88 Idem, Chapters, I, 39, p. 51/ Ică jr. 3, p. 374. 

 
 

in 

the 
trano,j, used by Symeon 
characterization of the divine sight, 
wants to say that the ecstatic sight prints 
with the highest acuity in our soul and is 
received with maximum accuracy. 

It 

is true (avlhqh/) and can be 
confirmed only by those who live it89. 
Alongside o`ra,w, Symeon uses and ble,pw90, 
both being the constatation verbs of the 
divine sight. Symeon does not want to 
explain by them the light but affirms the 
existence of ecstasy in his experience. 

The ecstatic vision is a ghostual 
(pneumatikw/j) sight, is a sight with mind's 
eyes (toi/j noeroi/j o`rw/n o`fqalmoi/j)91. The 
divine light is, in the same time, true 

To see and SC 51, Chapters, I, 77, p. 63: 
„fwto.j...kaqarou/"; II, 3, p. 72: „tw/n aivsqh,sewn tranw/j kai. 
kaqarw/j"; II, 8, p. 73; II, 17, p. 75: „evn avplw|/...qei,w fwti,"; 
SC 156, Hymns, VII, 16, p. 210; XII, 15, p. 244; XV, 2, p. 
276; SC 174, Hymns, XX, 14, p. 110. 

89 Idem, Chapters, I, 40, p. 51 / Ibidem. 
90 Ibidem / Ibidem. A se vedea şi Idem, Chapters, 
I, 50, p. 54; I, 51, p. 54; I, 52, p. 54; I, 101, p. 70; II, 6, p. 72; 
II, 8, p. 73; SC 156, Hymns, I, 159, p. 170; I, 160, p. 170; I, 
161, p. 170; II, 18, p. 178; IV, 45, p. 194; VII, 1, p. 208; VII, 
20, p. 210; XI, 47, p. 236; XI, 88, p. 238; XIII, 65, p. 262; 
XV, 8, p. 276; XV, 17, p. 292; SC 174, Hymns, XX, 39, p. 
112; XXI, 18, p. 132; XXI, 105, p. 138; XXII, 68, p. 176; XXII, 
162, 165, p. 182; XXIII, 112, 116, 119, p. 196; XXIII, 243, 244, 
245, 248**, 250, 251, p. 204; XXIII, 295**, p. 208; XXIII, 
388, p. 214; XXIII, 425,427, 429, p. 216; XXIII, 501, p. 220; 
XXIV, 6, p. 226; XXVI, 22, p. 270; XXVII, 163, p. 290; 
XXVIII, 16**, p. 294; XXVIII, 17, 18**, 19, p. 296; XXIX, 79, 
p. 318; XXIX, 117, p. 322; XXIX, 210, p. 328; XXIX, 226, p. 
330; XXX, 414**, 415, p. 368; XXXII, 12, p. 400; XXXIX, 
44, p. 480; XXXIX, 51**, p. 480; SC 196, Hymns, XLI, 102, 
p. 18; XLII, 75**, p. 42; XLII, 85, 87, p. 44; XLIV, 21, p. 72; 
XLIV, 117, p. 78; XLV, 97, p. 110. 

91 Idem, Chapters, I, 41, p. 51/ Ibidem. 

 
 

(avlhqino.n) but and unreached (a;duton)92. It 
is unreached for those who are ghostually 
blind, ie for those who have not ever seen 
it. 

The theme of the blind from birth 
(tuflo.j evk geneth/j) is at Saint Symeon the 
paradigm of the blind of the light, of the 
ignorant in the sphere of the mystical 
experiences, the one who does not want 
the light because he did not saw it and did 
not know it93. 
Symeon 

knowledge 
(gnwsi,a)94 and the unpassion (avpaqei,a)95 in 
direct connection with divine light. For 
him, the knowledge is a direct result of 
divine views and the sight keeps to the 
unpassion. 

puts 

the 

He who has no the experience of the 
light will imagine about those described 
by Symeon only „the false manufactures" 
(avnapla,smata yeudh/)96. 

Light, 

the ghostual knowledge 
(gained as result of the sight of light) and 
the unpassion are at Symeon those that 
make the faithful to fill the state of qe,wsij 
(deification)97. 

92 Ibidem/ Ibidem. See and SC 174, Hymns, 

XXVII, 42, p. 282; XXVII, 66, p. 284. 

93 Ibidem/ Ibidem. See and SC 51, Chapters, I, 50, 

p. 54; I, 51, p. 54; I, 53, p. 54; I, 98, p. 69; III, 23, p. 87. 

94 See SC 51, Chapters, I, 65, p. 58; II, 10, p. 74; II, 
14, p. 75; SC 174, Hymns, XIX, 33, p. 96; XIX, 70, p. 100. 
95 SC 51, Chapters, I, 98, p.69/ Ică jr. 3, p. 388. See 
about unpassion and in SC 51, Chapters, III, 33, p. 89. 

96 Idem, Chapters, I, 100, p. 70/ Idem, p. 389. 
97 SC 174, Hymns, XXIV, 269, p. 246. 

 
 

Our Father uses and the verb 
qeopoie,w (to make god)98 to indicate the 
state of deification and the derivatives of 
tele,w, as for example on h` teleio,th 
(perfection)99, but and the compound 
substantive qewqei,sh (deification)100. 

The grace is, in the ghostual man, as 
a divine fire that puts demons to flight101. 
Those who are in grace live „the liberty of 
the Ghost" (th.n evleuqeri,an tou/ Pneu,ma- 
toj)102 and have boldness (parrhsi,an) to 
God103. The symeonian soteriology, as a 
inner sensation104, conscious of grace, is 
the direct consequence of the sight of 
divine light. 

The substantive ovptasi,a appears also 
in the symeonian theology with an 
ecstatic qualification105. 

Those of the divine 

light are 
designated, 
sometimes, as goodies/ 
eternal and invisible assets (tw/n aivwni,wn 
kai. avora,twn...avgaqw/n)106 by Symeon or as 
glory (do,xa) of God107. 

98 Idem, Hymns, XXII, 40, p. 174/ Ică jr. 3, p. 140. 

To see and Idem, Hymns, XXX, 360, p. 364. 

99 Idem, Hymns, XXIII, 413, p. 214. 
100 Idem, Hymns, XXIX, 286, p. 334. 
101 SC 51, Chapters, I, 68, p. 59/ Idem, p. 380. 
102 Idem, Chapters, I, 78, p. 63/ Idem, p. 384. 
103 Idem, Chapters, I, 101, p. 70/ Idem, p. 389. 
104 SC 174, Hymns, XXVI, 19, p. 270. 
105 SC 51, Chapters, I, 85, p. 66/ Ică jr. 3, p. 386. 
106 Idem, Chapters, I, 88, p. 67/ Ibidem. To see 
and SC 51, Chapters, II, 18, p. 76; III, 50, p. 95; III, 78, p. 
104; XXVIII, 213, p. 310; XXX, 357, p. 364. 

107 Idem, Chapters, I, 89, p. 67/ Ibidem. To see 
and SC 51, Chapters, II, 11, p. 74; SC 156, Hymns, I, 151, p. 
168; I, 178, p. 170; I, 188, p. 172; II, 89, p. 182; II, 110, p. 

 
 

Saint Symeon has the extraordinary 
plastic expressions when he wants to 
express his interiorization with God. For 
example, who sees God is clothed with 
God's light like a bright garment108 and 
that means the enclothing in Christ109; 
Christ opens the heavens and He bends 
together with the Father and the Ghost, 
showing Himself to whom is believer110; 
he eats and feeds beautifully from His 
sight and unites with Him going beyond 

184; VII, 5, p. 208; XI, 88, p. 238; XII, 12, p. 242; XII, 129, 
p. 254, XII, 138, p. 254; XV, 2, p. 276; XV, 25, p. 278; XV, 
59, p. 282; XV, 78, p. 282; XV, 85, p. 284; XV, 53, p. 288; 
XV, 187, p. 292; SC 174, Hymns, XVI, 20, p. 12; XVI, 31, p. 
12; XVII, 34, p. 16; XVIII, 7, p. 74; XVIII, 15, p. 76; SC 174, 
Hymns, XIX, 10, p. 94; XIX, 57, p. 98; XIX, 149, p. 106; 
XX, 36, p. 112; XX, 47, p. 114; XXI, 276, p. 152; XXI, 277, p. 
152 (glory of the glory: th/j do,xhj do,xan); XXI, 495, p. 168; 
XXII, 68, p. 176 (glory of the glory); XXIII, 4, 190 bis, 
XXIV, 14, p. 228; XXIV, 268, p. 246 (height of the glory: 
u[yoj do,xhj); XXIV, 272, p. 246; XXIV, 368, p. 252; XXV, 
35, 36, p. 256; XXV, 66, p. 260; XXVI, 19, p. 270; XXVIII, 
187**, p. 308; XXVIII, 213, p. 310 (the eternal glory: 
aivwni,ou do,xhj); XXIX, 164, p. 326; XXX, 266 (the divine 
glory), 274, p. 358; XXX, 284-285, p. 360 (the divine 
glory); XXXI, 49, p. 388; XXXII, 90-91, p. 408 (the divine 
glory); XXXII, 112, p. 410; XXXV, 52, p. 444; XXXIX, 51 
(the divine glory); 57, 63, p. 480. SC 196, Hymns, XLI, 
104, p. 18; XLII, 77, p. 42; XLII, 193, p. 52; XLIII, 73, p. 62; 
XLVII, 46, 54, p. 124; XLVIII, 21, p. 132; XLVIII, 110, p. 
138; LVIII, 100, p. 286. 

108 Idem, Chapters, I, 90, p. 67/ Ibidem. The 
image of the dressing in light as a divine garment is and 
SC 156, Hymns, XIII, 7, 256; SC 174, Hymns, XXX, 325326, p. 362 (dressing in the immaterial garment); SC 
196, Hymns, XLV, 63, p. 106 (the bright and divine 
vestment). 

109 Idem, Chapters, II, 8, p. 73/ Idem, p. 392. To 
see and SC 156, Hymns, XV, 178, p. 292; XV, 214, p. 294; 
SC 196, Hymns, L, 187-190, p. 170. 

110 SC 156, Hymns, 36-38, p. 234/ Idem, p. 77. 

 
 

the heavens111; our union with God/ the 
sight of God is an ineffable and divine 
wedding (ga,moj)112 or he calls the ecstasy 
right nourishment from „the bosom of 
the glory" (tou/ ko,lpouth/j do,xhj)113 of God. 
just a few 
the symeonian 

These examples are 
eloquent 
images of 
theological discourse. 

But Symeon speaks not only in the 
antinomic terms of sight and unsight in 
his theology, but he speaks and in 
apophatic mode about the divine sight, 
showing that „more lighting of His is an 
full unsight (avbleyi,a)"114 for man. 

Ἀbleyi,a represents at Saint Symeon 
not a lack of sight, but an overwhelming- 
ness of sight, an uncomprehension of the 
light by man. Ἀbleyi,a must be understood all in the relation with the light 
received as gift, as enworthiness of the 
sight, in which we see from the divine 
light as we can comprehend at personal 
level. 

Two other characteristics of the 
sight of the light which we detach from 
the symeonian theology is that divine 
light is seen above the sensation (u`pe.r 
ai;sqhsin)115 and that on it we receive 

111 Idem, Hymns, XIII, 67-68, p. 262. 
112 Idem, Hymns, XV, 175, p. 292. 
113 SC 174, Hymns, XXIV, 263, p. 246. To see and 
SC 196, Hymns, L, 143, p. 166, where the sight of the 
light is depicted as a feeding from one breast (mazo,j). 
114 SC 51, Chapters, II, 2, p. 71 / Ică jr. 3, p. 390. 
115 Idem, Chapters, II, 2**, p. 71; II, 3, p. 72. In SC 
174, Hymns, XVII, 395-396, p. 40, Symeon says that the 
divine light clothed him in the garment of mind's 

 
 

through His Ghost (di.a tou/ Pneu,matoj 
Auvtou/)116, of Christ. 

We see the light ghostually, in other 
words, not physically. In the symeonian 
theology, the divine sight is not a falling 
in the sensuality, but a rise, through the 
Ghost, at the divine light. 

Therefore, 

in Chapters, 

II, 8, 
Symeon speaks about sight as about the 
climbing at „the height of the ghostual 
contemplation" (u;yoj pneumatikh/j qew- 
ri,aj)117. 

The glory of the Ghost118, which we 
see in ecstasy, is the glory of the Lord (th.n 
do,xan Kuri,ou)119 because it is the glory of 
the Trinity120. 

Whenever Symeon indicates the 
glory as being of a divine person, he does 
not envisage an exclusive revendication of 
it for that divine person. He speaks as 
and the Scripture, confering the posse- 
ssion of the divine light when to the one, 

sensation (aivsqh,sewj citw/na noera/j), namely gaved him 
the capacity to seize the light with mind, with a 
spiritualised mind, transparentised by grace. 

116 Idem, Capitole, II, 3, p. 72 / Ică jr. 3, p. 390. 
117 Idem, Chapters, II, 8, p. 73 / Idem, p. 392. To 

see and SC 174, XVII, 339, p. 36. 

118 Idem, Chapters, III, 21, p. 86 / Idem, p. 401; SC 
156, Hymns, XI, 50, p. 236; SC 174, Hymns, XIX, 53, p. 98 
(the grace of the Ghost); XXII, 177, p. 184 (the divine 
light of the Ghost: fw/j tou/ Pneu,matoj qei/on); XXVII, 67, 
p. 284 (the light comes from the Holy Ghost); XXXIV, 
84, p. 434 (the grace of the Ghost); SC 196, Hymns, 
XLII, 103-104, p. 44 (the light of the Ghost). 

119 Idem, Chapters, II, 15, p. 75 / Idem, p. 393. 
120 SC 156, Hymns, II, 91, p. 182; SC 174, Hymns, 

XIX, 56, p. 98 (the grace of Trinity). 

 
 

when to the other of persons, he knows 
that the 
is commune of the 
trinitarian persons. 

light 

In the research of his theology must 
never be applied 
the principle of 
discrimination of the existing theological 
datas but that of their corroboration. 
Symeon is revealed to us as a fully Father 
of the Church in the measure in that we 
are approaching, through experience and 
sensation of grace, to his ghostual 
experience and his mystical theology. 

theology has no 

Without our real communion with 
God, his 
internal 
articulation with us and we cannot 
than extremist, deplorable 
generate 
views, with address at his theology. 

And this, for that Symeon speaks 
about theology as being a full and mystic 
learning (evpignw,sewj)121 of us by the grace 
of God122, through which we become 
teodidacts123. 

121 SC 174, Hymns, XVIII, 7, p. 74; XXXIV, 82, p. 
434 (the exact knowledge: evpignw,sei avkribei/); XL, 95, p. 
492. 

122 SC 51, Chapters, II, 15, p. 75/ Ică jr. 3, p. 393. To 
see and Idem, Chapters, III, 38, p. 91, where the soul 
that sees God recognizes Him,Who roses him from the 
dead. 

123 Idem, Chapters, III, 84, p. 107/ Idem, p. 418. 
To see and SC 51, Chapters, III, 85, p. 107. Into an article 
on theme of the understanding of the scriptural text, 
Father Professor Constantin Coman stressed „the 
decisive and indispensable contribution of the Holy 
Ghost to the act of understanding" of the Scripture, acc. 
Rev. Prof. D.Th. Constantin Coman, About the Recourse 
of the Systematic Studies at Holy Scripture [Despre 
recursul studiilor sistematice la Sfânta Scriptură], rev. 
Theological Studies, Series III, II (2006), no. 2, p. 189. 

 
 

these mysteries of 

In this context he assimilates qewri,a 
with avpoka,luyij124. The revelation is the 
sight of the light and those which are seen 
in light are designated by Symeon as 
musthri,wn125. 
Only 

light 
represent for Symeon a knowledge of 
God126. It is observable in the symeonian 
writing and 
the recurrence of the 
derivatives from fai,nw (to show/ to 
reveal)127, through which is designated 
the divine revelations or the ecstatic 
sights. 

We 

in Chapters, II, 16 a 
formulation of the theological knowledge 

find 

124 Idem, Chapters, II, 15, p. 75/ Ică jr. 3, p. 393. 
In SC 51, Chapters, III, 22, p. 86, Symeon 
assimilates revelation with contemplation, but brings 
into the equation and knowledge. He says that God 
reveals Himself to those worthy and as He is revealed 
as it is seen by them and the sight of Him means the 
knowledge of Him. 

In other words, the sight means the theological 
knowledge and the knowledge is on measure of His 
revelation, the revelation that is on measure of the 
intimacy with God of those worthy. What wants to 
point out Saint Symeon is not the reality of the 
restrictive knowledge of God, but the fact that the act of 
the knowledge is proportional with our intimacy with 
God. 

To see and Idem, III, 77, p. 104; SC 174, Hymns, 
XXV, 43, p. 258; XXVIII, 36, p. 296; XXXV, 4, p. 440; SC 
196, Hymns, XLIX, 17, p. 148. 

125 Ibidem / Ibidem. 
126 Ibidem / Ibidem. 
127 SC 174, Hymns, XXIV, 255, p. 244; XXV, 10, p. 
254; XXV, 47**, p. 258; XXVIII, 36, p. 296; XXVIII, 179, p. 
308; XXIX, 90, p. 320; XXXV, 2, p. 440; SC 196, Hymns, 
XLV, 29, p. 104; XLVIII, 108, p. 138; XLVIII, 137, 152, p. 
142; L, 31, p. 158; L, 238, p. 174. 

 
 

as entrance in the divine light128 or in „tw/| 
buqw/| tou/ qei,ou fwto,j" („the depth of the 
divine light")129, as in II, 17 or as an 
„fw/j...evn Fwti."(„light...in Light"), accord- 
ing as he specificates in II, 18130. 

The knowledge in which we enter 
through sight is unspeakable (avporrh,- 
twj)131. Accepting, alike, the terminology 
of Sinai and that of Tabor, our Father 
assimilates and on gno,foj with fwto.j132, 
light 
the darkness and 
both 
designating the glory of God. 

the 

these 

assimilations, 

And Symeon does not simplifies, 
through 
the 
understanding of the ecstasy, but the 
understanding of the ecstatic termi- 
nology. This 
type of the synthetic 
understanding of the scriptural and 
patristic terminology is a constancy at 
Saint Symeon. 

of 

Another 

characteristic 

the 
ghostual life, which appears in frequent 
mode at Saint Symeon, is that, the 
salvation and, in the ultimate instance, 
the perfection, are realities which do not 
in avgnw,stwj mode, without 
occur 
consciousness or unconsciously, but in 
gnwstw/j mode, consciously133. 

128 SC 51, Chapters, II, 16, p. 75 / Ică jr. 3, p. 393. 
129 Idem, Chapters, II, 17, p. 75 / Ibidem. 
130 Idem, Chapters, II, 18, p. 76 / Idem, p. 394. 
131 Idem, Chapters, II, 16, p. 75 / Idem, p. 393. 
132 We refer in this citation at SC 51, Chapters, II, 
18, p. 76, where Saint Symeon says that, then when the 
mind is fully covered by darkness and divine light, it 
reaches at the sight of God. 

133 SC 51, Chapters, II, 20**, p. 77 / Ică jr. 3, p. 394. 

 
 

Therefore, for him, the feeling of the 
grace and the sight of God are absolutely 
real, conscious, deifying for that they are 
those which form, in fundamental mode, 
the personal holiness. 

For this fact, we encounter often in 
his writing referrings to the interior link 
between knowledge and the union, in 
beingly (ouvsiwdw/j)134 mode, with light. 
Desiring to prevent any puerile 
in 
accusations against God's sight, 
Chapters, II, 21 he warns of the capital 
danger of bad allegorisation of Scripture, 
through which is tangled what must to 
live now an orthodox christian with what 
must live in future or in eternity135. 

We, as many are worthy, we see 
God, says Saint Symeon, but and God 
sees us136. God speaks in ecstatic mode 
with His friends and gives them all to talk 
about Him137. 

Those who have seen and see God 
are the whole people (o`loklh,roij)138 and 
they make part of that crush/ a[lusij (gold 
chain)139, uninterrupted, of the Saints. 

To see and SC 174, Hymns, XXIX, 168-169, p. 326 
(God dwells in Saints in conscious [gnwstw/j] and 
beingly [ouvsiwdwj] mode); XXXIV, 81, p. 435. 
134 SC 196, Hymns, LI, 138, 141, p. 196. 
135 SC 51, Chapters, II, 21, p. 77 / Ică jr. 3, p. 395. 
136 Idem, Chapters , II, 24, p. 78 / Idem, p. 396. 
To see and SC 156, Hymns, I, 161-162, p. 170; VIII, 
1-5, p. 214; SC 174, Hymns, XVI, 17, p. 10; XVIII, 97, p. 82; 
XXX, 386, p. 366. 

137 Idem, Chapters, II, 24, p. 78 / Idem, p. 396. 
138 Idem, Chapters, III, 5, p. 81 / Idem, p. 398. 
139 Idem, Chapters, III, 4, p. 81 / Ibidem. 

 
 
 

From these cited places, we observe 
that Symon puts the ecstasy on account 
of Saints and those who sanctify their life 
in continuously and, on the other hand, 
he highlights the fact that the sight of 
full of 
God and 
discernment are those that sanctify us, 
those that make us, in total mode, of 
God. 

the ascetic 

life 

Saint Symeon, regarding the holiness 
as conscious personal reality, uses on 
dia,stasij and on cwrismo.j, for to show the 
interior separation 
distance and the 
between Saints and the sinful world140. 

But this separation at Saint Symeon 
is not dictated by subjectivism or religious 
intolerance, but is a consequence of the 
presence of grace in our being, that puts 
out us from passions and from the 
transients and moves us at the eternal 
life. 

We must remark the fact, that 
Symeon speaks about the receiving of the 
Holy Ghost as about an cognizant141 
earnest (avrrabw.n)142. Those who preserve 
the earnest are the inheritors of the 
Kingdom. 

140 Idem, Chapters, III, 42, p. 92/ Ică jr. 3, p. 407. 
To see and SC 174, Hymns, XVII, 397-398, p. 40 (the 
light separated him from those seen). To see the 
problem of cwrismo.j and in SC 196, Hymns, 52, 148, p. 
210. 

141 Ibidem/ Ibidem. 
142 Idem, Chapters, III, 47, p. 94/ Idem, p. 408. To 
see and Idem, III, 48, 49, 50, p. 94; III, 53, 54, 55, p. 96; 
SC 156, Hymns, I, 73, p. 162; SC 174, Hymns, XVII, 817, p. 
68; XVII, 854, p. 70; XXVIII, 219, p. 312. 

 
 

For the uncreated divine grace143, 
Symeon uses a wide range of entitlings, of 
which we mention: avrrabw.n (earnest), pu/r 
(fire)144, fw/j (light)145, sfragi,j (seal/ 

143 About the divine grace as uncreated (a;ktistoj) 
to see SC 174, Hymns, XVII, 245, p. 30; XVII, 359, p. 38. 
144 SC 51, Chapters, III, 59**, p. 97-98; SC 156, 
Hymns, I, 34, p. 158 (spiritual fire); VI, 1, p. 204; XI, 78, 
p. 238; XIII, 13, p. 256; SC 174, Hymns, XVII, 325, p. 36; 
XVII, 832, p. 70 (sweet fire: pu/r gluka,zon); XXII, 36, p. 
172; XXII, 157, p. 182; XXII, 171, p. 184; XXII, 175, p. 184; 
XXIV, 20, p. 228; XXIV, 25, p. 228; XXV, 33, p. 256; 
XXVIII, 157, p. 306; XXX, 1, p. 340 (the divine fire); XXX, 
11, p. 340 (Ibidem); XXX, 52, p. 344 (Ibidem); XXX, 81, p. 
346 (Ibidem); XXX, 145, p. 350; XXX, 427, p. 368; 
XXXIII, 127, p. 422; SC 196, Hymns, XLV, 35, p. 104. 
145 SC 156, Hymns, I, 72, p. 162; I, 160, p. 170; I, 
226, p. 174; II, 6, p. 174; II, 104, p. 184; III, 4, p. 188; IV, 
22, p. 202; VII, 5, p. 208; VII, 16, p. 210; VIII, 84, p. 220; 
IX, 5, p. 224; IX, 32, p. 226; XI, 58, p. 236; XII, 8, p. 242; 
XII, 47, p. 246; XIII, 1, p. 256; XIII, 60, p. 260; XIV, 61, p. 
270; XV, 105, p. 284; SC 174, Hymns, XVI, 31, p. 12; XVII, 
35, p. 16; XVII, 67, p. 18; XVII, 237, p. 30; XVIII, 8, p. 74; 
XVIII, 13***, p. 74; XVIII, 109, p. 84; XVIII, 120**, p. 84; 
XIX, 14, p. 94; XX, 27, p. 112; XX, 205, p. 126; XXI, 1, p. 
130; XXI, 2, p. 130; XXI, 7, p. 132; XXI, 9, p. 132; XXI, 104, 
p. 138; XXI, 162, p. 142; XXI, 297, p. 152; XXII, 11, p. 170; 
XXII, 19, p. 172; XXII, 159, p. 182; XXII, 174, p. 184; XXII, 
177, p. 184; XXII, 202, p. 186; XXIII, 94, p. 194; XXIII, 112, 
p. 196; XXIII, 113, 116, 117, 118, 133, p. 196; XXIII, 222, p. 
202; XXIII, 228, p. 204; XXIII, 464, p. 218; XXIV, 16**, p. 
228; XXIV, 17, 18, 19, p. 228; XXIV, 265, p. 246; XXV, 33, 
p. 256; XXV, 44, 47**, 50, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, p. 258; 
XXV, 90, p. 262; XXV, 149, p. 266; XXVI, 19, p. 270; 
XXVI, 96, 100, p. 276; XXVII, 42, 43**, p. 282; XXVII, 80, 
86, p. 284; XXVII, 129, 136, p. 288; XXVIII, 161, p. 306; 
XXVIII, 168, p. 308; XXVIII, 190, 206, p. 310; XXVIII, 217, 
p. 312; XXIX, 203, 204, p. 328; XXIX, 205 (God's light: 
fw/j Qeou/), 211, p. 328; XXX, 243, p. 356; XXX, 304, p. 
360; XXX, 313, 314, p. 362; XXX, 428, p. 368; XXXI, 49, p. 
388; XXXIII, 26, 31 (light of life), p. 414; XXXIII, 38 
(divine light), 40 (unapproachable light), p. 416; XXXIII, 
64, p. 418; XXXIII, 127, p. 422; XXXIII, 131 (divine light), 
138-139 (Ibidem), 139, 140, p. 422; XXXIII, 141, p. 424; 
XXXIV, 70, p. 432; XXXIV, 112, p. 436; XXXV, 4, p. 440; 

 
 

ka,lloj147/ w`raio,thj148 
signet)146, 
to. 
lampro,thj150 
lamphdo,na149/ 
(beauty), 
(brightness), u[dwr (water)151, h`donh/j kai. 
glukasmou/ tou/ qei,ou (pleasure and divine 
sweetness)152, margari,th| poluti,mw| (most 

XXXV, 53, p. 444; XXXIX, 2, p. 476; XXXIX, 44, 54, 57 
(divine light), 62, 63, p. 480; XL, 1, p. 484; XL, 14, 17 
(simple light), p. 486. SC 196, Hymns, XLII, 88, 103, p. 
44; XLII, 134, p. 48; XLII, 187, (great light), 192, p. 52; 
XLIV, 21, p. 72; XLIV, 114, p. 78; XLIV, 243, p. 88; XLIV, 
373, 374, p. 96; XLV, 5, p. 102; XLV, 32, p. 104; XLV, 97, 
106, p. 110; XLVII, 46, p. 124; XLVIII, 20, p. 132; XLVIII, 
139, 152, p. 142; XLIX, 18, 24, 27, p. 148; XLIX, 68, 87, p. 
152; L, 41, p. 160; L, 238, p. 174; L, 239, p. 178; LI, 1, 8, 9**, 
p. 184; LI, 15, 17, p. 186; LII, 5, 6, p. 198; LIII, 10, p. 212; 
LV, 6, p. 252; LV, 116, p. 262; LV, 192, p. 268; LV, 200, p. 
270. 

146 Idem, Hymns, I, 73, p. 162; SC 174, Hymns, 
XVII, 819, p. 68; SC 196, Hymns, XLII, 88, 103, p. 44; 
XLII, 134, p. 48; XLII, 187, p. 52 (great light). 

147 Idem, Hymns, II, 18, p. 178; XV, 14, p. 278; XV, 
79, p. 282; XV, 153, p. 288; SC 174, Hymns, XXI, 170, p. 
142 (divine beauty); XXIII, 501, p. 220; XXIV, 7, p. 226; 
XXIV, 29, p. 228; XXIV, 246, p. 244; XXV, 2, p. 254; 
XXV, 71, p. 260; XXVII, 118, p. 288; XXX, 196, p. 354; 
XXX, 375, p. 366; XXXI, 3, p. 384; XXXIX, 1, p. 476; SC 
196, Hymns, XLII, 76, p. 42; XLVII, 49, p. 124; XLVIII, 
152, p. 142; XLIX, 29, p. 148; LII, 10, p. 198. 
148 SC 174, Hymns, XXIV, 250, p. 244. 
149 SC 156, Hymns, II, 18, p. 178; SC 174, Hymns, 
XX, 11, p. 110; XXX, 571, p. 378; XXX, 586-587, p. 380 
(divine shinings); XXXI, 49, p. 388; SC 196, Hymns, 
XLIII, 16, p. 56. 

150 SC 174, Hymns, XXIV, 270, p. 246. 
151 Idem, Hymns, VI, 2, p. 204; SC 174, Hymns, 
XVII, 523; p. 50; XVII, 831, p. 70; XXIV, 20, p. 228; SC 
196, Hymns, XLV, 35, p. 104; XLVIII, 22, p. 132; L, 39, p. 
158. 

152 SC 174, Hymns, XVI, 30, p. 12; XXI, 163, p. 142 
(divine sweetness); XXIV, 15, p. 228; XXV, 86, 260 
(divine sweetness); XXVIII, 
143, p. 306 (divine 
sweetness); XXVIII, 218, p. 312; SC 196, Hymns, L, 146, p. 
166. 

 
 

precious pearl)153; suna,pewj tw|/ ko,kkw| 
(grain of mustard)154, zumi,thj (yeast)155, 
i`ma,tioj156/ e;nduma157/ peribo,lioj158 (gar- 
ment/ vestment), trofh, (food)159, po,si/j 
(drink)160, du,namij161/ kra,toj162 (power/ 
strength), avsth.r aveilamph.j (ever bright 
star)163, ovsmh.n avqanasi,aj (scent of immor- 
(flame)165, megalwsu,nh 
tality)164, flo.x 
(greatness)166, trufh, (delight)167, cara, 
(happiness)168, qhsauro.j (treasure)169, phgh, 

153 Idem, Hymns, XVII, 539, p. 50; XVII, 540, p. 
50; XVII, 573, p. 52; XVII, 620, p. 56; XVII, 650, p. 58; 
XVII, 701, p. 60; XVII, 825, p. 68; XX, 206, p. 126; XXX, 
409, p. 374; XXX, 539, p. 376; SC 196, Hymns, XLII, 86, 
p. 44. 

154 Idem, Hymns, XVII, 760, p. 64; XVII, 766, p. 
66; XVII, 773-774, p. 66; XVII, 791, p. 66; XVII, 828, p. 
70; XXVIII, 93, p. 300; XXVIII, 107, p. 302; XXX, 500, p. 
374; XXX, 540, p. 376. 

155 Idem, Hymns, XVII, 829, p. 70. 
156 Idem, Hymns, XVII, 833, p. 70. 
157 SC 196, Hymns, XLV, 33, p. 104. 
158 Ibidem. 
159 SC 174, Hymns, XVII, 834, p. 70; SC 196, 

Hymns, XLV, 32, p. 104; L, 149, p. 168. 

160 Ibidem; SC 196, Hymns, XLV, 32, p. 104. 
161 Idem, Hymns, XVIII, 15, p. 76; XIX, 10, p. 94; 

XXIX, 164, p. 326. 

162 Idem, Hymns, XXV, 41, p. 258. 
163 Idem, Hymns, XVIII, 18, p. 76; XXII, 5, p. 170; 
XXII, 150, p. 182; XXII, 169, p. 184; SC 196, Hymns, XLII, 
85, p. 44; XLV, 38, p. 104 (ever bright star). 
164 Idem, Hymns, XVIII, 158, p. 88. 
165 Idem, Hymns, XVIII, 88, 82 (great flame: flo.x 
mega,lh); XXII, 8, p. 170; XXII, 33, p. 172; XXII, 157, p. 182; 
XXV, 34, p. 256. 

166 Idem, Hymns, XIX, 10, p. 94. 
167 Idem, Hymns, XIX, 152, p. 106; XL, 93, p. 492; 

SC 196, Hymns, XLV, 37, p. 104. 

168 Ibidem; XXV, 86, p. 260; SC 196, Hymns, XLV, 

32, p. 104; LIII, 11, 13, p. 212. 

169 Idem, Hymns, XX, 207, p. 126; XXI, 181, p. 144. 

 
 

(spring)170, spinqh,r (spark)171, evne,rgeia 
(work)172, e;paqlon (premium)173, e;leoj 
(oil)174, ste,foj (crown)175, stagw,n (drop)176, 
lampa,j (torch/ rushlight/ lamp)177, eivrh,nh 
(peace)178, zwh, (life)179, skhnh, (tent)180, 
qei/oj oi=koj (divine house)181, avna,stasij 
(resurrection)182, avna,pausij (rest)183, lou- 
tro,n (bathing)184, potamo,j (river)185, r`ei/qron 
(flow)186, a;rtoj (bread)187, oi=noj (wine)188, 
feast)189, plou/toj 
pandaisi,a 
(richness)190, poth,rion (chalice)191 etc. 

(banquet/ 

170 Idem, Hymns, XX,208, p. 126; SC 196, Hymns, 

XLV, 35, p. 104 (spring of life: phgh. zwh/j). 

171 Idem, Hymns, XXIII, 273, p. 206; XXX, 501, p. 
374 (divine spark); XXX, 537, p. 376 (spark of the divine 
Nature). 

172 Idem, Hymns, XXVIII, 157, p. 306 (foreign 

work: evnergei,aj xe,nhj). 

173 Idem, Hymns, XXVIII, 220, p. 312 (pl. ta. 

e;paqla). 

174 Idem, Hymns, XXX, 36, p. 342; XXX, 41, p. 344. 
175 Idem, Hymns, XXX, 328, p. 362; SC 196, 

Hymns, L, 138, p. 166 (divine crown); LIII, 16, p. 214. 

176 Idem, Hymns, XXX, 409, p. 374. 
177 Idem, Hymns, XLII, 87, p. 44; SC 196, Hymns, 

XLV, 39, p. 104; L, 31, p. 158. 

178 SC 196, Hymns, XLV, 32, p. 104. 
179 Idem, Hymns, XLV, 33, p. 104; LI, 2, p. 184; 

LIII, 12, p. 212 (eternal life). 
180 Ibidem. 
181 Ibidem. 
182 Idem, Hymns, XLV, 34, p. 104; LI, 2, p. 184. 
183 Ibidem. 
184 Ibidem. 
185 Idem, Hymns, XLV, 35, p. 104; L, 147, p. 166. 
186 Ibidem; L, 148, p. 168. 
187 Idem, Hymns, XLV, 36, p. 104. 
188 Ibidem. 
189 Idem, Hymns, XLV, 37, p. 104. 
190 Idem, Hymns, XLVIII, 109, p. 138; LI, 145, p. 

196. 

191 Idem, Hymns, L, 147, p. 166. 

 
 

An ecstatic symeonian entitling is 
and to, o[ra/ma (sight/ vision)192. He calls 
the ghostual changes from his life and his 
visions right qauma,sta (wonders)193. In 
Hymns, IV, 45, Symeon says, explicitly, 
that to see means „qau/ma qauma,twn" (the 
wonder of wonders)194. 

Exists and places where he uses on 
fano,j together with fw/j without as this to 
mean something redundant, but on the 
contrary an expression even more painful 
of the longing for God195. 

In the Hymn I, Symeon presents the 
coming of light in heart as a rising in 
heart of a sun (h[lioj)196 or a sun disk 
(di,skoj h`li,ou)197. 

The two ecstatic entitlings are fluid 
at Symeon, as and the sight also, for that 

192 SC 51, Chapters, III, 64, p. 99. 
193 SC 156, Hymns, I, 47, 160. About the sight as 
qau/ma, as wonder, to see and SC 174, Hymns, XXX, 524, 
p. 376; SC 196, Hymns, L, 4, p. 156. 

194 Idem, Hymns, IV, 45, p. 194. 
195 Idem, Hymns, VII, 16, p. 210. 
196 Idem, Hymns, I, 39, p. 160 / Ică jr. 3, p. 53. 
About the sight of the light in heart as a sun, to 
see places: SC 156, Hymns, VII, 4, p. 208; VIII, 74, p. 
220; SC 174, Hymns, XVII, 327, p. 36; XVIII, 17, p. 76 
(unsunset sun: h[lioj a;dutoj); XXI, 8, p. 132; XXII, 6, p. 
170 (great sun: h[lioj me,gaj); XXII, 150, p. 182; XXII, 168, 
p. 184; XXIII, 233, p. 204; XXIII, 260, 261, p. 206; XXIII, 
360, 364, 370, p. 212; XXIII, 388, 398, p. 214; XXV, 10, p. 
254 (more than the sun); XXVII, 98, p. 286; XXXIV, 79, 
p. 434 (great sun); SC 196, Hymns, XLII, 85, p. 44; SC 
196, Hymns, XLV, 38, p. 104 (unsunset sun); L, 95, p. 
164. 

197 Ibidem/ Ibidem. To see and SC 174, Hymns, 
XVII, 385-387, p. 40, where the light is shown in the 
middle of heart as a fwsth,r (luminary) but also as a sun 
disc. 

 
 

they attest the sight of the light in 
similarity with some bodily and does not 
solidify the mode of the manifestation of 
the light in his being. 

The 

light 

takes diverse 

forms, 
according as God wants to show them to 
the seer of His light. Therefore, the light 
that appears like a sun, in the same 
symeonian fragment, is and flo.x198, flame 
or tongue of fire. 

In Hymns, 29, 9, the light shows 
itself to him like a full moon (o`lo,fwton 
selh,nhn)199 to Saint Symeon, while in 50, 
41 as a spheric light (fw/j sfairoeide,j)200. 
The ecstatic symeonian entitlings, 
with other words, are not all aprioristic 
given, but some touches the ecstatic 
events personally experienced. 

Therefore, at Symeon merges the 
traditional ecstatic entitlings with the 
ones personally experienced. 

The personal experience is vital for 
salvation, for that the inheritance of the 
Kingdom of Heavens is on measure (ta. 
me,tra) of lightenment and of love which 
we have201. 

In Hymns,VIII, 41-42, Saint Symeon 
expresses in concise mode the fact that 
the cleaning manifestation of the Ghost in 

198 Idem, Hymns, I, 40, p. 160 / Ibidem. To see 
and SC 174, Hymns, XX, 238, p. 128; XXVIII, 140, 142, p. 
304. 

199 SC 174, Hymns, XXIX, 9, p. 314. 
200 SC 196, Hymns, L, 41, p. 160. 
201 SC 156, Hymns, I, 149-150, p. 168 / Idem, p. 55. 

 
 

our being is on measure of cleaning and 
of personal lightenment202. 

The assimilation of light with the 
glory, ie of fw/j with do,xa203, is pretty 
evident at him: „tou/ fwto.j h` do,xa" (glory 
of the light)204; „fw/j avqanasi,aj" (light of 
immortality)205; „fwti. th/j qei,aj do,xhj" 
(the light of divine glory)206; „ai[glhn 
avqanasi,aj" (sparkle immortality)207; „to. 
fw/j th/j ca,rito,j" (light of grace)208; „to. 
fw/j th/j do,xhj" (light of glory)209; „do,xan 
th.n avqa,naton" (immortal glory)210; „do,xhj 
qei,aj" (divine glory)211. 

The adjectives and adverbs of the 
light, and they are very important in our 
discussion, because they expresse the 
light ecstatic 
seen, with dogmatic 
exactitude, as light of God: avpro,sitoj (un- 
approachable)212, avqe,atoj213/ avo,ratoj214 

202 Idem, Hymns, VIII, 41-42, p. 218. 
203 SC 174, Hymns, XXVI, 19, p. 270. 
204 SC 156, Hymns, I, 184, p. 172. 
205 Idem, Hymns, II, 89, p. 182. 
206 Idem, Hymns, I, 210, p. 174. 
207 Idem, Hymns, II, 5, p. 176. To see and SC 174, 

Hymns, XVI, 25, p. 12. 

208 Idem, Hymns, II, 18, p. 178. 
209 Idem, Hymns, VII, 5, p. 208; SC 174, Hymns, 

XXI, 1, p. 130. 

210 Idem, Hymns, VIII, 93, p. 222. 
211 SC 174, Hymns, XVII, 455, p. 44; XVII, 465, p. 

46; XVII, 485, p. 46; XXI, 12, p. 132. 

212 SC 156, Hymns, XI, 57, p. 236; XI, 69, p. 238; 
XIV, 61, p. 270; SC 174, Hymns, XVIII, 13, p.74; XX, 36, p. 
112; XX, 44, p. 114; XXI, 2, p. 130; XXI, 276, 297, p. 152; 
XXII, 36, p. 172; XXII, 161, p. 182; XXVII, 43, p. 282; 
XXVIII, 206, p. 310; XXXIII, 40, p. 416; SC 196, Hymns, 
XLII, 76, p. 42; XLIX, 24, p. 148; LV, 117, p. 262. 

213 Idem, Hymns, XI, 56, p. 236; SC 174, Hymns, 

XXIV, 297, p. 248. 

 
 

a;stektoj 

(unbearable)215, 
(unseen), 
avfra,stoj216/ avpo,rrhtoj217/ a;rrhtoj218/ a;fqeg- 
ktoj219 
(un- 
(unspeakable), a;crantoj 
blemish)220, qei/oj (divine)221, th/j a;nw 
(from above)222, prw,th (prime/ initial/ 
(unextinguished)224; 
first)223, a;sbestoj 
glukei,w sfo,dra (very sweet)225, avschma,- 
tistoj226/ a;morfoj227 (formless/ amor- 
(simple)228, avsu,nqetoj 
phous), a`plou/j 
(uncompounded)229, avme,ristoj (indivisi- 
ble)230, 
be 

avnexereu,nhtoj 

(cannot 

214 SC 174, Hymns, XXX, 19, p. 342; 
215 SC 156, Hymns, XI, 57, p. 236; XI, 81, p. 238; SC 
174, Hymns, XXII, 36, p. 172; XXV, 44, p. 258; XXVIII, 
161, p. 306. 

216 SC 174, Hymns, XVIII, 120, p. 84; XXIV, 270, p. 
246; SC 196, Hymns, XLVIII, 21, p. 132; XLIX, 26, p. 148; 
L, 146, p. 166. 

217 Idem, Hymns, XXIV, 7, p. 226; XXVIII, 187, p. 

308. 

218 SC 196, Hymns, XLIII, 73, p. 62; XLIV, 114, p. 

78; XLVIII, 20, p. 132; XLIX, 27, p. 148; L, 39, p. 158. 

219 Idem, Hymns, LII, 6, p. 198. 
220 SC 174, Hymns, XIX, 14, p. 94; XXV, 149, p. 

266; SC 196, Hymns, XLVII, 46, p. 124. 

221 Ibidem; XX, 205, p. 126; XXVII, 65, p. 284; 
XXVII, 129, 136, p. 288; XXIX, 211, p. 328; XXX, 52, p. 
344; XXXIII, 38, p. 416; XXXIII, 131, p. 422; XXXIII, 138, 
p. 422; XXXIX, 51, 57, p. 480; SC 196, Hymns, XLIV, 243, 
p. 88; XLVIII, 22, p. 132; L, 41, p. 160; L, 147, p. 166; L, 
296, p. 178; LI, 15, p. 186. 

222 Idem, Hymns, XIX, 57, p. 98. 
223 Ibidem. 
224 Idem, Hymns, XX, 205, p. 126; XXX, 23, p. 342. 
225 Idem, Hymns, XVIII, 82, p. 80. 
226 Idem, Hymns, XXII, 159, p. 182. 
227 SC 196, Hymns, L, 42, p. 160. 
228 Idem, Hymns, XXII, 160, p. 182; XXIV, 15, p. 

228. 

229 Ibidem. 
230 Ibidem. 

 
 

a;ktistoj 

evening)237, 

investigated)231, lhpto,j (understood/ com- 
prised/ distinguishable)232, avkata,lhptoj 
(not understood/ incomprehensible)233, 
trano,j (limpid/ transparent)234, avlhqino,j 
(true)235 a;dutoj (unreached)236, avnespe,roj 
(un- 
(without 
created)238, a;narcoj (unbeginning)239, 
avnalloi,wtoj 
a;u?loj 
(unchangeable)241, 
(un- 
circumscribed)242, avqanatoj (immortal)243, 
avperi,lhpton pa,nth| (boundless with all)244, 
image)245, 
avnei,deoj (faceless/ without 
(incorruptible)246, 
avgh,rwj 
a;fqartoj 
(unoldening)247, avsu,gkritoj 
(incompa- 
rable)248 etc. 

(immaterial)240, 

avperi,graptoj 

In Hymns, XIX, 68, enters in the 
frame of the theological discussion and 

231 Idem, Hymns, XXII, 161, p. 182. 
232 Idem, Hymns, XXIII, 234, 238 p. 204; XXIII, 

380, p. 212. 

484. 

233 Idem, Hymns, XXIV, 296, p. 248. 
234 SC 174, Hymns, XXIV, 368, p. 252; XL, 1, p. 

235 SC 174, Hymns, XXXIV, 26, p. 428. 
236 SC 196, Hymns, XLIV, 373, p. 96. 
237 SC 174, Hymns, XXVII, 43, p. 282; SC 196, 

Hymns, L, 293, p. 178. 

238 Idem, Hymns, 19, p. 342. 
239 Idem, Hymns, XXX, 20, p. 342. 
240 Ibidem. 
241 Idem, Hymns, XXX, 21, p. 342. 
242 Idem, Hymns, XXX, 22, p. 342. 
243 Idem, Hymns, XXX, 23, p. 342; SC 196, 

Hymns, L, 148, p. 168. 

244 Idem, Hymns, XXX, 24, p. 342. 
245 Ibidem. 
246 SC 196, Hymns, LI, 146, p. 196. 
247 Ibidem. 
248 Idem, Hymns, LII, 6, p. 198. 

 
 

the 

twice 

substantive 

the Hymn 
the 

the verb qea,omai249 for to qualify the 
ecstatic sight and in the Hymn 31 we 
qe,a 
found 
(vision)250. 
In 
its 
pei/ra 
appearance 
(experience)251 for to indicate the divine 
sight and in 38, 74 the substantive 
avnatolh, (sunrise)252. In the Hymn 50, 234 
we find pragmatei,a (occupation/ quoti- 
dianness)253 put in direct link with pei/ra 
and gnwsi,a. 

substantive 

34 makes 

The light enters in our being and 
our members become carrying of light 
(fwtofo,ra)254. The whole symeonian 
theology is built around this deifying 
experience: that of seeing the divine light. 

results 

that Symeon 

From those on which we have 
is 
presented 
profoundly scriptural and traditional in 
his ecstatic terminology without being 
less innovative. Symeon's terminological 
innovations are not intellectualistic but 
pragmatic ones. He describes what he 
saw, the forms under which he had seen 

249 SC 174, Hymns, XIX, 68, p. 98; XXIX, 204, p. 

328. 

250 Idem, Hymns, XXXI, 2, 3, p. 384. 
251 Idem, Hymns, XXXIV, 17, p. 428; XXXIV, 48, 

p. 430; SC 196, Hymns, L, 234, p. 174. 

252 Idem, Hymns, XXXVIII, 74, p. 472; SC 196, 

Hymns, XLV, 34, p. 104. 

253 SC 196, Hymns, L, 234, p. 174. 
254 SC 174, Hymns, XVI, 33, p. 12; XIX, 15, p. 94 

(lamprofo,rouj). 

 
 
 
 

the divine light and he does not seek to 
bring 
the 
expressions for the sake of expressions. 

front of his readers 

in 

strict, 

But, from the descriptions of these 
very 
exactness of ghostual 
experience until at the suspectness of 
Saint Symeon that he fantasizes on the 
theme of the divine sight or of the fact 
that he would propose a non-traditional 
mystique is a long and unrealistic path. 
The textual research indicates us the 
complete orthodox and 
traditional 
legitimacy of the symeonian ecstatic 
terminology, for that he expresses a 
personal experienced teaching, before to 
be a humble and full rallying to the 
teaching of the previous Church Fathers. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Triadology 

2. 2. The Most Holy Trinity in 

the Personal Ghostual Experience 

The symeonian triadology has two 
major characteristics: is apologetic, then 
when responding of public and personal 
contestations and doxological, personalistic, when not made for the large public, 
but 
into the personal 
is 
prayers. 

integrated 

But the combative dimension of 
symeonian triadology has nothing to do 
with the malicious and the impersonalism of a modern dogmatic treatise, 
but combines the living piety, total and, 
especially, attentive, with the fidelity 
towards the faith of the Church's Saints, 
towards Tradition. 

In this section, we begin the 
presentation of teaching about the Most 
Holy Trinity at Saint Symeon, beginning 
with its public dimension, combative, for 
to conclude with the personalistic, inte- 
rior, as a manifestation of his love 
towards God. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2. 2. 1. The Apologetic Dimen- 

sion 

The three Theological Discourses are 
the apologetic emblem of the symeonian 
theology.The theological concision unites 
here with the simple majesty, delicate of 
the mode to do the ghostual theology. 
Therefore, Symeon does not begin 
the first of his theological discourse with 
a revolutionary impulse to a theology 
made by any tyro, but with the indication 
of the fact that the understanding of God 
has nothing to do with a soul auvqadou/j 
(stubborn) and full of tolmhra/n (auda- 
city)255. 

He is sharp, trenchant, and justly, to 
those who innovate without a traditional 
base or which repertoires of traditional 
writings for to flabbergast in front of 
ignorants256. 

Therefore, we believe 

that a 
knowledge of the issues of the symeonian 
triadology means a precise understanding 
of the theology of glory. 

255 SC 122, The Theogical Discourses, I, 3-4, p. 96/ 
Ică jr. 1, p. 75. The admonestations of Saint Symeon are 
not gratuitous, but are part of the arsenal of 
discreditation of those who are improper for theology. 
They specificate the deficiencies of the false theologians 
and they are never personal attacks. 

To see in this sense Idem, The Theological 
Discourses, I, 172-173, p. 108; I, 273-282, p. 116; I, 332-337, 
p. 120; I, 403-404, p. 126. 

256 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 4-10, p. 

96/ Ică jr. 1, p. 75. 

 
 
 
 

Only if we believe in the trinitarian 
God about that speaks to us Scripture 
and the Fathers of the Church, we can 
experience the sight of God. The tria- 
dological stake is capital for understan- 
ding the ghostual life, the sight of God 
and the personal salvation. 

fact 

that 

The trinitarian problem of the first 
discourse is to demonstrate the fact that 
the Father is not greater than the Son257. 
Because only mustagwgou,menoi (ini- 
tiates into those hidden, sacred) know the 
ones that are said by the Ghost258, 
Symeon affirms 
the 
the 
trinitarian persons being eternal united 
(avei. h`nwme,na) and eternal alike (avei. 
w`sau,twj) it can not exist between them 
the anteriority and posteriority rela- 
tions259, and, in definitive, nor any degree 
of excellence of any person before 
another. If they renounce at the idea of 
the degree of excellence of the Father 
towards the Son, says Symeon, he can 
talk about the Father as the cause (ai;tion) 
the Trinity260. The preexistence 
of 
(prou?pa,rxan) of the Father towards the 
Son is radically contested by Symeon261. 

257 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 10, p. 98/ 

Idem, p. 76. 

258 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 24-25, p. 

98/ Ibidem. 

259 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 31-32, p. 

98/ Ibidem. 

260 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 43-45, p. 

100/ Idem, p. 76-77. 

261 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 49-50, p. 

100/ Idem, p. 77. 

 
 

The Son is together-eternally (sun- 
ai?di,on) and together-without-beginning 
(sunana,rcon) with the Father262. The 
Father is into the Son and the Son is into 
the Father in entirely, because Both are 
the one-honor (o`moti,mon) and the onebeing (o`moousi,on)263. 

But, stresses our Father, Symeon, 
the Father 
is the cause of Son in 
regarding His incarnation, and the idea of 
the gradual, consecutive apparition of the 
trinitarian persons has no relation with 
the Most Holy Trinity264. 

The idea of cause (ai;tion) in Trinity 
is not rejected definitively by Symeon, 
but only purged of the idea of the primacy 
and of the consecution. 

The ineffable and divine birth of the 
Logos from the Father may be orthodox 
formulated in sentence: the cause of the 
Son is the Father265. 

But the fact that the Father is cause 
of the Son does not mean that the Father 
is prw/ton (first)266. 

If we introduce the primacy of the 
Father in the Trinity and the consecution 
of the persons of the Trinity, we are only 

262 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 52-53, p. 

100/ Ibidem. 

263 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 54-56, p. 

100/ Ibidem. 

264 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 64-70, p. 

100-102/ Ibidem. 

265 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 72-74, p. 

102/ Ibidem. 

266 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 75, p. 

102/ Ibidem. 

 
 

falling into polytheism, because we divide 
the Deity in three gods267. If the Father is 
prw/ton, continues Saint Symeon, then we 
have as deu,teron the Son and as tri,ton the 
Holy Ghost268. The affirmation which he 
examines (that „the Father is greater than 
the Son") it discloses in I, 101 as a 
dogmatization covered of the tritheism 
(triqeἶan)269. 

Commenting John. 1, 1, Symeon 
draws us the attention that the Logos was 
not known as Son than in the frame of 
the incarnation and that God was not 
known as Father until not revealed to us 
this thing His incarnate Son270. 

Triadology is a post-incarnational 
revelation made in the space of the 
oikonomia of salvation271. Therefore all 
what we know about Trinity we have 
learned from the Son, Who becames 
man. Retaking the discussion about cause 
in Trinity, Symeon affirms the fact, that 
the 
idea of cause should not be 
interpreted as a primacy of the Father 
towards the Son or the Ghost. 

Although the Father is ai;tion, the 
cause of the Son, He is not prw/ton, the 

267 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 75-77, p. 

102/ Ibidem. 

268 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 96-97, p. 

104/ Idem, p. 78. 

269 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 100-101, 

p. 104/ Idem, p. 79. 

270 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 104-106, 

p. 104/ Ibidem. 

271 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 106-119, 

p. 104-106/ Ibidem. 

 
 

first. Neither the Son is deu,teron, the 
second, although He is from the Father. 
Nor the Ghost is a third, a tri,ton, 
although He proceeds from the Father272. 
Trinity is one from the beginning (e;n 
evx avrchj) and Her existence excludes any 
anteriority273. 

Symeon believes that 

is not a 
boldness to analyze those about God, 
about the trinitarian God into Whom we 
have been baptized. We must know that 
God is Trinity274, but we do not examine 
„how or when or wherewith or how is 
Trinity the creator of all" 275. 

Through this Symeon discourages 
the vainglorious research, haughty of the 
knowledge of God, which proposes to 
inventory problems that not related by 
the Holy Tradition, but a gnosticizing 
speculation of the theological research. 

In the second discourse, Symeon 
draws attention that the triadology does 
not occupy with the research of God's 
being276. 

272 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 124-126, 

p. 106/ Ibidem. 

273 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 126-129, 

p. 106/ Ibidem. 

About the problem of the non-anteriority in 
Trinity to see and Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 
131-138, p. 106; I, 236-237, p. 114; II, 68-69, p. 134; II, 100101, p. 138. 

274 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 240-246, 

p. 114/ Idem, p. 83. 

275 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 246-247, 

p. 114/ Ibidem. 

276 Idem, The Theological Discourses, II, 53-55, p. 

134/ Idem, p. 92. 

 
 

The discussion about fu,sij (nature) 
and ouvsi,a (being) does not have the 
revelational covering. But the discussion 
about 
the persons of Trinity can 
emphasize to us the truth, that the Father 
„gives birth in the timeless and eternal 
face to the Son the one-being, Which 
[Son] in noway doesn't leave Him, and 
together with Which, together-proceeds 
and the divine Ghost from the Father the 
one-being and Which [Ghost] is the onebeing with the Son"277. 

His assertion excludes any tempora- 
lisation of the persons of the Trinity, any 
interval between the birth of the Son from 
the Father and the procession of the Holy 
Ghost from the Father and shows the 
eternal communion between the trini- 
tarian persons, Which have in common, 
in perichoretic mode, the same being of 
the Godhead. 

Debating the parallelism between 
the image of God in man and the Holy 
Trinity, Saint Symeon affirms that the 
Father cannot be without the Son and the 
Ghost278. 

For as to confess in orthodox mode 
about Trinity, says Symeon, we must say 
that the Father gives birth to the Son but 
He did not pre-existed the Son, that the 
Son is begotten of the Father but without 
to be posterior to the Father and that the 

277 Idem, The Theological Discourses, II, 81-84, p. 

136/ Idem, p. 92-93. 

278 Idem, The Theological Discourses, II, 105-108, 

p. 138/ Idem, p. 93. 

 
 

Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, but 
is together-eternal and the one-being with 
the Son and with the Father279. 

The symeonian triadology focuses in 
the second theological discourse, primar- 
ily, on the attestation of the Trinity's 
unity. 

Who denies a person from Trinity or 
talks about her in unrevelational mode, 
he abolishes the Trinity280. The God 
Father was made known to us by the Son 
and His Ghost and those of the Holy 
Ghost we have learned from the Father 
and 
the Son, together-eternal with 
Him281. 

All three persons of Deity have one 
and the same will282, stresses Symeon. 
This thing is capital in our relation with 
Trinity, because we receive the grace of 
the Trinity and see His glory and not a 
substitute of His presence. 

Our relation with God 

is an 
impartation of His glory but reality of 
God's being is not understood for all 
creation283. 

The God's being is for us avpro,siton 
and avkatano,hton, unapproachable and not 

279 Idem, The Theological Discourses, II, 108-111, 

p. 138 / Ibidem. 

280 Idem, The Theological Discourses, II, 167-170, 

p. 142 / Idem, p. 95. 

281 Idem, The Theological Discourses, II, 187-190, 

p. 144 / Idem, p. 96. 

282 Idem, The Theological Discourses, II, 205-

209, p. 144 / Ibidem. 

283 Idem, The Theological Discourses, II, 242-

246, p. 148 / Idem, p. 98. 

 
 

understood284. Therefore, the Holy Scrip- 
ture says about God only that He exists 
but not and how is He285. 

In the end of the second discourse, 
Symeon says that, although we cannot see 
if we see „the 
the being of God, 
unapproachable glory of His divine light 
and endless", we have seen God286. The 
sight of the Trinity's glory makes us to 
have on God in us, Who speaks us and 
introduces us into His mysteries those 
hidden287. 

And the third discourse has right 
center of its problematizations the unity 
of the Trinity, without as Symeon to look 
the triadology in a substantialist mode. 
But he emphasizes, in preponderant 
mode, the triadologic details which his 
opponent has required from him. 

Here, Symeon speaks about the 
theology of Trinity as about a knowledge 
in that we were introduced by the Ghost 
and affirms the fact, that the Trinity's 
persons are unmixed (avsugcu,touj) and 
undivided (avdiaire,touj) in Their divine, 
common nature288. 

284 Idem, The Theological Discourses, II, 250-251, 

p. 148/ Ibidem. 

285 Idem, The Theological Discourses, II, 257-259, 

p. 148/ Ibidem. 

286 Idem, The Theological Discourses, II, 297-

299, p. 152/ Idem, p. 100. 

287 Idem, The Theological Discourses, II, 300-303, 

p. 152/ Ibidem. 

288 Idem, The Theological Discourses, III, 30-33, 
p. 156/ Idem, p. 102. To see and Idem, The Theological 
Discourses, III, 81-84, p. 160. 

 
 

by 

the 

incarnated 

As to talk about God, we must 
confess Him to be in three persons and 
the one after nature289. The revelation 
brought 
Son 
essentialized this triadological doctrine290. 
received 
through faith291, says Simeon. We must 
keep and confess only those who have 
been revealed and we must not seek to 
understand more than that292. 

Triadology must 

be 

We do not know the being of God, 
concludes and the third discourse, but we 
know that those around of God, those 
that come from God and those who are in 
God are one light293. 

In III, 142-157, Symeon puts the equal 
sign between all nominations which the 
Scripture gave of God's works that come 
to us, saying that all are not something 
else than the divine light 294. 

289 Idem, The Theological Discourses, III, 84-85, 

p. 160/ Idem, p. 103. 

290 Idem, The Theological Discourses, III, 86-97, 

p. 160/ Ibidem. 

291 Idem, The Theological Discourses, III, 130, p. 

164/ Idem, p. 105. 

292 Idem, The Theological Discourses, III, 129-132, 

p. 162-165/ Idem, p. 104-105. 

293 Idem, The Theological Discourses, III, 133-135, 

p. 164/ Idem, p. 105. 

294 Idem, The Theological Discourses, III, 142-157, 

p. 164/ Ibidem. 

Saint Symeon says here, that life, immortality, 
the fountain of life, living water, love, peace, the truth, 
the Kingdom of Heavens, the bridal chamber, the bed, 
the Paradise, the delight, the land of the meeks, the 
crowns, the clothes of the Saints, the pearl, the grain of 
mustard, the true vine, the lump, the hope and the 
faith are not than the different expressions of the reality 
of divine light, of the glory of the Trinity. 

 
 

The light is of the Trinity and each 
person of Trinity is in relation with us 
through the uncreated light which we see. 
The third theological discourse ends 
in the positive note of the impartation of 
light, as a consequence of the relation of 
the believer with the trinitarian God. 

We found scattered in the three 
theological discourses and a number of 
the ascetic qualities for to be proper of the 
light. 

Symeon shows in the first Discourse, 
that triadology is a medicament given to 
us for to not get sick of atheism and 
which must make us doxological and not 
that we can 
full of 
understand rational on those supraratio- 
nal of the Trinity295. 

the boldness, 

Reporting the knowledge of God at 
our faith, entering thus in the perimeter 
of the ghostual experience, Symeon 
shows that God gives us, at all, in His love 
of people, th.n peri. Auvtou/ gnw/sin (those 
about His knowledge)296. 

295 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 141-155, 

p. 106-108/ Idem, p. 80. 

About suprarational of the triadological dogma 
to see Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, The 
Orthodox Dogmatic Theology [Teologia Dogmatică 
Ortodoxă], ed. II, vol. 1, Ed. IBMBOR, Bucharest, 1996, 
p. 199: „The effort towards the understanding of the 
single-distinct constitution of reality helps us ascend to 
the suprarational paradox of the perfect unity of the 
three distinct Persons, which is represented by the unity 
of being of the three divine Persons". 

296 SC 122, The Theological Discourses, I, 185-196, 

p. 110/ Ică jr. 1, p. 81. 

 
 

Our Father speaks of a knowledge of 
God being in relation with Him and not 
about a knowledge gained, in exclusive 
mode, from the reading of the theological 
books. For this reason, he sees the 
measure of our knowledge as being direct 
proportional with the measure of faith 
which we have it297. Because he puts at 
base of the theological knowledge, of 
gnw,sewj, on pi,stewj, the personal faith. 

The faith is the one that receives 
from God the knowledge. And the 
knowledge or the ghostual experience 
consists in the receiving from God of 
many sumei,wn (signs), aivnigma,twn (enig- 
evnergeiw/n 
mas), avso,ptrwn 
(works), qei,wn avpokalu,yewn (divine reve- 
lations), evlla,myewn (enlightenments) and 
in the deepening in qewri,a, in contempla- 
tion298. 

(mirrors), 

But the certitude (plhrofori,a) of the 
faith is given by the coming of the Holy 
Ghost (parousi,aj tou/ VAgi,ou Pneu,matoj) in 
our being and more fully enlightenment 
we have through the sight of the divine 
light, which it is our teacher in the 
mysteries of God299. The faith must to 
follow the repentance (metanoi,a)300. The 

297 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 189-190, 

p. 110/ Ibidem. 

298 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 195-198, 

p. 110/ Ibidem. 

299 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 200-203, 

p. 110-112/ Idem, p. 82. 

300 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 255, p. 

114/ Idem, p. 83. 

 
 

is what provides us the 
repetance 
knowledge that we are people but and the 
knowledge of God 301. 

Repentance destroies 

the wall 
(tei/coj) that separates us from God's 
light302 and therefore its importance is 
essential in the symeonian theology303. 
The faith and the repentance bring 

ghostual knowledge304. 

In II, 304-305, Symeon speaks by 
another condition of the glory's sight and 
namely: „th/j tw/n evntolw/n Auvtou avkribou/j 
fulakh/j" (the exact keeping of His com- 
mandments)305. 

The perspective of the purification of 
passions of the ghostual life is the frame 
in that Symeon lives and sanctifies his 
life. And in this perspective, the ghostual 
knowledge is acquired not studying the 
theology or the philosophy from books, 
but by repentance we understand the 
mysteries (musthri,wn) of our faith306. 

But Symeon does not exclude the 
theological study (he himself was a man 

301 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 256-257, 

p. 114/ Ibidem. 

302 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 253, p. 

114/ Ibidem. 

303 About the role of repentance in the theological 
knowledge to see and SC 122, The Theological 
Discourses, I, 273, p. 116; I, 304 -306, p. 118; I, 313-319, p. 
120. 

304 SC 122, The Theological Discourses, I, 304-

306, p. 118/ Ică jr. 1, p. 85. 

305 Idem, The Theological Discourses, II, 304-305, 

p. 152/ Idem, p. 100. 

306 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 306-311, 

p. 118 / Ibidem. 

 
 

who knew the scripting Tradition of the 
Church) but he does not antepune the 
theological study to ascesis, for that he 
considers primordial in the ghostual life 
the cleansing of passions, the way to the 
sight of God. His focalization was on 
methods to struggle with himself, of the 
mode in that we do worthy of the sight of 
God. 

It becomes evident 

the non- 
discrimination of the theological study by 
Simeon 
from the next reference at 
knowledge. Those who have beautifully 
repented, he says, to those is revealed the 
knowledge of God contained in the holy 
books307. 

With other words, we must not to 
transform theology into an attribute of 
those who are doing very easily with the 
textual study and with the memorizing of 
the holy texts of the Church, but must 
decipher the texts of the Tradition with 
the help of the divine grace, that comes 
the 
into our ascetic 
autonomous mind309 must prevails in the 

lives308. Not 

307 Idem, The Theological Discourses, I, 313-325, 

p. 120/ Ibidem. 

308 In SC 122, The Theological Discourses, I, 380, 
p. 124, Saint Symeon warns in trenchant mode to the 
fact, that we cannot make theology without purity, 
without sanctifing our lives in continuous mode. The 
purity is the place where the grace likes to live and that 
only the pure can see, aided by grace, the depths of the 
holy writings of the Church. 

To see and SC 122, The Theological Discourses, 

II, 33-35, p. 132; II, 60-62, p. 134. 

309 About the devastating problems aroused by 
the autonomous mind of man that does not want to 

 
 

understanding of Tradition's texts, but 
the mind that is lightened by grace and 
humble is what that keeps the deep 
meanings of faith and can transmits of its 
in consciousness of cause. 

In 

the 

conclusion, 

symeonian 
Theological Discourses put before us a 
triadology without mystifications and 
which guarantees the energetics relation 
between the Trinity and the faithful man. 
Symeon does not propose us a 
substantialist 
that gives 
triadology, 
preeminence to the divine nature in the 
detriment of the trinitarian persons, who 
possess, in perichoretic mode, the same 
divine being, but highlights, in special 
mode, the unit of being of the Trinity, 
because it was defectious understood in 
his time. 

Therefore, in measure in that we 
know the triadological positioning of 
Saint Symeon, we cannot suspect of the 
idecent pietism or of 
the ailing 
exacerbation his relation with God and 

obey God in noway, to see Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru 
Popescu, The Man Without Roots [Omul fără rădăcini], 
op. cit., p. 11-12: „the modernity transferred the center of 
gravity of the world from God to man, thus that the 
man feels so autonomous in the face of the Divinity, 
that considers the will of God as a kind of attempt 
against his own freedom. In this anthropocentric 
conception, the man realizes himself by himself, 
without God's help. The sacred is the principal obstacle 
in the way of his freedom, and he does not feel free 
only in measure in that eliminates the sacred from 
nature". 

 
 
 
 

we cannot see the his ecstatic experience 
in outside of a real relation, personal with 
Trinity. 

 
 
 
 
 

2. 2. 2. The Personalistic Dimen- 

sion 

If in The Theological Discourses, 
Saint Symeon is connected at the living 
thesaurus of Tradition, presenting the 
triadological dogma as a ghostual 
contemplation, in Hymns we are dealing 
with doxological expressions started from 
the largest communion with Holy Trinity. 
In his prayer, the trinitarian God is 
not a God about Who you talk to others, 
but with Who you are talking, to Which 
you adress through the prism of love that 
links you to Him. 

Having the experience of the fact 
that „the divine light of Trinity is in all" 310 
that are in existence, Symeon feels a 
direct relation with God through the sight 
of His glory. 

In 11, 36-38, He presents Christ as 
One who opens the heaven and bends/ 
inclins toward him, together with the 
Father and the Ghost. 

tw/| 

trisagi.w/|" 

Holy Trinity is known by him as 
„Fwti. 
(threefold-holy 
Light)311, for that is „e;n o;n evn toi/j Trisi. 
kai. e`n e`ni ta. Tri,a" (one in Three and 
Three are in one)312. 

The verb paraku,ptw used at 11, 37, 
with the acceptation to look out/ in 

310 SC 156, Hymns, I, 226, p. 174 / Ică jr. 3, p. 57. 
311 Idem, Hymns, XI, 38, p. 234 / Idem, p. 77. 
312 Idem, Hymns, XI, 39, p. 234 / Ibidem. 

 
 
 
 

outside313, defines the ecstasy as an act of 
mercy of the Trinity to the faithful, 
descenting to him, looking at him. 

The Trinity, continues Symeon, is 
the one Light „that lights my soul more 
than the sun and shines my mind that is 
darkish" 314. 

In the first line, the divine light 
overwhelms the mind one who sees (right 
for that it is stronger than the visible sun) 
but the brightnesses of it illuminates the 
mind, purifies it. And this cleansing of the 
darkness of passions cannot be made by 
the rays of the heavenly star, but only by 
the divine light ecstatic seen. 

Symon emphasizes in this context 
the reality of the sight of the divine light 
and its ghostual character, overwhelming 
and paradoxical in the same time, that to 
be an initiator in the knowledge of the 
Trinity. 

Thus, „in the light of the Ghost look 
those who see, and those who look see in 
it the Son, and the worthy to see the Son 
looks the Father [acc. Jn. 14, 9] and who 
looks to the Father, that one contem- 
plates the Father together with the Son" 
315. In outside of the divine light, with 
other words, we do not know in clear 

313 Both recent romanian translations of the 
Hymns translate paraku,ptonta, from SC 156, Hymns, XI, 
37, p. 234, wiht: „They bend/ inclin [towards him]", acc. 
Ică jr. 3, p. 77 şi Hymns, ed. Stăniloae, p. 361. 

314 SC 156, Hymns, XI, 41-42, p. 234/ Ică jr. 3, p. 

77. 

315 Idem, Hymns, XI, 50-53, p. 236/ Ibidem. 

 
 

mode, from experience, but only from 
books, about the eternal communion, 
interpersonal, of the trinitarian persons, 
about the being unity of the Trinity and 
about His the ever-being 
light that 
sanctifies us. The sight of the Trinity's 
glory is what brings the true knowledge of 
in an abyssal, 
God and puts us 
paradoxical relation with our God. 

Just therefore at tranei/ qewri,a| (the 
limpid/ clear contemplation)316 reaches 
few, for that this contemplation is given 
to the Son, Who is more-before-of-allages with the Father and the Ghost317. 

In the Hymn 15, Symeon specifies 
the fact, that those receiving the light 
from the Son are believers and they are 
not from outside the Church: „Your glory, 
[the glory] of the divine Divinity only 
believers (pistoi.) see it, while all un- 
believers (a;pistoi) seeing You remain 
blind, the Light of the world!"318. 

The faith in the Trinity is what helps 
us not to be blinded by too overwhelming 
evidence of the divine glory. Christ, says 
Symeon, ever shines on those who see 
Him319. 

But the scope of the divine sight is 
not that to take us out of the world and to 
separate us from the world - as and how 
the world would be an evil or would the 
devil work - but to live in paradoxical 

316 Idem, Hymns, XII, 15, p. 244/ Idem, p. 79. 
317 Idem, Hymns, XII, 15-17, p. 244 / Ibidem. 
318 Idem, Hymns, XV, 88-90, p. 284/ Idem, 92. 
319 Idem, Hymns, XV, 96, p. 284/ Ibidem. 

 
 

mode, both in the world and above the 
world and the our senses, our relation 
with Trinity through the sight of His 
glory. 

The Trinity's light raises us to the 
divine sight, which is beyond of those felt 
(tw/n aivsqhtw/n) and of those seen (tw/n 
o`rwme,nwn) in this world, for that we want 
to be, always, enlightened by His light and 
we want to make immortal (avqana,touj) 
from mortals and gods (qeoi.) who see 
God320. 

The Hymn 

19 discusses 

the 
energetics presence of Trinity in our being 
from the reality that should be quotidian 
to us, familiar for every christian in part 
and namely: from the feeling of grace in 
our being. 

Symeon writes: „Who having the 
grace of the Ghost (th.n ca,rin tou/ 
Pneu,matoj) in heart, he did not receive the 
indwelling in him of the glorious Trinity, 
Which enlightens and makes him 
god?"321. 

The conscious/ aware presence of 
the grace in our being, as a direct result 
of the ecstatic sight, means the feeling of 
the inner dwelling of the Trinity. 

Continuing with the assertion, that 
the grace of the Trinity (ca,riti th/j 
Tria,doj) is what makes us gods322, we 

320 Idem, Hymns, XV, 103-108, p. 284-286/ Idem, 

p. 92-93. 

321 SC 174, Hymns, XIX, 53-55, p. 98/ Idem, p. 118. 
322 Idem, Hymns, XIX, 56, p. 98/ Ibidem. 

 
 

understand very clearly, that Symeon is 
conscious of 
the synergistic act of 
deification, stipulating thus an universal 
consciousness of the personal deification 
process of the orthodox christians. 

a 

relational 

For that, at Symeon, the divine sight 
has 
and paradoxical 
character, because it is, in fact, the 
simultaneous existence of the Trinity in 
us by His light and of ours in communion 
with the Trinity, through the sight of His 
glory. 

The reality of the feeling of grace is 
part from the foundation of the state of 
consciousness, of the very deep awareness 
of the personal deification. 

Gods or Saints are born into the 
consciousness of cause, they live very 
mysterious and personal the deification, 
for that they live the largest interior 
communion with the trinitarian God. 

In Hymns 19, 74, Symeon defines the 
process of deification right the fact of „to 
liturgise (leitourgei/n) [of God] in the 
purity of heart and into the purity of 
conscience"323. 
Heart 

conscience 
(suneidh,sij) about that Symeon speaks 
vise the center of entire being of the 
believer, the abyss where it takes place 
our communion with God. 

(kardi,a) 

and 

The cleaning of our innerness is 
produced by the descent of the grace in 
us, which is living, permanent irradiation 

323 Idem, Hymns, XIX, 72, p. 100/ Ibidem. 

 
 

of the Trinity but God's grace sanctifying 
us and, in the same time, exceeding all of 
our and, through it, the Trinity draws us 
to Himself. 

Just therefore Symeon says: „If you 
have seen (evqea,sw) Christ, if you have 
taken (e;labej) the Ghost and if you were 
brought (proshne,cqhj) by Both at the 
Father"324, we know the ones he tells us, 
and we realize that the stance of a 
celebrant of the Trinity is thing „great and 
trembling, above all [human] glory, 
splendor, domination and [transient] 
power"325. 

We observe that for Symeon the 
deification is the central occupation of the 
whole universe and that it is synonymous 
with the state of the interior liturgising, 
of the ministry and the inner mostglory 
of Trinity. 

The relation of the faithful man with 
the Trinity is not only the most living 
theological thrill and the most proper 
narration of God's presence in creation, 
but, in the first line, is a theological life, a 
continuous banquet of the ghostual 
happiness, for which every moment 
means a new delight and a discovery of 
overwhelming greatness, trembling of the 
Trinity. 

The ghostual knowledge 

is a 
celebration, a feast of wonderness of God. 

324 Idem, Hymns, XIX, 68-69, p. 98-100/ Ibidem. 
325 Idem, Hymns, XIX, 71-72, p. 100/ Idem, p. 119. 

 
 

The Hymn 21 speaks about the 
knowledge that about our learning by the 
Trinity, through the divine light: those 
who see God „have as didascal/ teacher 
(dida,skalon) the Ghost, and they do not 
need to learn from people, but being the 
enlightened (lampo,menoi) by His light, look 
at the Son, seeing the Father and worship 
the Trinity in persons, of God united by 
nature (h`nwme,non th/| fu,sei) in unspeak- 
able mode326. 

It is noted that Symeon emphasizes 
the communion and the interpersonal 
relations at the level of Trinity and, in the 
same time, stresses the fact that the 
Ghost leads us through the Son at the 
Father and thus introduces us into the 
communion with the Trinity. 

If in the apologetic side of his 
triadology emphasizes the problem of the 
Trinity's unity, in the side doxological 
but, Saint Symeon speaks about the real 
communion of the faithful with the 
Trinity through the sight of His glory and 
the real initiation of it, through ecstasy, in 
the divine life and love between persons of 
the Trinity. 

Thus, the ghostual knowledge is a 
lightenment, is a divine revelation for the 
believer. 

Triadology, 

according 
the 

as we 
symeonian 
is a dogma that we can 

from 

understand 
discourse, 

326 Idem, Hymns, XXI, 102-107, p. 138/ Idem, p. 

130. 

 
 

experience if we live the sight of the divine 
light. 

It is not only a veritable expose of 
Tradition, but also a mysterious lighting 
and a divine reality to which we accede, 
an internal cohabitation with Trinity, 
because the Trinity dwells in us by Her 
grace and thus lives up to Himself. 

Those who accede, through the 
Ghost, to the knowledge of the Holy 
Trinity, they see the glory of God and 
they don't have the reflex of the curious 
seekers327 in those mysterious of God. The 
ghostual 
from 
swaddle the tendency for cerebralization 
of the Trinity's mystery. 

experience destroys 

For the ghostual man, the Trinity is 
not a distant object of research and that 
has nothing to do with himself, but is the 
source 
life, 
because he lives in the deep communion 
with Trinity. 

itself of man's spiritual 

But in the communion with the 
trinitarian God we enter as response at 
His more-loving initiative to us. And 
therefore, we not only bring us to Him, 
but we want to bring the whole cosmos to 
fulfill into God's glory. 

For that the matter is a structure 
with rational and ghostual foundation 
and has right sense the ghostualisation, 
its transfiguration, our bodies are made 
of this matter, through the sight of His 
glory we personalize and we sanctify in us 

327 Idem, Hymns, XXI, 495, p. 168/ Idem, p. 138. 

 
 

the matter of our body and this irradiance 
of divine light extends and to what is 
around us. 

Symeon recognizes those who know, 
through lightenment, the dogma and the 
truth of the Trinity, because they can give 
details about 
from the 
discovery of the Trinity in their being. 

this reality 

At the beginning of the Hymn 31, 
praising Most beautiful Trinity, our 
Father affirms the initiative of the Trinity 
in the personal discovery of the faithful 
and the fact that, in ecstasy, is seen the 
beauty but not the being of the Trinity328. 
(ouvsi,a| 
u`perou,sioj) of God is unknown both to 
Angels and men329. 

The being beyond-being 

Light of the Trinity but is the reality 
that we impart in ecstatic mode and this is 
the subject that Symeon wanted to clarify 
in his entire opera. 

The reality of the sight and the 
possibility of the God's sight by any 
christian in part is the quintessence of the 
symeonian theology. 

The Hymn 33, which has right the 
prolegomena an extended triadological 
confession, puts light of Trinity face in 
face with the human reality made after 
the image and likeness of God330. The first 
like as strouqi,on euvtele,j (the 
man, 

328 Idem, Hymns, XXXI, 1- 6, p. 384 / Idem, p. 191. 
329 Idem, Hymns, XXXI, 6, p. 384 / Ibidem. 
330 Idem, Hymns, XXXIII, 1-25, p. 412-414 / Idem, 

p. 199. 

 
 

humble sparrow), alias dra,konta (the 
serpent) the old and great, fell because 
they lost the light of the Trinity331. 

in Church, 

To experience again the communion 
with the Trinity, 
is the 
consequence of the sight of the Trinity's 
light and the feeling of the grace in our 
being, which gives us to live a paradoxical 
relation with God, through that the 
Trinity is in us through His glory and we 
in the glory of Trinity, being together with 
Trinity. 

The light's sight is a irrepressible 
interior reality for who lives of it. The 
light sparkles on our soul and body and 
makes them shine332. 

Of course, our being full of light 
does not shine a light on to see it all (it's 
here word about the uncreated light) but, 
in the first line, sees the one who lives it 
and other ghostual people, who would 
see the ecstatic during his sight. 

He who lived the light sees himself 
invaded by light and in light he sees the 
mysteries of God, what God wants to 
reveal to him. 

The consciousness's state of ecstasy 
and, evident, the awareness and the 
remembrance of it is marked in the 
Hymn 34. 

The sight of the Trinity's light is a 
in 

„th.n e[nwsin evn gnw,sei 

 (union 

331 Idem, Hymns, XXXIII, 25-26, p. 414 / Ibidem. 
332 Idem, Hymns, XXXIII,141-142, p. 424 / Idem, 

p. 202. 

 
 

understanding/ in state of consciousness),...evn aivsqh,sei (in sensation),...pei,ra| 
(experience) kai. o`ra,sei (and sight)"333. 

All four members of the symeonian 
statement catalogs the ecstatic's sight 
right a total experience and a direct link 
with the glory of the Trinity. 

The sight of God is a vision without 
a external mediation, namely is not 
produced with the aid of a heavenly 
Power, but is a direct view of the glory of 
God, through the work of the Holy Ghost. 
The glory of God reveals us those of 
the Trinity, because we find „the grace of 
the Ghost, and through Him and in Him 
[we see] the Son together with the 
Father. And [the soul] will see [the glory 
of the Trinity], as it is able (dunato.n) to 
look at it. 

And thus, through Them and from 
Them, it will learn in face of unspeakable 
and it will speak and it will write all to all 
and they will make teachings on measure 
of God (qeopreph/), alike with the teachings 
of all the previously Holy Fathers"334. 

Symeon, in accord with this passage, 
is observed that he sees the didascalic 
initiative, but and the writing and the 
editing of the theological books, as the 
post-ecstatic achievements at that we are 
pushed to the Trinity Herself and that 

333 Idem, Hymns, XXXIV, 16-17, p. 428/ Idem, p. 

334 Idem, Hymns, XXXIV, 84- 90, p. 434/ Idem, p. 

203. 

205. 

 
 

this books have the endorsement of the 
earlier patristic books. 

is not an 

The patristic writing, with other 
words, 
inventory of the 
theological data on base a predetermined 
chronology, but is a reality that keeps the 
man who divinizes himself and it will be 
write and edit until the second coming of 
the Lord. 

The personal measure determines 
the understanding concerning of those of 
the God's light and differences gradually 
on the seers to God. This does not means 
then, that there are the special lights for 
each Saint in part, but everyone imparts 
the unapproachable light of God on his 
measure. 

The impartation by the Holy Ghost, 
by glory, is for Symeon the indication that 
someone is a Holy man335. This state of 
parrhsi,a, the boldness to God, translates, 
in fact, the reality of the communion with 
God. 

We have boldness to God not if we 
are without grace, the good deeds and 
the sight of God and we hide behind a 
personal experience that is only the 
linguistic type and not factual, but only if 
God revealed to us and He continuously 
discovers Himself to us, if we feel that He 
if we feel un- 
lightens always and 
interrupted His grace in our being. 

The presence of Trinity 

in us 
through Her glory, of the grace of Trinity 

335 Idem, Hymns, XXXIV, 96-97, p. 434/ Ibidem. 

 
 

that embraces and, in the same time, 
exceeds all, is what that guarantees our 
theology and supports our state of 
parrhsi,an. 

Symeon knew this thing entirely, for 
that his theology was one with his 
experience, was on measure of his ecstatic 
experience. 

But, how his experience was the 
result of real communion with God, he 
does not speak anywhere in his opera 
about the states subjectivist or fantastical 
of the spirit, but about a senzation and a 
paradoxical ghostual experience of com- 
munion with the Trinity through the 
sight of His glory. 

The addressability the most proper 
of Symeon to the Trinity is retrieve in the 
nomination of God right Filoikti,rmoj 
(Lover of mercifulness)336. 

is 
The mercifulness of God 
manifested in his life as crossing over all 
his sins, for to fill his heart with the 
brightness of His glory337. For this the 
unspeakable mercifulness he is archi- 
thankful, because he knows very sure, 
that only the mercifulness of Trinity filled 
him with so much grace and not his good 
works. 

And we observe enough limpid, how 
the Hymns 44 and 45 begin in doxological 
mode concerning to Trinity, for to 

336 SC 196, Hymns, XLV, 1, p. 102/ Idem, p. 244. 
337 Idem, Hymns, XLV, 1-3, p. 102/ Ibidem. 

 
 

in 

very 

Prevails 

happiness, 

the highlights 

transform 
condensed of the triadological dogma. 
the 

the 
gratitude, the thanksgiving for the graces 
poured into his being by the Mostpure 
Trinity and these transform, suddenly, 
into a concise theology of the reality of 
the trinitarian persons and of the eternal 
relations between them. 

Symeon emphasizes the God's desire 
to have a faithful with a doulei,an gnhsi,an, 
with a real, true service338. They are the 
ones who get in their heart on the Father, 
on the Son and on the Holy Ghost in face 
conscious, in their being, on the Trinity 
who lives (oivkou/nta) and walks (evmperipa- 
tou/nta) together with them339. 

Of fact, the fulminant Hymn 58 
requires nothing else, than the real 
presence of God in every orthodox, who is 
baptized christianly in the Church of God. 

As was able to ascertain, Saint 
Symeon speaks with boldness with the 
Trinity, because He is the God of his love, 
of his heart, for that he has a real 
communion and paradoxical with God. 

He is the doxological and very 
grateful to Her, he feels unworthy for the 
gifts of Her but, in the same time, he feels 
and follows which teaches the Trinity. 

338 Idem, Hymns, LVIII, 209, p. 294/ Idem, p. 

295. 

339 Idem, Hymns, LVIII, 205-208, p. 292-294/ 

Idem, p. 294-295. 

 
 
 
 

He speaks as a servant of the 
Trinity's love, as a friend of the Lord, as a 
life 
theodidact, who made from his 
theology and from theology one of the 
most encouraging 
the 
personal experience of the God's pres- 
ence. 

invitation at 

Any alignment of his with the 
extremism, with the psychic unbalance or 
with the phraseological theology comes 
only from people who have not experi- 
enced the faith as a way to sight, but as a 
form of the epistemologi- 
historical 
zation and the repertoire of the Church's 
Tradition. 

 
 
 
 
 

Christology 

2. 3. The Sight of the Christ's 

Glory and the Path of Deification 

We could tell from the beginning, 
anterior of the laborious textual analysis, 
that the relation of Saint Symeon with 
Christ 
is the central theme of his 
theology, of where pass on, in abrupt 
mode, to the theology of glory. This thing 
becomes evident even if we do only a 
frugal reading of his work. 

The person of Christ is one that 
absorbs the full attention of Symeon and 
Symeon speaks with Christ and about 
Him, seeing Him both personally, in his 
in the same time, and 
being, but, 
objectively, as the Pantocrator, the one 
Who keeps all and 
interior 
foundation of all creation visible and 
invisible. 

is the 

The personal reporting and, in the 
same time, objective, realistic of Symeon 
at the person of Christ is the deepest 
experience and knowledge of his life. 

This thing we want to emphasize 
from good beginning, for that not to by 
considered the communion of Symeon 
with Christ right a reality of the domain 
of the strict subjectivity, which has 
nothing to do with Christ as the real 
person, objective, Who is the Head of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Church and the Almighty, the Pantocrator 
of the entire existence. 

The centrality of the Christ's person 
in the theology of Saint Symeon does not 
start from the fact that our Father has an 
exclusive initiation, of the textual type in 
the christology of the Scripture and of the 
anterior Fathers, but because Symeon 
saw the glory and the beauty of Christ in 
ecstatic mode. 

The Christ of Symeon is the Christ of 
the Church, Who is above all, but He is 
the Lord of his life in the same time, with 
Who he is in communion, until he no 
longer live, but Christ lived in Symeon. 

We present in this section the 
mystical oikonomia of Christ, about Who 
Symeon speaks to us, the continuous 
miracle that happens with those who 
deify themselves and, in the frame which, 
each relives, in personal mode, the whole 
oikonomia of salvation experienced by 
Christ in His humanity. 

 
 
 
 
 

2. 3. 1. The Birth of Christ in the 

Personal Experience 

The Ethical Discourse 5 attacks a 
thorny problem for every generation of 
believers and theologians, who poste 
the 
regarding 
mystical experience on the field of the 
personal unconnection, by grace, at the 
God's life. 

the Sacraments and 

Saint Symeon discusses here the 
false orthodox attitude of those who say, 
that they have the Ghost of God in 
unknown/ unconscious (avgnw,stwj)340 face, 
Whom they received from their Baptism, 
but that they have no an interior evidence 
of His by sight (qewri,a|) and revelation 
(avpokalu,yei), but received Him and keep 
Him in them only by faith (pi,stei) and 
through an 
thought 
interior attitude that does not touch at all 
the ecstatic experience of the glory. 

(logismw/|)341, 

ie 

Symeon dismounted step by step 
the affirmations of his opponents, that, 
after how is observed, they had an 
intellectualist relation and not a graceal 
one with God. 

Commenting on Gal. 3, 27 (the verse 
from which Symeon begins his theologi- 
cal contraoffensive), our Father says that 
Christ, the One with that we dress us in 

340 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, V, 1, p. 78/ Ică 

jr. 1, p. 247. 

341 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, V, 2-13, p. 78-

80/ Idem, p. 247-248. 

 
 
 
 

Baptism (a real, mysterious dressing), 
being the true God and the true man, 
came to make man god through His 
divinity342. 

Our deification, emphasizes Symeon, 
is produced by the deified body (dia. th/j 
qewqei,shj zwopoiei/) of Christ and through 
this we do not know Christ as man, but as 
perfect God known in two natures343. 

The deification (qeopoio,n) of man is a 
for all ages, for that Christ 
reality 
divinizes us „through His divinity and not 
just through His body"344. 

to 

According 

the christological 
dogma, where the person of Christ is not 
divided because of the two natures of His 
hypostasis345, Symeon punctuate without 
right at appeal, that we have clothed in 
Baptism with God, with Christ God and 
that the dressing with God was felt by our 
being346. 

If we say that the dressing with God 
is a metaphor, resulting by the symeonian 
syllogism, that Holy Baptism is not a 
Holy Mystery, but a symbol. Those who 
do not feel that Christ is in them, 
although they were baptized orthodox, 

342 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, V, 14-35, p. 80-

82/ Idem, p. 248. 

343 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, V, 38-41, p. 82/ 

Idem, p. 249. 

344 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, V, 58-59, p. 84/ 

Ibidem. 

345 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, V, 59, p. 84/ 

Ibidem. 

346 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, V, 59-68, p. 84/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

are for Symeon nekroi. kai. gumnoi., namely: 
dead and naked347. 

The dressing in Christ is for Symeon 
the first part of the equation of our 
ghostual birth. 

to 

the 

Binding 

famous 
pnevmatological text from I Thess. 5, 19, 
Simeon says that the address of this verse 
are those who have lampa.dan, the candle/ 
the torch348, that „kaiome,nhj kai. avstra,pton 
evcou,shj to. fw/j" (burns and has a bright 
light)349. 

Translating the expression into the 
next phrase, Symeon says that the 
pauline verse is an encouragement for 
those who see in themselves the Ghost, 
which burns and gives light to them350, 
and not a moral exhortation without 
coverage in our being or a reference to an 
inner reality, that is only a mental 
projection. But his opponents consider 
the theological confession of Symeon 
right a blasphemy, because, in their 
conception based on Jn. 1, 18, God is 
unseen to the faithful351. 

The symeonian citations lead to a 
the 

reaching 

result, 

to 

contrary 

347 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, V, 72-73, p. 84/ 

Idem, p. 250. 

348 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, V, 78, p. 84/ 

Ibidem. 

349 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, V, 80, p. 86/ 

Ibidem. 

350 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, V, 82-83, p. 86/ 

Ibidem. 

351 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, V, 83-90, p. 86/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

conclusion that the Gospels speak about 
the sight of God and the sight of God is on 
the measure of power (dunato.n) of man to 
see Him352. 

Proper with Mt. 5, 8, Acts 5, 4, Jn. 14, 
21 and I Jn. 4, 20, Symeon shows that 
where is the purity and the exactness 
keeping of the commandments, there is 
and the sight of God, of where comes the 
perfect love353. 

For that we will have a section 
where we will analyze the relation 
between Baptism and ecstasy, where we 
will achieve the distinction - more 
evident at Symeon - of what we receive in 
Baptism and what we receive in ecstasy, 
we will remain in the sequence of our 
work only to substantiate the ghostual 
reality of our birth in Christ. In the 
Ethical Discourse 8, taking into account 
the indwelling in us of Christ and of the 
Ghost, of the Trinity at Baptism, Symeon 
presents our ghostual birth conscious, 
produced by a dro,soj ouvra,nioj (heavenly 
dew)354, ie of the love of God united with 
an ineffable light (avrrh,tw| fwti.), that is 
falling in spiritual face, alike a lightning 
in our hearts and becomes a beautiful 
pearl355. 

352 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, V, 106-107, p. 

86/ Idem, p. 251. 

353 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, V, 108-135, p. 

86-88/ Ibidem. 

354 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, VIII, 79, p. 206/ 

Idem, p. 301. 

355 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, VIII, 79-82, p. 

206-208/ Ibidem. 

 
 

The pearl of God's love will grow in 
us daily, by renunciation of ourselves and 
by fulfillment of the commandments, so 
that it will become a miracle of miracles 
(qau/ma qauma,twn)356. 

In the allegory of the prisoner, where 
Symeon shows the difference in degree 
between ecstasy and the indwelling in 
Kingdom of God, he states that the 
ecstasy, „this rapture of mind (a`rpagh. tou/ 
noo.j) is not of the perfects (telei,wn) but of 
the beginners (avrcari,wn)"357. 

The output at light (from the prison 
of the God's unsight) or the sight of the 
first ecstasy means the first making 
contact with the glory of God. 

But to see the light is not perfection 
but the beginning of perfection, because 
perfection means sitting unceasing in 
God's glory. 

Just therefore, Symeon speaks about 
the enlargement of the opening in this 
allegory, of ovph.n, about the increasing of 
light that begins to see it someone who 
purifies of passions, situation in that „the 
growing habit (h` sunh,qeia) with the light's 
sight erases that small wonder"358 of the 
initial ecstasy. 

The ghostual growth presupposes 
the experimental understanding of the 

356 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, VIII, 82-92, p. 

208/ Idem, p. 301-302. 

357 SC 122, The Ethical Discourses, I, 12, 338-339, 

p. 296/ Idem, p. 160. 

358 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 12, 365-369, p. 

298/ Idem, p. 161. 

 
 

fact, that „there is something else more 
perfect and higher 
the state 
(katasta,sewj) and this sight (qewri,aj) 359, 
than the first ecstasy that we've had. 

than 

The sight of 

light ever more 
increases our inner repulsion towards the 
dark prison (th.n fulakh.n) of the mind, 
which does not see the light and, in this 
situation, we support with great heavi- 
ness the conviviality with our deprivation 
of His glory360. 

But the first ecstasy that we had is 
the foundation of ghostual life, is the 
beginning of the spiritual life, as personal 
relation, conscious with God. In the 
absence of ecstasy, any auto-entitling as 
ghostual man or charismatic father is a 
fictionalisation of our own interiority and 
insolent and disgusting personal 
an 
affirmation, in the face of those who 
know, in authentic mode, these divine 
realities. 

Just therefore Symeon called the 
first ecstasy „a beginning of those what 
are introducing in piety and that now 
(a;rti) were stripped (avpodusame,nwn) for 
the struggles of the virtue"361. 

 The adverb a;rti, which uses it 
in the phrase cited above, 
in 

Symeon 
translates, without 

equivoque 

359 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 12, 375-377, p. 

300/ Ibidem. 

360 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 12, 413-415, p. 

302/ Idem, p. 162. 

361 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 12, 416-417, p. 

302/ Ibidem. 

 
 

romanian language, with: right now, just 
now. 

Symeon used it intentionally in 
phrase, because, 
in our opinion, he 
wanted to indicate the concomitance 
incipient purification of 
between the 
passions and the ecstatic sight. 

When we get in real mode, and not 
imagined, to cleanse us from passions in 
some degree, we come to see the light of 
God, as a fast ecstasy, unexpected. 

Our erminia is not an enforcement 
of the symeonian text. Because Saint 
Symeon continues by saying, that after 
this qewri,an, after our ghostual birth into 
consciousness (for that we to be proper to 
the symeonian style) follows „[long] years 
without return (avnepistro,fwj) at that 
sight"362. 

The long search, with longing, with 
far more discerning and ascesis of the 
light seen at the beginning of our 
ghostual life, is rewarded - says Symeon 
in same context - by the sight and more 
of the light and of the mysteries which it 
brings in us, to the point where that we 
accustome with the divine light and we 
live the coexistence (sunw,n) of it363. 

But until the continuous coexistence 
with light from this life, there must be the 
first sheen/ brightness of the light in our 

362 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 12, 418, p. 

302/ Ibidem. 

363 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 12, 418-426, p. 

302/ Idem, p. 162-163. 

 
 

being. It must be therefore, the birth into 
consciousness through Trinity's glory. 

In the Ethical Discourse 1, 10, the 
reality of our ghostual birth or of Christ in 
us becomes a conception of Christ by 
ourselves. 

Says Symeon, that we do not 
conceive Him „physically, like how to 
wear (sune,laben) the Virgin and the 
Mother of God, but ghostually (pneuma- 
tikw/j) and beingly (ouvsiwdw/j)"364 on 
Christ. 

The conception of Christ has place 
in our heart365, but, according to II Cor. 4, 
7, we have in us and the treasure 
(qhsauro.n), ie on the Holy Ghost 366. 

Making this new augmentation at 
the reality of the God's presence in us, 
Symeon asks us to think at the presence 
of the Trinity in us and not at a Christ 
separated from the Trinity. 

Then when we hear to talk abut 
Christ in us, says Simeon, we must 
understand that together with Christ is in 
us and the Ghost, but and the Father, 
because Holy Trinity is consubstantial 
(o`moou,sion) and inseparable (avcw,riston)367. 
The conception of Christ in our heart 

364 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 10, 17-19, p. 

252/ Idem, p. 143. 

365 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 10, 20, p. 254/ 

Ibidem. 

366 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 10, 27, p. 254/ 

Idem, p. 144. 

367 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 10, 29-38, p. 

254/ Ibidem. 

 
 

makes, but through the faith from all the 
heart in Holy Trinity, through a total 
faith and through an ardent repen- 
tance368. 

 Faith and repentance make from 
our souls some parqe,nouj dhladh. (virgins 
clean) and in such souls appears the dew 
from heaven, the fountain with water of 
immortal life, the divine fire, ie the 
presence in us of the Holy Trinity369. 

The beginning of the real and of 
conscious ghostual life, in conclusion, is 
the sight of the God's glory and filled us 
by the Trinity's grace. 

Symeon emphasizes the impossi- 
bility of existence of a relation with God 
without the overwhelming awareness of it 
and he presents the beginning of our 
deification as an act of the Trinity and as a 
feeling of the Trinity's energy in ourselves. 
Christ is together with the Father 
and with the Spirit in our being and this 
means the energetics presence of God in 
us. But the presence of Christ in us does 
not make Him our prisoner, for that He is 
above us. Or just for that He is above all, 
He comes and He is born in us, that we 
raise ourselves to Him. 

it 
The ghostual realism which 
disengage the symeonian theology is 

368 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 10, 39-40, p. 

254/ Ibidem. 

369 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 10, 42-51, p. 

254-256/ Ibidem. 

 
 
 
 

bound, in fundamental mode, to the 
divine reality of the grace and of the 
ecstatic contact, directly with God370. 

370 Mr. Dorin Ielciu, into an evaluated article at 
the life and the mystique of Saint Symeon, he score very 
well both the presence of Christ in the life of Symeon 
and the awareness of this divine presence of Christ in 
him: „The mind becomes bright as Christ, because no is 
separated 
it working, 
irradiating, thinks Christ, though Symeon knows 
himself, for he felt with Christ's mind as his mind", acc. 
Dorin Ielciu, The Saint Symeon the New Theologian - 
Byzantine Mystic, in rev. The Orthodox Faith III (1998), 
no. 1-2, p. 147. 

from Him, but 

through 

 
 
 
 

2. 3. 2. The Death and the Resur- 
rection of Christ in the Personal 
Experience 

In the Catechesis 13, Saint Symeon 
discusses these realities in concise mode 
and programed. He wants to show to the 
monks under his leadership in what 
of Christ's 
consists 
Resurrection in our being371. 

the mystery 

This avnasta,sewn, the resurrection of 
Christ has place only in those who desire 
it, says Symeon, in those who strive to 
have it, to live and it happens constantly, 
in mystic face (mustikw/j) in them372. 

received 

Christ, Whom we 

in 
Baptism and Whom we awared in us, 
through the sight of the divine light, in 
our first ecstasy, is buried (qa,ptetai) in us 
as into a tomb (evn mnh,mati), says Symeon, 
and raised (evxani,statai), united being 
with our souls373. 

But to get to the death and 
resurrection of Christ in us, we must 
participate at the His Passions (tw/n 
Paqhma,twn). 

Participation at the Lord's suffering 
is done through exiting from world and 

371 SC 104, The Catecheses, XIII, 35-36, p. 192/ Ică 

jr. 2, p. 173. 

372 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 36-37, p. 192/ 

Ibidem. 

373 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 38-39, p. 192/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 
 
 
 

entering in the tomb of repentance and 
humility. We must to wait in this tomb 
our resurrection, for that only here is 
going the true ghostual resurrection374. 
Our resurrection is a resurrection 

together with Christ (su.n tw|/ Cristw|/)375. 

This resurrection is real and not 
phraseological for Symeon, for that the 
one who raised with Christ, together with 
Him, from the tomb of repentance, sees 
yet now the glory of His mystical 
resurrection (th.n do,xan th/j mustikh/j Auvtou/ 
avnasta,sewj)376. 

In the catechesis which we are 
discussing, we don't have 
than a 
confirmation of the fact that the birth, the 
death and the resurrection of Christ in us 
is all one with the sight of the divine light 
and that the repentance and the faith, our 
entire effort for to be proper to God are 
the sufferings of Christ in us, the togetherpassion with Christ, for as we resurrect 
into Him and we see the glory of His 
divine-human person. 

For to be understood properly by his 
audience, Symeon states that the Christ's 
resurrection which he speaks about is, in 
fact, our resurrection377. But this resur- 
rection and glory of Christ shown in us 

374 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 48-50, p. 194/ 

Ibidem. 

375 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 54, p. 194/ 

Ibidem. 

376 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 54-55, p. 194/ 

Ibidem. 

377 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 56-57, p. 194/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

through the resurrection of Christ in us378, 
through this ecstatic consciousness sight. 
Our resurrection is the resurrection 
of our souls379. And the resurrection is an 
e[nwsi,j, a union of our with the life380. 

The soul, states Symeon, our soul 
dead cannot rise by itself from his 
ghostual death, from his passions, if it is 
„not connecting in unspeakable face and 
unmixed with God, Who is the eternal 
life"381. 

For as we raise together with the 
Lord, we must have a union with Him in 
consciousness (evn gnw,sei), sight (o`ra,sei) 
and sensation (aivsqh,sei)382. 

All three calificatives of the vision, 
which are proposed to us for under- 
standing, in the symeonian affirmation, 
shows the fact that the union with God is 
real and is personal awared, it is partial 
understood, is ecstatic and, in the same 
time, is repercussed both in the soul and 
the body of those who live it. 

The soul does not live the divine 
sight, the presence of the divine light in 
distancing from the body, but the body 

378 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 61-64, p. 194/ 

Ibidem. 

379 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 65, p. 194/ 

Ibidem. 

380 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 65-66, p. 194/ 

Ibidem. 

381 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 69-70, p. 196/ 

Idem, p. 174. 

382 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 70-71, p. 196/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

participates at the reality of the divine 
grace. 

Without the union with the Lord, 
without this ecstatic union, Symeon 
affirms - and on good righteousness - 
that the soul is dead (nekra,), although it is 
noera. kai. th/| fu,sei avqa,natoj (after his 
nature, rational and immortal)383. 

Our 

soul 

cannot achieve 

the 
ghostual resurrection and the sight of the 
light only for that it has the possibility to 
think and to understand the reality, but 
only if it is united with the Lord, it begins 
to see and to feel with true those 
ghostual. 

Symeon continues the theological 
explanation by the presentation of the 
three qualifications of the vision as being 
the 
interdependent. Thus, he says, 
ecstatic knowledge, this ecstatic gnw/sij 
which we are discussing, is not without 
o`ra,sewj, without the ecstatic sight384. 

The knowledge and the ecstatic sight 
have occur simultaneously. What you see, 
you know and what you know is a result 
of the ecstatic sight. 

But the sight (o[rasij) is not without 
aivsqh,sewj (sensation)385. What we see in 
ecstasy, we feel with the soul and the light 
floods us and the body. 

383 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 71-72, p. 196/ 

Ibidem. 

384 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 72-73, p. 196/ 

Ibidem. 

385 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 73, p. 196/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

If in the frame of the unghostual 
experience, of the bodily experience (as 
calls it Saint Symeon), we can feel 
something, as the blind for example, 
without and we see that thing at 
proper386, but in the ghostual, „mh. eivj 
qewri,an e;lqh o` nou/j tw/n u`pe.r e;nnoian, th/j 
mustikh/j evnergei,aj ouvk aivsqa,netai" (if the 
mind does not reach until the sight of 
those beyond mind, it does not feel the 
spiritual work)387. The sensation of those 
ghostual is reserved for those who have 
seen the ecstatic light388. 

Symeon incites his followers to the 
real living of the resurrection of Christ, 
saying that many people believe in the 
Lord's resurrection, but very few are 
those who have it in themselves and look 
it in pure face (ble,pontej kaqarw/j)389. 

Those who lived it in themselves are 
those who truly worship the Lord, as Holy 
and Lord of their390
 and they know the 
interior content of the song: „Resur- 
rection of Christ seeing (qeasa,menoi), let's 
worship the Holy Lord Jesus, the one, 
Who without sin..."391. 

386 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 75-77, p.196/ 

Ibidem. 

387 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 78-79, p. 196/ 

Ibidem. 

388 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 80-81, p. 196/ 

Ibidem. 

389 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 90-92, p. 196/ 

Ibidem. 

390 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 92-93, p. 196-198/ 

Ibidem. 

391 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 98-100, p. 198/ 

Idem, p. 175. 

 
 

Resurrection of the Lord from the 
grave, the historical, says Saint Symeon, 
which the Scripture indicated it by the 
absence of the Lord's body from the 
grave, it was not seen by anyone392. 

The witnesses of the resurrection 
are the witnesses of the sight of Christ 
risen, Which was shown in front of them, 
but not the witnesses of the divine event 
of the resurrection, of the moment when 
it occurred, as were present at Trans- 
figuration of the Lord, on Tabor, the 
three Apostles. 

But the wonder, that can occur in 
each of us, says our Father, is that now, in 
each of those who believe can occur the 
Christ's resurrection, and not only once, 
but in every moment393. The resurrection 
of Christ, which we sing it and we believe 
it, we have experience of it then, when 
„Himself the Master Christ risens in us, 
shining (lamproforou/ntoj) and flashing 
(avpastra,ptontoj) with the scintillations of 
incorruption and of His divinity" 394. 

392 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 104-105, p. 198/ 

Ibidem. 

393 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 106-108, p. 198/ 

Ibidem. 

394 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 109-111, p. 198/ 

Ibidem. 

Bishop Hilarion Alfeyev discussing the problem 
of the Christ's sight in the symeonian theology said, in 
an article very erudite, that „Symeon never spoke about 
any appearance of Christ as a visible image, but only 
about the light and sometimes about the voice of 
Christ", acc. Hilarion Alfeyev, The Patristic Background 
of St. Symeon the New Theologian's Doctrine of the 
Divine Light, in rev. Studia Patristica, vol. XXXII, edited 

 
 

The presence of the Ghost in us, 
stresses Symeon, gives us the grace to see 
the Lord Himself resurrecting in our 
being395 and resurrecting and us once 
with Him. The resurrection of Lord in our 
is an evpifa,neian, a ghostual 
being 
revelation of Christ in us, a ghostual 
revelation of Himself in our being, being 
seen with toi/j pneumatikoi/j o;mmasi (ghost- 
ual eyes), ie with the eyes required by Mt. 
5, 8. 

Christ, continues Symeon, comes in 
us together with the Ghost (dia. tou/ 
Pneu,matoj) and resurrects us from the 
dead (avnista/| h`ma/j evk nekrw/n) and makes 
us to see Him live (zw/nta) and whole 
(o[lon) in our being, giving us the grace to 
know Him in limpid mode (tranw/j), as 
the one Who resurrects together with us 
and He is glorified together with us, acc. 
Eph. 2, 6 and Rom. 8, 17396. 

This resurrection is of the true 
believers, says, towards the end of 
catechesis, our Father, and not of the 
believers on halfness (h`mi,pistoi)397. 

They do not see anything and will 
not see anything from those ghostual 398. 

by Elizabeth A. Livingstone, Pub. Peeters Publishers, 
Louvain, 1997, p. 235. 

395 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 113-114, p. 198-

200/ Ibidem. 

396 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 119-124, p. 200/ 

Ibidem. 

397 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 125-127, p. 200/ 

Ibidem. 

398 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 127-128, p. 200/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

The faith in that is not God, Who 
resurrects the man, is a dead faith399, and 
alike with they are dead and those who 
have a such of faith without the interior 
intimation of the God's presence400. 

good 

it with 

The end of the symeonian catechesis 
is encouraging, hardener, for those who 
are eager to purify and sanctify their lives: 
„the faith in God ever makes living and, it 
being alive, makes alive those who 
intention 
approach 
(proqe,sewj avgaqh/j) and receive on it, 
which, even before the work of the 
commandments, it took many from death 
to life and showed them the ChristGod"401. 
The 

it the 
movement 
divine 
lightenment and sees the light of God is 
the living faith and it makes us live, for 
that it is our ghostual life. 

faith that 

in 
the 

grace, 

feels 

of 

Symeon, as how is observed, blends 
the 
the 
theological 
concrete experience of ecstasy, for to talk 
about the orthodox faith mysteries. 

reasoning with 

These mysteries are not a dozen 
speculation, made easy, but is a complex 
experience, a personal revelation of the 

399 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 138-139, p. 200-

202/ Idem, p. 176. 

400 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 145-147, p. 202/ 

Ibidem. 

401 Idem, The Catecheses, XIII, 147-151, p. 202/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 
 
 

eternal life, which is given to you by the 
divine Trinity, in your life full of longing 
for holiness. 

Our Father shows that the dogmas 
of faith are not the mental abstractions or 
the landmarks of a christian philosophy 
that can be ideologised, but the divine 
realities which we can experience in our 
lives, in the frame of the deepest relation 
with the trinitarian-God, which we love 
Him. 

 
 
 

 2. 3. 3. The Ascension of Christ 

in the Personal Experience 

A 

very 

and plastic 
realistic 
expression in the same time of the 
experience of the Christ's ascension in 
our being, we find in the Ethical Discours 
4. 

Here, Saint Symeon speaks about his 
relation with God, more precisely about 
his ecstatic relation with God, as about 
the fact to be to. th/j do,xhj evkkre,masqai tou/ 
Qeou/ (hanged/ pendent of the God's 
glory)402. The one who is hanged by the 
divine light is, in the same time, and the 
one who wants God always (tau,thn 
avena,wj evpizhtei/n)403. 

To be with the God which you see 
Him means to desire Him always, to seek 
to see Him always. The finding of God 
does not mean nothing but the continual 
increasing of the desire to want more 
Him, of to be with Him. The communion 
with God, in the frame of a life in which 
is present the divine light, is an escalation 
of any term of comparison. In the Ethical 
Discours 3, the ascension is presented as 
rapture (a`rpagh/n)404. 

402 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 76-77, p. 

14/ Ică jr. 1, p. 221. 

403 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, p. 77, p. 14/ 

Ibidem. 

404 To see the verb a`rpa,zw and in Acts 8, 39, I 
Thess. 4, 17, Rev. 12, 5, where rapture has the evident 
meaning of ascension, taking, lifting by the Ghost. 

 
 
 
 

Commenting II Cor. 12, 2, Symeon 
says that Paul speaking about „rapture, 
showed first of [all] the [ecstatic] sight 
(th/j 
prw/ton 
a`rpagh/j 
evdh,lwse)"405. 

qewri,an 

th.n 

The divine sight is a rapture, a total 
stealing of the mind by what shows you 
the Holy Ghost. 

The ecstasy is presented here not as 
a dislocation of the mind from the human 
being, but as a total perplexedness of the 
human mind. The mind is stolen, is 
captured, is caught entirely in the con- 
templation of light. 

There's nothing more important than 
in 
the sight of God's glory means, 
definitively, the rapture of mind by what 
God reveals us. 

But texts in which Symeon speaks 
explicitly about our ascension together 
with Christ in the frame of the ecstasy, we 
found, for example, in the Hymn 15 and 
Catechesis 36. 

In the Hymn 15, 97-108, Symeon 
speaks about the descent of Christ to us, a 
real descent, for to lift us, together with 
Him, at the Father: 

„But since You, as said, You are out 
of all that exists, and those that enlighten 
them, make them to be outside (e;xwqen) 
from those seen, and as how You, as the 
One who are above, together with Your 
Father, You are inseparable from us, as 

405 SC 122, The Ethical Discourses, III, 247-248, p. 

408/ Ică jr. 1, p. 204. 

 
 

the One who are integer together with us, 
and, although You are in the world, 
though You are incomprehensible to the 
world - because You being in all things 
there, You are as the One above all - 
whole thus, to us, Thy servants, we are in 
the midst of those felt and seen, take us 
out (evxa,geij) from all things there and 
take us up on the entirely, together with 
You, enlightened by Your light, and You 
make us be immortals from mortals. For 
to remain what we are [You make us] 
Your sons by grace, alike You [I Jn. 3, 2], 
gods who see God"406. 

Is observed how Symeon speaks 
about the sight of the Christ's glory as 
about an ascension with Him to heavens. 
We cannot, with other words, tells 
us Symeon, lift us to the sight of the 
Christ's glory than together with Him, 
Who comes to us, but Who is beyond all 
that exists and rises us, with Him, at His 
sight. 

In Catechesis 36, speaking about the 
act of our ascension with Christ, Symeon 
denominates it right „shattering/ tremen- 
dous mystery" (frikto.n musth,rion) 407. 

„taking me 

This mystery consists in the fact 
and 
that: 
ascending You (avnelqw,n) to heaven, You 
take me together (sunanh,gagej) with You, 

(labo,menoj) 

406 SC 156, Hymns, XV, 97-108, p. 284-286/ Ică jr. 

3, p. 92-93. 

407 SC 113, The Catecheses, XXXVI, 167, p. 344/ 

Ică jr. 2, p. 374. 

 
 

whether in the body, I do not know, 
whether outside the body, You alone 
know, Who did that"408. 

Is observed how Symeon combines 
the historic plan of the Christ's oikonomia 
with the world with the personal plan of 
the Christ's oikonomia in the salvation of 
everyone of us. 

He speaks, also, about the Ascension 
of the Lord with the body into heaven but 
and the ascension of the Lord, together 
with Him, into heaven, as an entry in 
ecstasy. 

If You taking me and You ascending 
to heaven is an expression of assumption 
and of ascension of the human nature by 
Christ on the throne of the Trinity, the 
next part of the phrase quoted, indicates 
the fact that the ecstatic sight is a 
together ascension with Christ or the 
living of the Christ's ascension by our 
person. 

Symeon, like as Paul, do not know 
how is going the ecstasy, how does take 
place in his being. But he is sure that 
Christ is the One who knows how to get 
to the sight of the light, for that together 
with Him we ascended at the sight of the 
Trinity's light. 

lives 

Simeon 

inexpressible 
astonishment of the divine glory, that 
„unmeasure height"(tw/| avmetrh,tw| u[yei)409, 

the 

408 Idem, The Catecheses, XXXVI, 167-170, p. 

344/ Ibidem. 

409 Idem, The Catecheses, XXXVI, 172, p. 344/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

which made him tremble in his whole 
being 
own 
wickedness410. 

to mourn his 

and 

Our ascension with Christ is thus 
true and not purely rhetorical. The sight 
of the light is a sight of the Christ's glory 
and, in the same time, an ascension with 
Christ to the unmeasured glory of the 
Trinity. 

Any human endeavour, that wants 
to reach the divine light is a failure, says 
Simon, as long as Christ Himself is not 
born, is not suffering, does not die and 
does not rise in us, and, not in the last 
line, if does not ascend in us and not lift 
us in the glory of the Trinity. 

410 Idem, The Catecheses, XXXVI, 172-175, p. 344/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Pnevmatology 

2. 4. The Holy Ghost and the 

Sight of the Divine Glory 

Although Saint Symeon 

is the 
Theologian of the Trinity and he never 
sees a divine person as being separated 
from the other two, though we find in his 
theology a rich pnevmatology, as we have 
found a rich christology applied in the 
frame of the personal salvation, but 
unsystematic presented. 

The energetics presence of the 
Ghost in his being is amply discussed, 
because the Holy Ghost is the One who 
lifts us to sight, at the divine light, the 
light which is, in fact, the grace of the 
Trinity. 

But at Symeon, Christ 

is the 
backbone of the entire ghostual life and 
the person of the Holy Ghost is never 
seen as separated from Christ, but where 
is Christ is and the Ghost present or 
Christ is seen through His Holy Ghost by 
the believer. 

In this section of our work, we will 
present various hypostasises of the sy- 
meonian theology, where the person of 
the Holy Ghost is presented as having 
direct link with the ghostual knowledge 
and with the sight of the divine glory. 

 
 
 
 
 

2. 4. 1. The Holy Ghost, the True 
Faith and the Experience of the 
Grace 

The Ethical Discours 10, occasions 
us a trenchant discussion about faith and 
the sight of the divine glory. Saint Symeon 
has in view here the orthodox christians 
canonically baptized and not any kind of 
believers. 

Speaking about the sight of the glory 
of God, he says, „the deity, namely the 
grace of the Most Holy Ghost, is not 
shown to anyone, never, without faith 
(ouvdeni. ouvde,pote di,ca pi,stewj pefane,rw- 
tai); and if it shows, however, by a man, 
in paradoxical face, it shows frightening 
and 
fearful (fobera. kai. frikth.), not 
luminating, but burning, not being alive, 
but frightening punishing"411. 

The exemplification which brings 
Saint Symeon, at this affirmation entirely 
true, is the case of Saint Paul, who, on the 
road to Damascus lost its natural light of 
the eyes then when he saw the glory of 
Christ412. Saint Paul, concludes in his 
argumentation Saint Symeon, „could not 
see the slightest brightness (ouvde. mikra.n 
avpaugh.n)"413 of the Christ's glory on the 

411 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, X, 88-92, p. 

264-266/ Ică jr. 1, p. 325. 

412 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 92-97, p. 

266/ Ibidem. 

413 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 102-103, p. 

266/ Ibidem. 

 
 
 
 

road to Damascus. The unbelief of Paul is 
for him the sure indication, that only 
believers see God's glory, as a lighting and 
holiness of their being. 

For this reason he says further, that 
„for those who are still in unbelief (th/| 
avpisti,a|) and are mastered by passions 
(toi/j pa,qesi katecome,noij), the grace is 
completely unapproachable and un- 
seen"414. 

Symeon does not indicates here the 
unbelief that state of non-membership to 
the Orthodox Church, but as full nonattachment to God. The unbelief of a 
believer is shown in that, that he does not 
come off fully of his passions and he is not 
looking to see the glory of the Trinity, 
that is to sanctify him and to deificate him 
in integral mode. 

Without the purity of heart and 
without the fulfillment of the divine com- 
mandments, we cannot be lighted in 
continuous mode415. 

the 

that 

fulfillment of 

 Commenting Jam. 2, 17, Symeon 
shows 
the 
commandments or what we call good 
deeds must to set us up into a pressed 
evidence, clear, into an evidence of our 
faith416. The faith and our deeds must be 
concordant. 

414 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 104-106, p. 

266/ Ibidem. 

415 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 111, p. 266/ 

Ibidem. 

416 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 201-202, p. 

274/ Idem, p. 328. 

 
 

Therefore says Symeon: „those who 
confess that Christ is God, but they do not 
keep His commandments, they will be 
considered not only those who reject Him 
(avrnou,menoi), but and that those who 
dishonor Him (avtima,zontej)"417. 

The 

faith 

itself 
through facts is it that receives the 
experience of the Ghost. 

that manifests 

For Symeon, the faith cannot be a 
real one if it has not a touch with the 
grace. He says, in trenchant mode, that 
in 
„cannot [even] be called 
accomplished face (pisto.j telei,wj)...[that 
who] does not receive the Ghost of 
God"418. 

faithful 

Bringing in support of this assertion 
Jn. 4, 14, Jn. 7, 39 and I Pet. 2, 22, Symeon 
shows that the Lord Himself testified the 
presence and the interior sensation of the 
grace in our being, in so that, „if That one 
says that the Ghost is given (dido,nai) those 
who believe in Him, all those who have 
not (mh. e;contej) the Ghost are not 
believers from the heart"419. 

Symeon asks the sensation of the 
grace, sensation that means a personal 
relation, real, of the orthodox faithful 
with God. The personal faith must to be 
the interior foundation where experience 

417 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 202-205, p. 

274/ Ibidem. 

418 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 488-489, p. 

294/ Idem, p. 337. 

419 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 448-500, p. 

294/ Ibidem. 

 
 

occurs the glory of God and where the 
ghostual growth is a personal evidence 
and not a simple supposition with tradi- 
tional character. 

Faithfulness to God, for Symeon, is 
not measured in ascetic deeds and not in 
acts of the exterior presence in the Church 
of God, but in revelation of God to us, in 
ecstatic revelation, as an expression of our 
right living in His face. 

Just therefore, „if anyone says that 
each of us, the faithful, received Him [the 
Ghost] and has Him in insensitive face 
(avnaisqh,twj labei/n), that one blasphemyes 
(blasfhmei/)"420 against Christ, Who said 
that we feel the grace of the Holy Ghost in 
our being421. 

The sight of the divine light is the 

beginning of the sensation of the grace. 

In symeonian theology, the sight of 
the light, as beginning of our relation, 
conscious and real, with God, is the 
foundation of the ghostual life, without 
thereby to diminish somewhat the Holy 
Sacrament of Baptism. 
The Baptism 

presupposes 

the 

ecstatic sensation of the grace. 

It is not contrary to the personal 
ecstatic experience, but this is a personal 
actualization, absolutely necessary, of the 
grace received at Baptism. 

420 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 501-502, p. 

296/ Ibidem. 

421 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 502-506, p. 

296/ Ibidem. 

 
 

Light of the Trinity is a divine reality 
perceived by the believer, the believer 
that cleanses himself from passions. 

Symeon says in express mode that 
thing: „none from people could not ever 
see it before being cleaned, [and] cannot 
receive it before seeing it. For many 
people saw it, but they have not acquired 
it (ouvk evkth,santo) [in stable mode], exact- 
ly with those who are worthy to see a 
large treasure in the royal treasures, but 
they go there with empty-handed. 

Because, at many times, those who 
repent ardent (tou.j metanoou/ntaj qermw/j) 
it makes itself to them at beginning a 
divine brightness and a lighting (e[llamyij 
qei,a kai. fwtismo,j), but that quickly 
passes. 

And if they give themselves entirely, 
up to death, and they will seek it with 
tiredness, depicting the Lord as worthy by 
it and without reproach in all, they will 
receive it again, in perfect face, when it 
will return"422. 

There is therefore a confirmation of 
repentance and of faith of the beginners 
from part of Trinity, then when they see 
the divine light and when they begin to 
feel in them, living and working, the Holy 
Ghost but there is and an increasing 
filling of our by Ghost, until the return of 
the divine light in us, as a quotidian 
presence. 

422 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 522-532, p. 

296-298/ Idem, 338. 

 
 

The initial ecstasy makes us to see 
the endless treasure of the divine glory 
but this we does not have as stable wealth 
in our being. 

Symeon uses the aorist of kta,omai, 
preceded by negation, for to show that 
light does not enter into our definitive 
possession only because we saw it once or 
several times, and emphasizes through 
the adjective a;xioj, that the sight is not a 
gift of God, at which we have no personal 
contribution, but it is a worthiness/ a 
worthy gained by doing with longing of all 
His commandments. 

But the most important message of 
the text quoted is, that the ecstasy is a 
confirmation from God of our faith and it 
is not a badge that we put ourselves alone 
on the chest. We are not those who 
declare ourselves believers, but God is the 
One who confirms our zeal and our 
faithfulness to Him. 

The ecstasy is the first engrossing 
letter, the first shattering email from God, 
how that He saw our sincere zeal for Him. 
But His sight must to turn into a 
living longing, acute in our being, for His 
sight in continuous mode, into a running 
full of love and hope, for only He is the 
single fulfillment and the eternal rest of 
ours. 

Conscious, the consciousness grace- 
ful relation of the believer with God is the 
foundation of deification. 

 

If we live the Godhead's brightness in 
the purity of our soul, says Simeon, then 
is 
this lampa,j, the divine brightness 
„knowledge of the divine and heavenly 
things (h` gnw/sij tw/n qei,wn kai. ouvrani,wn 
pragma,twn) given by the Holy Ghost to 
that who is israelite with the mind"423, 
namely seer of God. 

The sight of the light is what 
procures us the ghostual knowledge424. 
Saint Symeon repeats often this thing. 

How he repeats, also, and the fact, 
that only through cogitation on the divine 
meanings, through full ascesis, ghostual 
readings and tears we cleanse our soul, 
for as to receive the divine light425. 

faith 

The dynamism of 

is the 
principal premise of the ghostual life at 
Saint Symeon. The living faith or what 
makes us to be alive unto God is the 
sensation of grace in us and the sight of 
His glory. 

Speaking about the 

faith, that 
manifests itself as a fulfillment of God's 
commandments, Symeon states that Holy 
Apostles and Holy Fathers have gained, 
by such a faith filled with an over- 
whelming dynamism, „the love of God 

423 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, XIV, 184-187, p. 

434/ Idem, p. 396. 

424 About the theme of the divine sight, that 
brings us the spiritual knowledge, to see and Ică jr. 1, p 
81, p. 82, p. 91, p. 92, p. 100, p. 154, p. 163, p. 255 etc. 

425 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, XII, 182-184, p. 
396/ Ică jr. 1, p. 379. About ascesis as a preamble of sight 
to see and Ică jr. 1, p. 84, p. 85***, p. 100, p. 204-205, p. 
305, p. 338. 

 
 

into the knowledge" (th/j tou/ Qeou/ avga,phj 
evn gnw,sei)426 and „the knowledge of God 
in love" (evn avga,ph| gnw/sin Qeou/)427. 

We stressed the last two citations by 
the greek text for to clarify and better the 
fact, that Symeon called the grace right 
the divine love and presents it, in the 
Hymn 18, into a majesticness full of 
enthusiasm, full of divine fervor. 

In this Hymn, Symeon shows that 
for our 
the ecstasy 
is determinant 
cleaning from passions, for that the light 
seen ecstatic „is shown for little time and 
it is contracting/ it withdraws, but erases 
one, just one between the passions of the 
heart (tw/n paqw/n th/j kardi,aj). For man 
cannot overcomes the passions, if it did 
not come in aid and, moreover, it does 
not chase away all at once. 

For the psychical man (o` a;nqrwpoj o` 
yuciko.j) may not receive all at once the 
Ghost entire and to become unpassioned 
(avpaqh.j), but then when he accomplished 
all those found in his power (ta. eivj 
du,namin)"428. The presence of the Holy 
Ghost in the believer's life is an active 
presence, cleansing, deifying, of which he 
is conscious429. 

426 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, XV, 156, p. 454/ 

Idem, p. 405. 

427 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, XV, 158, p. 454/ 

Ibidem. 

428 SC 174, Hymns, XVIII, 50-57, p. 78/ Ică jr. 3, p. 

112. 

429 Father Dușe said, into an article of his 
dedicated to Saint Symeon: „The deification is a 
permanent process of ontological transformation, but 

 
 

His humbleness consists in the fact, 
that he feels himself a dwelling of the 
Trinity's grace but, in the same time, he is 
conscious of his defaults, at the fact that 
he is not always at the measure to delight 
the Holy Ghost, Who dwells into him. 

The union with God, about that 
speaks Symeon, is a real one, it is an 
experience lived in overwhelming mode of 
the believer. 

Then when we have an ecstatic 
sight, 
„man unites ghostually and 
physically (e`nou/tai pneumatikw/j te kai. 
swmatikw/j) with God, because the soul 
does not separate from the mind, nor the 
body from the soul, but by a union in the 
beingly 
face (ouvsiwdw/j e`nw,sei), man 
makes himself threehypostatic through 
grace, a god through adoption (qe,sei 
qeo,j), made from body, soul and the divine 
Ghost of which he imparts (metei,lhfe)"430. 

without that the faithful man to lose his created 
nature...for that the possibility of union [with God] is 
given by the status of person of human", acc. Rev. PhD. 
Călin-Ioan Duşe, The Deification after Saint Symeon the 
New Theologian [Îndumnezeirea după Sfântul Simeon 
Noul Teolog] in rev. Theological Horizons [Orizonturi 
teologice], I (2000), no. 2, p. 117, 124. 

And P. Miguel said, into an article about grace at 
Saint Symeon, that „the sin is solely responsible, after 
Symeon, for the lack of spiritual experience: the 
habitation of the Holy Ghost in us cannot be but 
conscious", acc. P. Miguel, The Consciousness of the 
Grace after Symeon the New Theologian [La conscience 
de la grâce selon Siméon le nouveau Théologien], en 
Irénikon XLII (1969), no. 3, p. 325. 

430 SC 104, The Catecheses, XV, 72-77, p. 288/ Ică 
jr. 2, p. 186. About the full man, spiritual, that cannot 
be without the Holy Ghost, to see and Ică jr. 1, p. 337**. 

 
 

Thus, we constate, that the ecstatic 
sight is not at Symeon a collateral 
theological subject but, on the contrary, it 
is the foundation of our deification. 

The ecstatic sight is lived by soul in 
inseparable mode from his own body and 
the fully man, the whole man is the one in 
which the Holy Ghost reigns in his being. 
The living faith, full of the grace of 
the Ghost is the true faith, because God 
speaks to His true children, those who are 
living for that they stand in the graceful 
relation with the Living One. 

Those who see through the Ghost 
the Trinity's glory and feel in they the 
grace as an alive source of eternal life, 
they are believers that must go full of 
longing towards the permanent dwelling 
in them of the divine light. 

The symeonian theology does not 
know a ghostual life in which relaxation 
has a positive side but, on the contrary, 
continue desire towards more, towards 
light and of 
the 
more 
understanding of it mysteries, represents 
the true orthodox-christian interiority. 

sight of 

For that, 

in the frame of the 
ghostual experience, after how says 
Father Professor Dumitru Stăniloae, 
„man has the perspective of an eternal 
advance in the divine light and in his 
spiritual enrichment"431. 

431 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, The 
Personal Relation with Christ in the Light of Divine 
Infinity, after Saint Symeon the New Theologian 
[Legătura personală cu Hristos în lumina infinităţii 

 
 

2. 4. 2. The Personal Ecstatic 

Testimonies and Their Validation 

Undoubtedly, we cannot venture to 
pronounce, in trenchant mode, on those 
about the theology of glory without to 
have ever the experience of the sight of 
the divine light. 

It would be the one between the 
things of the most embarrassing with 
possible and a muster of cheap vedettism 
from our part, to trample a domain so 
holy and shattering for any humble 
christian. 

Therefore, the symeonian testimo- 
nies about his ecstasies, in our opinion, 
take account the most important thing in 
the frame of the theology of glory and 
namely the real understanding, authen- 
tic, about how we must deify our whole 
being. 

His ecstatic confessions are not 
gratuitous, they do not have a stressful 
morgue, they do not stiff exhibitions of 
private experiences, but, on the contrary, 
they are generated by holy conscience, 
that these ecstatic experiences will be 
enlightening for those who will listen and 
read later. 

dumnezeieşti, după Sfântul Simeon Noul Teolog], in 
Studies of Orthodox Dogmatic Theology [Studii de 
teologie dogmatică ortodoxă], Pub. Metropolitan of 
Oltenia, Craiova, 1990, p. 316. 

 
 
 
 
 

Saint Symeon speaks about of his 
own sights and of his proper holiness 
driven by the divine grace, that incited 
him to speak, to give confidence to those 
who are cleansed of passions and, 
especially, to show them that holiness is a 
reality shockingly beautiful and not a trite 
story, that happened or not in foretime. 
Speaking about the sight of God, 
Symeon wants to be authentic and less 
didactic, strongly emphasizing the identi- 
ty of his ecstatic experience with the 
ecstatic experience of all previous Saints, 
without that through this emphasis in 
force to consider him worthy of God's 
mercifulness, which it showed as sight of 
His glory. His confessions are full of 
humbleness, contentedness, gratitude 
and of a truth conquering. 

They are extensive guarantees for a 
theology of the glory wholly orthodox, 
because they have „the force an personal 
unmediated experience"432. 

Thus, in the following sequences of 
this 
subchapter, we will punctual 
excogitate various ecstatic symeonian 
testimonies, we try to present a clear 
analysis, internal, in proper terms433, of 
theology of glory. 

432 Rev. Prof. John A. McGuckin, The Biblical and 
Theological Paradigms of the Sight of the Divine Light to 
Saint Symeon the New Theologian [Paradigmele biblice 
şi teologice ale vederii luminii dumnezeieşti la Sfântul 
Simeon Noul Teolog], in Ică jr. 4, p. 420. 

433 Father McGuckin finish his study cited in 
note above, dedicated the theology of glory at Saint 

 
 

2. 4. 2. 1. The First Ecstasy of 

Saint Symeon 

Without to enter into an exegeticshistoricist perspective434, our research, 

Symeon, with the express desire to continue the 
internal exegesis of the symeonian ecstasies. 

He said: „With all the literary, historical and 
theological complexities of it, this important collection 
of epiphany stories, deserves and requires an analysis 
fuller and more rigorous in their proper terms", acc. 
Idem, p. 422. 

434 We believe that the historical perspective of 
Father McGuckin, with the sight I in 969 [acc. Idem, p. 
407] and the sight II in 976 [acc. Idem, p. 410] is 
interesting, possibly credible, but we tend to believe 
that we must to punt more on the undated sights, 
according his expression [acc. Idem, p. 417], namely the 
current sights in the life of Saint Symeon, of which he 
confessed the ones he wanted or made a synthesis of 
them, intended to present the sight as a divine reality in 
his life. 

We do not believe that our Father wanted to 
make a systematization, a hierarchy, a chronology of 
his ecstasies, designed to give us a historical perspective 
on the frequency and the number of them. 

We agree that he speaks about a first ecstasy, 
about how was at the beginning of his ecstatic life. But, 
then, the things are complicated. We do not know 
clearly about what ecstasies he speaks, but it is evident 
that he speaks about realities personal lived. 

We tend to give right to Father Golitzin, when he 
affirms, that „we cannot specify the exact number of 
in which Symeon was visited by the 
occasions 
appearing of the divine light. His writings and Life of 
Niketas suggests that this thing was quite frequently, 
although it varied in intensity", acc. Hierom. Alexander 
Golitzin, Symeon the New Theologian: the Life, the 
Epoch, the Thinking, in Ică jr. 1, p. 466. 

But, both, Father Golitzin [acc. art. cit., p. 466] 
and Father McGuckin [acc. art. cit., p. 407], designates 
right the first epiphany relating Catechesis 22, which 
the first sees it repeated by Niketas in Life, 5 [acc. Idem, 

 
 
 
 

from 

the premise of 

theological and linguistic in the same 
time, of the symeonian confessions, 
the 
leaves 
indeterminacy of the number of ecstatic 
experiences which Saint Symeon has had. 
According to a theological consensus 
statuted of Life, 5, Catechesis 22 is 
designated as the first ecstatic symeonian 
confession that we have. 

The ecstatic relating is comprised 
between 88-103 lines435, being concise and 
presented, by humbleness, under the 
name of the young George, who lived in 
Constantinople and had almost 20 
years436. 

The symeonian ecstatic confession is 
contextualized. It appears as a emphasis 
of God's oikonomia with those who fulfill 
with zeal His will. 

Young George, 

alias Symeon, 
appears as standing in prayer and saying 
the prayer of heart, of repentance: „The 
God, have mercy on me, the sinner!" (8889 lines). 

His desire was the commiseration 
from part of God, the forgiveness, the 

p. 467] and, the second sees it retaked in Catecheses 35 
and 36 [acc. Idem, p. 408-409]. 

Therefore and we will discuss this epiphany 
relating of Catechesis 22 as the first ecstatic symeonian 
experience, after how confesses and Saint Niketas 
[Stethatos] in Life, 5, acc. OC [Orientalia Christiana] 12, 
V, 1-8, p. 8/ ed. Iliescu, p. 18 and Life, ed. Koutsas, apud. 
Ică jr. 4, p. 247. 

435 Acc. SC 104, The Catecheses, XXII, 88-103, p. 

372/ Ică jr. 2, p. 242. 

436 Idem, The Catecheses, XXII, 22-23, p. 366/ 

Idem, p. 239. 

 
 

discharged from the passions of his being 
and not the sight of the divine light. 

The sight comes as a divine surprise 

in his life. 

Symeon 

thing 
states a 
regarding the prayer of George: the fact 
that it was made more with mind than 
with the mouth (89-90 lines). 

single 

Our young man was into a state of 
mental's prayer, into a cry of his mind to 
God. Were preponderating the mind and 
the heart, the interior effort in front of 
God and not the articulated words. 

The specification of this fact is very 
important, because the sight comes into a 
state of interior concentration, of repen- 
tance, the interior perception of the light. 
The light comes in the time of his prayer, 
when he was ready to receive it and 
without any notice from God. 

When Symeon begins the relating of 
the ecstasy of George, he begins abruptly, 
talking about an e[llamyij qei,a [divine 
in 
brightness], 
unexpected mode, that appears suddenly 
in his being and it shines, being shown 
coming from above [evpe,fanen a;nwqen] [90 
line]. 

that comes ai;fnhj, 

Symeon does not explain to the 
auditorium the terms communiqued by 
him. It is presupposed that they had to 
know what means that divine brightness. 
We have, from the first enunciation, 
a few certain things: during the prayer of 
George it came, in unexpected mode, in 

 

his being, a brightness from part of God, 
which he has lived it as coming from 
above, from heaven. 

Symeon does not speak about a 
simple e[llamyij, that would have caused 
by something physical but not the adverb 
a;nwqen, an adverb that expresses the 
place, the location from where something 
comes to us, to those on earth, should 
not lead us with the thought, that it 
indicates a terrestrial or cosmic source of 
light. 

We believe that a;nwqen wants to 
emphasize the role which it has the 
adjective qei,a, that accompanies e[llamyij. 
The light is divine, is from above, ie 

is from God. 

George asked God's mercy and God 

shows His mercy as light. 

But the phrase open by Symeon is 

not finished. 

After specifying that the light comes 
from above, Symeon affirms that the 
divine brightness filled the whole place 
where was the young George [91 line]. 

The aorist of plhro,w, and namely 
evplh,rwse, which Symeon uses here, in our 
opinion, it does not indicate the fact that 
our young man looked around, with his 
physical eyes, and saw that everywhere, 
in his cell, was light, but, rather, that 
everything what sees him now, in this 
moment, was only that brightness. 

Symeon looks retrospectively the 

things and compendious. 

 

He has not present the ecstatic 
event in progress, like a televisual horse 
racing, where is showing to us, finally, in 
slow motion, which of the competitors 
walked first across the finish line and 
how it actually happened. 

Symeon includes in running the 
event details that he did not realized 
during the ecstasy, but he understood the 
post-ecstatic, at some time after the 
event. 

This thing is evident from the 

following two phrases. 

If, further, in the phrase following 
that 
in which we reported before, 
Symeon said that the young man „did not 
know [anything by himself, to him, who 
prayed] and he forgot that he was in the 
house or under a roof" (91-93 lines), 
immediately Symeon opens an another 
phrase and says: „because everywhere he 
sees only light and he did not know 
whether he was walking on the earth" 
(93-94 lines). 

The idea of the roof, of ste,gh, that 
suddenly disappears, collapses, that he 
does not see it because the light, it will 
reappear in the symeonian description. 

The light of God coming down, 
coming in human, and it takes over 
completely, is what separates us from 
things seen, catapulting us, suddenly, in 
the vastness of the divine light. 

The divine light does not give us the 
possibility to think something related of 

 

the visible world, but we see fw/j mo,non, 
only light in that moment. 

The transition from what we see to 
that what-we-do-not-expected-to-see of 
the ecstasy, but which we was ready to 
see it, fills us with amazement. Our 
young man forget everything he knew, 
what he wanted, what he believed that he 
was. 

The symeonian relating presents 

again post-ecstatic details. 

It says that the young George felt 
not in him the fear of not falling into sin, 
he did not take care of things from the 
world and he bore himself like one 
immaterial (94-98 lines). 

But the ecstatic state, that to be o[lwj 
fwti. avu/lw| sunw.n [completely united with 
the immaterial light] (97 line), does not 
permit the evidence of the world with 
which we are accustomed, but is a 
transposition of us in eternity. 

Therefore and returns Symeon at 
the narration of the ecstatic event, 
through characterization of divine bright- 
light and 
ness right the 
through emphasis the fact that light was 
in the young George with such interior 
evidence, that he himself felt the light (9798 lines). 

immaterial 

The utilization of dokei/n from the 
line 98 does not indicate a conjecture, a 
simple supposition of the young George. 
The verb doke,w, used with his intransitive 
significance as in Acts 15, 28; 17, 18, I Cor. 

 

12, 22, Hebr. 12, 11 translates with: to seem, 
in comparison with the transitive form 
where it means: to think, to believe, to 
presuppose, to consider437. 

In the symeonian text, we have that 
connotation of the verb that we find and 
in the synodal tomos from Acts 15, 28. 

When Symeon said about the young 
George, that to him it seemed that he was 
made light entirely, that he is a light in 
the light of God, more concrete said, he 
had no doubt that this was reality. 

He lived not a state of unreality, of 
appearance, which might be presupposed 
based on the aorist of the verb doke,w, but 
he was convinced, as the Synod's Fathers 
from Jerusalem, that this was reality: he 
was filled with divine light, because he 
was in the light of the Trinity and not into 
an impersonal light and depersonalized. 

Our young man sees himself joined 
with the light, made entirely the light and 
seeing only those who appeared to him in 
the light which revealed him the Trinity. 
He does not choose what to see in 
the light, but he sees in wonder, he was 
only the one seeing eye of those that God 
shows him. For that the ecstasy is 
precisely in this: in our raising to com- 
munion with the Trinity, through His 
glory. 

Symeon 

touches with more 
perspicacity the fact that light flooded the 

437 Acc. Gingrich Lexicon, apud BW 07. 

 
 

young man without that he to oppose the 
interior resistance. 

The 

light 

flooded him with 
everything. Being 
into a state of 
repentance and of fervent prayer, into a 
deep state of concentration, by ghostual 
introspection, our young man is kid- 
napped with the mind to God and he sees 
the divine light. 

The ecstatic state is incompatible 
with the memory, says Symeon, using the 
participle evpilaqo,menoj. 

He forgot all world suddenly [98 

line], then when appeared the light. 

The detail, how that he arrived in 
and 
„full of 
this moment 
unspeakable joy and gladness" [99-100 
lines], it does not belong of the ecstatic 
moment, but it is a ghostual result of the 
ecstasy in his life. 

tears 

That what keeps by ecstasy, by 
development of the ecstatic moment is 
the final specification, that „his mind 
ascended into heaven and it saw another 
light more limpid than the one that was 
close to him. And standing in proximity 
of that light was showed to him, in 
paradoxically face, that old man Holy and 
wise and alike with Angels" [100-103 lines], 
and namely Saint Symeon the Pious, his 
ghostual Father. 

The problems raised by the end of 
ecstatic confession to an exegete are 
insurmountable, as long as we consider 
that we are dealing with a prime light and 

 

with a second light, the latter being 
separated from the first by its reality. 

The symeonian expression ouvrano.n 
avnh/lqen o` nou/j auvtou/ [his mind was 
exalted/ ascended to heaven, acc. 100 
line], it should not be interpreted as a 
crossing from an ecstatic sight with 
terrestrial connotations at an ecstatic 
sight with heavenly qualities, divine, for 
that this passage does not exist in reality. 
Our young man was already in the 

light, he was full of light. 

The ascension of mind about which 
Symeon speaks and the heaven that he 
indicates for us here, is not than a 
revelation more intense, from part of God, 
of those things seen in the divine light. 

Speaking in anthropomorphic man- 
ner about this ecstatic situation, Symeon 
wants to tell us only that, his mind was 
widened in the light of divine, that it 
received a more pronounced sight of the 
mysteries of light, this crossing towards 
an all-more-knowledge/ sight of those 
from the light being called ouvrano.n, 
heaven. 

The young George, with other 
words, he did not pass from heaven to 
another as in mythology, but he passed 
from one ghostual heaven to another and 
more impressive, from the light to a light 
and more clear/ limpid, ie from an initial 
sight to a more divine and overwhelming, 
in which appeared his ghostual Father. 

 

Symeon points out all these ecstatic 
details, internal of ecstasy, for to show 
that the ecstasy is not only sight but also 
the advancement in the sight, in knowl- 
edge, in the discovery, from part of God, 
of those divine. 

The increasing clarity of light is a 
divine gift and the sight of Symeon the 
Pious in light was a confirmation, from 
part of God, of his holiness. 

Saint Symeon the New Theologian 
was taught, on the one hand, about those 
of the light of God, God Himself initiated 
him into the mysteries of His eternal 
glory but, in the same time, God ensures 
him that the holiness is known by Him, 
that Saints are His people and that only 
they can be credible with truly for those 
who want to sanctify their lives. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

2. 4. 2. 2. The Ecstasy During His 

Noviciate438

The text that we find in Catechesis 
16, 78-107439, which relates the sight of a 
young brother of the monastery, it 
constitutes in the second ecstatic descrip- 
tion, that we analyze here. 

Saint Symeon anonymizes again his 
own experience, he had at 28 years, as 
novice at Stoudios, putting it on account 
of a young man. Niketas will describe it 
in Life, 19, as the third of his ecstasy440. 

The confession begins with the habit 
of the young man to pray. He fulfills the 
commandment of his Holy abbot to pray 
with the prayer: „Holy God" [78-79 lines]. 
The fulfillment of the command- 
ment to pray is immediately rewarded by 
God, for that the young Symeon was 
moved „towards tears and towards divine 
longing", the fact that brought to him an 
interior joy (cara,n) and a pleasure (h`do- 
nh,n) immense [80-82 lines]. 

438 We punt in this context on the emphasis on 
that makes the Metropolitan Basil Krivochéine in the 
starting note to Catechesis 16: „Dans la vision de la Cat. 
16, il s'agit par contre d'un novice, vivant avec son père 
spirituel dans le meme monastère" [But in the vision of 
Catechesis 16, it is rather a novice, who lives together 
with his spiritual Father in the same monastery], acc. 
SC 104, p. 238, n. 3. 

439 Acc. SC 104, The Catecheses, 78-107, p. 244-

246/ Ică jr. 2, p. 193-194. 

440 Acc. OC 12, II, 19, 13-23, p. 28-30/ Life, II, 19, 
ed. Iliescu, p. 34-35/ Life, II, 19, ed. Koutsas, apud Ică jr. 
4, p. 257. 

 
 
 
 
 

The antechamber of the sight is 
again the prayer. But at this time the 
prayer is joined with a state of joy, the 
ghostual impetus and confidence in God, 
ie is animated by a sensation resulting 
from the atmosphere of repentance, that 
we found it and in the ecstasy previously 
analyzed. 

It is seen the increase of young 

novice in this description. 

The young man, being with his face 
to the ground [82-83 lines], into a state of 
adoration of the Trinity, is again invaded 
by the divine light. 

Introduced by the adverb ivdou. - that 
expresses, in this case, the huge surprise, 
the unexpected ecstatic - the symeonian 
confession tells us, first, about a fw/j polu. 
(more light), that shines his mind, taking 
the mind wholly to it, along with the soul 
[83-85 lines]. 

This divine light shines upon him as 

and the first description. 

Symeon used e`pila,myan, ie the same 
formula as the first time, showing that 
the light which shone upon him, this 
immense divine light was seen by his 
mind and the sight of it nailed the mind 
and his soul in its contemplation. 

Using the verb lamba,nw into a such 
context, with the meaning of rapture, 
seizure, taking is strategic for Symeon. 

The insinuation in text of this verb 
keeps to clarify the fact, that the soul 
prepared by longing and love by God does 

 

not oppose resistance to the divine light, 
at its sight, but, rather, it is captured to 
the full by its presence, then when it is 
revealed by God. 

A false-ghostual discussion, better 
said an intellectualist-theological one, of 
the report between grace and freedom in 
the frame of the ecstasy, ceases to exist by 
itself in the symeonian theology. 

One who expects with longing God's 
mercy, namely His sight, does not think 
in terms of equity, of the counter-value 
the God's presence in his life, but the 
divine condescension as light is received 
with an impressive opening, beingly, by 
his own person. 
light 

is not violent with 
Symeon's freedom but it guarantees the 
authenticity of its beingly expression, for 
that the perception of the light in his 
being is more than he could have ever 
imagined, that means the divine mercy. 

The 

The light reveals not a rationalist, 
atheist or gnostic mind, who prefers a 
God built by the computer of mind or the 
absence of the Being creative, but a mind 
full of longing, of waiting to the Loved 
One. 

into all 

Symeon confirms 

this 
direction of thought, because, he says: 
„the unexpected of wonder filled me with 
wonder and made me to be like into an 
ecstasy" [85-86 lines]. 

The sight filled Symeon not with 
disorder but with wonder, the supreme 

 

admiration 
achieve. 

that human beings can 

That the light was perceived as a 
miracle is a evidence in the opera of Saint 
Symeon. From the symeonian theology 
resulting in express mode the fact, that 
did not exist a greatest miracle in his life 
than the sight of the divine glory. 

The e;kstasij was real for Symeon. 
Particle w`j, from the phrase anterior 
regiven, has not at Symeon the dubitative 
character but, we believe, rather that he 
puts, through the intermedium of it, the 
equal sign between sight and ecstasy. 

The sight of the light which he lived 
it is an ecstasy, is an output by itself, ie 
that state, evoked more above in other 
words, when the soul was captured by the 
sight of the Most Holy Trinity's light. 

The young Symeon forgets the place 
where he was and who he was [86-87 
lines]. His seizure by light and this 
forgetfulness - real forgetfulness - about 
that he speaks here are post-ecstatic 
details. 

When he came out from ecstasy was 
found himself crying: „Lord have mercy!" 
[87-88 lines]; the cry emphasizing, both, 
his immense joy but and his surprise. 

The line 88 ends the relating propersaid of the ecstasy. Until the line 107, we 
have a theological elaboration of his 
reality and, especially, of its consequences 
with that has resulted the ecstasy. 

 

Symeon says that the young man 
spoke with the light [92 line]. Using the 
aorist proswmi,lhsa, he indicates the fact 
that he did not listen passively to what 
the light said him or what was told to him 
light, but that he 
from the divine 
conversed with the 
light, he had a 
personal attitude towards the light, he felt 
it as a personal irradiation of Godhead. 

The personalistic attitude of Symeon 
opposite at light is seen from the fact that 
designated it that being conscious of the 
fact that they converse [92 line]. 

In this situation, the form of perfect 
oi=den, from 92 line, translated by to know, 
knowing, by us, indicates understanding, 
mutual discussion of the trinitarian God, 
Who reveals His overwhelming glory, and 
Symeon. 

But Symeon accepts and the direct 
significance of oi=da, as we have seen, 
because he speaks about a sight of us by 
God, through light, but and about a sight 
of Him, by us, through intermedium of 
the light. 

In the light, Symeon conversed with 
God but he also saw God. Converse with 
Him whom he saw. 

The sight of the light scattered the 
fog and the earthly thought from his soul, 
removed the burden of the soul and it has 
made that his body become suddenly 
vigorous, stripping the garment of the 
corruption [92-99 lines]. 

 

Symeon was invaded by a great joy, 
by a sensation of the mind and by a divine 
sweetness [100-101 lines], that we could 
not acquire only from the prayer without 
divine sight. 

Of fact, this is the message which he 
wants to induce to his listeners and 
readers: that the ecstatic sight produces a 
divine knowledge and it has amazing 
reactions, at holistic level, in the faithful 
man and is not just a passenger event, 
who could be forget easily by him. 

He lives, post-ecstatic, an amazing 
interior freedom, he forgets the syllogistic 
attitude that requires your life in the 
world and he forget and the death, the 
fact that he is a mortal man [102-105 
lines], for that „all sensations of the mind 
and of the soul were glued only (mo,nhn) of 
that ineffable joy of the light" [105-107 
lines]. 

All these evidences show us that the 
sight is not a mental disorder, nor a 
paralysis of conscience, is not an un- 
welcome and uncomfortable pressure of 
God in our being, but is the meeting, at a 
deep personal level, of God with the 
faithful man and the entry in com- 
munion, through His glory, with the 
Most Holy Trinity. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2. 4. 2. 3. The Ecstatic Con- 
fession and the Validator Comment 

In the Ethical Discourse 5, we have a 
symeonian typical muster of the tren- 
chant testimony of the personal ghostual 
experience, doubled by a rigorous theo- 
logical validation, which has no defect of 
logic or of the hook at mystical Tradition 
of the Church. 

In 5, 251-354441, Saint Symeon makes 
a fulminant apology to the divine sight 
and to the direct theological experience, 
presenting theology as on a consequence 
of the ecstatic sight. 

Symeon begins 

the experiential 
explanations, which we wish to comment 
here, from the traditional syntagma: „the 
light of knowledge"(fw/j gnw,sewj) [251 
line]. 

He tells his audience, that at the 
hearing of this syntagma, we must not to 
understand that we can have a real 
theological knowledge without the sight 
of the divine light [251-253 lines]. 

Not the knowledge is what that 
produces the light, warns Symeon, but 
„the light produces in us the knowledge" 
[254-255 lines]. 

The gnw/sij/ gnosis/ knowledge or 
cognizance (as we translate, taking as 
paradigm the liturgic usance) does not 

441 Acc. SC 129, The Ethical Discourses,V, 251-354, 

p. 98-106/ Ică jr. 1, p. 255-258. 

 
 
 
 

have at Symeon 
foundation. 

than the ecstatic 

The ecstatic knowledge is for him the 
true knowledge, beingly knowledge, 
ontological, in that we are fingerprinted 
by the glory of God. 

The knowledge by collecting data, 
the knowledge as multilateral experience 
is subsumed for him the knowledge that 
sight. The one that gives the tone in his 
relation with his listeners or his hierar- 
chical superiors is the ecstatic experience, 
this being the promoter of law of his 
theology. 

Without the ecstatic sight we can 
not know, in real mode, on God. Symeon 
repeats this thing by every time, he 
massive making angry those who had no 
idea about a such experience. 

In the text to which we refer, he 
says: „someone can not know God than 
only through the sight of the light (mh. dia. 
th/j qewri,aj) that gushes from Him" [255257 lines]. 

Saying that, Symeon emphasized his 
relation with a living God, with a God 
who is not an antiquity of the Church, 
well preserved by its theologians or an 
impeccable fake, that is covered with 
eulogies, for as not to know the non- 
actualness and His inoperability. 

Symeon gives testimony about an 
overwhelming experience of the reality of 
the Creator of the heaven and of the 
earth, and he asserts the fact that, his 

 

relation with God is one as possible 
common, quotidian and in no case a 
relation occasioned just by any celebra- 
tion or tradition or by his position as 
priest of the Church. 

The God whereof speaks Symeon is 
living, He is the single God and He 
irradiates us with His glory, that brings us 
His knowledge. 

Bringing in face of his auditorium 
the paradigm of the witness, the one who 
can give a testimony about a man or a 
city only if he saw these [257-262 lines], 
Symeon concludes: „(also none cannot 
speak) about the above Jerusalem and 
about the invisible God, Who dwells in it, 
about the unapproachable glory of His 
face and about the work and the power of 
His Most Holy Ghost, so about the light, 
if he first sees not the light with the eyes 
of his soul and (if he not) know with 
exactness the lightings and its works in he 
himself "[263-269 lines]. 

The symeonian syllogism is irrefuta- 

ble at practical level and contemplative. 

You can know and speak about 
something, only if you have experience 
that fact. We cannot know what we do 
not know nowise. 

If God's light is seen from the eyes of 
our heart, if we see light in purity of heart 
and we have the current lighting of the 
Ghost, related to different problems of 
the quotidian life, then there is no great 
difficulty to give testimony about them. 

 

Symeon spoke very openly about his 
ecstatic experiences because they were 
common to him, they were part of the 
daily rhythm of his life and they were not 
taboo problems theological. 

If in the case of the knowledge as the 
personal revelation of light, you know it if 
God gave you in your life, Symeon says 
that and the reading a holy book, in the 
case a ghostual man, is not a scanning of 
surface of the readable information, but 
his reading is a continues divine revelation 
of the senses: „even and then when he 
hears through the divine Scriptures 
intermedium, speaking to those who 
have seen God, (the spiritual man) is 
learned (dida,sketai) about those only 
(mo,na) through the Holy Ghost" [269-271 
lines]. 

The knowledge through the light 
unites in the ghostual man with that 
through the divine illumination. 

The grace of the Holy Ghost is the 
one who reveals to us both. They are 
manifestations of grade of the Ghost and 
not of essence. 

As said above Saint Symeon, all 
what we call as being of God are, in fact, 
the references to the divine light. 

Symeon continues with the para- 
digm of probation, of the immediate 
experience. 

The simply reading of Scripture's 
texts considering at the sight does not 

 

mean an experience of sight [271-276 
lines]. 

No matter how banal may seem his 
explanations, full of truism for a ghostual 
man, Symeon goes on a low syllogism to 
explain his ecstatic experiences. 

The sight of God means to see the 
light [276 line]. To know God you have 
not to see anything else irradiating from 
Him than His light. If we saw the light, 
then, in that moment, „(we received) first 
cognizance that God (exists)" (gnw/sij 
prw,ti o[ti Qeo,j) [277 lines]. 

If we know that God exists from 
what we read about Him and we believe 
that He exists, the sight of the light 
demonstrates, in personal mode, to the 
believer, how shows the God that exists, 
Who is always and forever [277-286 
lines]. 

Beginning with the line 287, Symeon 
reconfess the ecstasy of his noviciate 
years, which we analyzed in the previous 
section. 

Only that here, Symeon does not 
opt for a simple narration of any ecstatic 
details, but he remembers the details that 
requires to be theological interpreted. 

The confession retaken here has a 
preamble constituted by allusions to the 
reality of the ecstatic experience. 

The God that revealed Himself to 
Symeon is avora,ton [287 line], unseen. But 
one who sees on the One invisible has a 
revelation, he sees a light [288-289 lines]. 

 

The state of sight contains in it the 
state of wonder, of astonishment of the 
one who sees [289 line]. 

The sight of the light does not 
indicate, in the first phase, and the 
knowledge of Him who appeared to you. 
Symeon states that you cannot ask Him, 
Who reveals in the light, who is, as long 
as you cannot look Him, nor you can 
comprehend His greatness 
[289-293 
lines]. 

We see, with other words, the glory 

of Someone, not the glory of something. 

The symeonian ecstatic theology is 
personalistic because 
indicates us a 
relation with Someone through the inter- 
medium of His glory and not a relation 
with an 
impersonal glory, with a 
phantomlike and depersonalized holistic 
reality. 

Says Symeon, that he who sees, 
knows that „o[lwj ti,j evstin o` fanei.j pro. 
prosw,pou auvtou" (all that was shown/ 
revealed in front of him is of Someone) 
[293-294 lines]. 

The glory is of Someone, of the 

trinitarian God. 

Retelling the ecstasy of Catechesis 
16, Symeon gives the light the appellative 
of gluku,j (sweet) [297 line]. 

He doubled linguistic the character- 
istic of the light, that to be refelt as sweet, 
he emphasizes this thing, for to show the 
personal mode in that he received the 
light in his being. 

 

The light did not filled him of fear, 
did not burn him, did not brought him in 
the threshold of madness but, on the 
contrary, it filled him with an inexpress- 
ible divine sweetness. 

Light came into a longing heart for 

God and it was refelt as sweetness. 

The sweetness (glukei/an) and the 
loging (po,qon) [300 line] are the ecstatic 
consequences highlighted by Symeon 
with this occasion. The ardent tears and 
many come from itself, as a continuation 
of the two [301 line]. 

In this context appears the image of 
the house that disappears and, once with 
it, and the whole world, moment in that 
the ecstasy is presented as an extreme 
deep loneliness in two: he and God are 
face to face [302-304 lines]. 

After what he expresses in face of 
his Father, his perplexity considering at 
the presence of his body during ecstasy, 
Symeon indicates us his interiority: an 
unspeakable joy, love and miss much and 
rivers of tears of joy flowed him from eyes 
[304-309 lines]. 

The Father responds him that the 
light is what that cleanse us, until when 
makes us perfect and in this state we can, 
we gain, we have the boldness to ask Him, 
Who shows us, who is He and He will 
answer us that is God, our Creator [311-316 
lines]. 

 

The increase in knowledge means for 
Symeon the growth in the sight and the 
understanding of the divine light. 

In the knowledge of God advances 

slow but constant. 

Symeon says, that we go forward 
kat' ovli,gon, by little in every day in those 
of God [317-319 lines]. 

The sight of God means His 
authentic knowledge and His knowledge 
means to know that is His will to us [320323 lines]. 

in 

The 

stays 

sight 

internal 
connection with the knowledge in the 
frame of the symeonian's theology and 
His knowledge is manifested as personal 
understanding of to. Auvtou/ a[giou qe,lhma 
(His holy will) [322-323 lines]. 

Communion with God, which 
procures us the sight of His glory, gives 
us to feel how we behave, how must we 
talk, how must we manifest before God 
and people. 

This communion with Him we do 
not presuppose how to act, but we are 
taught interior, by the light, what to say 
to the glory of God. 

Theology of glory is the one that 
gives us true moral dimension of the 
ghostual life, for that good deed into 
consciousness, good deed which we see 
the consequences in our being, they are 
realized in personal mode or it is made
then, when we see light, when we feel the 
grace of God in us. 

 

Saint Symeon does not live active 

moral dilemmas, congested. 

Knowledge as sight and that as 
lighting discharges us of what seems 
dilemmatic, 
in 
ghostual life. 

obturated 

obscure, 

The advancement and the reaching 
in familiarity with God is for Symeon a 
knowledge of what God does in us, thing 
that is identic - accentuates he - with 
what God has done and will do with all 
the Saints [324-328 lines]. 

Symeon does not speak than by a 
single modality to advance in communion 
with God and namely the life of holiness, 
which translates to a life in that we go 
forward always in the sight of the light 
and in lightings and ghostual contem- 
plations. 

just 

that 

Therefore, 

this 
for 
mysterious side of the relation of Saints 
with God means ghostual life, and, in 
definitive, theological knowledge, Symeon 
sees our relation cu God, the holy 
communion with God, as having its 
foundation 
initiation, which 
makes to us God Himself about Himself 
[328-329 lines]. 

itself 

in 

intensely 

Symeon debates 

this 
capital truth about personal salvation, 
showing that true knowledge of God we 
do not receive through our work, through 
the efforts very tiresome we are making, 

 
 
 

but His knowledge is a divine gift, is a gift 
received in purity of heart and it is 
personal revelation of the divine light of 
the Trinity. 

We begin to receive His knowledge 
still from this life, but the full receiving of 
His sight is reserved to the eternal life 
[329-337 lines]. 

But, if we do not know that we are 
children of God from the presence of Holy 
Ghost in us, says Symeon, then we will 
not be like God, because He is not in us 
[343-346 lines]. 

 
 
 

2. 4. 3. The Symeonian Ecstasies 
from the Life Written by Saint 
Niketas 

In the description of the Life of Saint 
Symeon, his Father, Saint Niketas 
Stethatos punctuates more ecstasies of 
him, the first being that from I, 5. 

After how we said into a previous 
section, the first symeonian ecstasy is 
recognized and by Niketas, as being the 
one before coming of Saint Symeon at 
Stoudios, after what he met on Saint 
Symeon the Pious442. 

The ecstatic description of the I, 5, 
begins with the detail that Symeon was at 
prayer, on time at night and he was 
united with Prime Mind, as a noi> kaqarw|/ 
[pure mind]443. 

Niketas puts the accent on ghostual 
rationality of man who prays, which is 
brought of purity of mind and on his 
relation with God as Prime Reason, as the 
Fountain of any clean thinking. 

The ecstatic sight is integrated also 
the context of private prayer, 

in 
prolonged, of Saint Symeon. 

It was a night prayer, where Symeon 
sees, suddenly, „a light from above, 
shining upon him, [an] unmixed [eivli- 

442 Acc. OC 12, I, 4, 1-34, p. 6-8 [ed. Hausherr]/ 
Life, ed. Iliescu, p. 16-18/ Ică jr. 4, p. 246-247 [ed. 
Koutsas]. 

443 Idem, I, 5, 1-2, p. 8/ Idem, p. 18/ Idem, p. 247. 

 
 
 
 

krine,j] [light coming] from heaven, im- 
mense [a;pleton], that filled all with the 
light and purity, as and how the day had 
come"444. The light and the purity are two 
pregnant realities of the niketian de- 
scription and the divine light is presented 
as the foundation of purity of mind of 
Saint Symeon. 

To Symeon, which stands in the 
light, says Niketas, it seemed to him that 
he did not see anymore the house and the 
cell in that he prayed, for that these two 
no longer espied445 and he was „a`rpage,nta 
evn tw|/ ave,ri" [ravished in the air]446, he 
forgetting his body447. 

In I, 5, 9-10, Niketas recognizes that 
he reproduces what he heard 
from 
Symeon and what wrote and Symeon 
about this sight448. 

The oral and written tradition 
merges in Life written by Niketas and it is 
the living mode, coherent in that was 
transmited to us the holy and multilateral 
Tradition of the Church. 

The sight, says Niketas, was received 
by Symeon as a „foreign enormity" [to. 
xe,nou tou/ terasti,ou], as a colossal 
experience, for that he did not live such 
discoveries [avpokalu,yewn]449. 

444 Idem, I, 5, 2-4, p. 8/ Ibidem/ Ibidem. 
445 Idem, I, 5, 5-7, p. 8/ Ibidem/ Ibidem. 
446 Idem, I, 5, 8, p. 8/ Ibidem/ Ibidem. 
447 Idem, I, 5, 7-8, p. 8/ Ibidem/ Ibidem. 
448 Idem, I, 5, 8-9, p. 8/ Ibidem/ Ibidem. 
449 Idem, I, 5, 10, p. 8/ Idem, p. 18-19/ Idem, p. 

248. 

 
 

If Niketas recognizes that this is the 
first symeonian ecstasy, in the same 
night, Niketas says that Symeon lived and 
another divine sight, distinct from ecstasy, 
but in extension of it - for that it was 
„into the work of light"450 - in which he 
saw Saint Symeon the Pious451. 

In this second sight [ei=doj], Symeon 
sees „a too-bright cloud, without form and 
without interruption, full of unspeakable 
glory of God, [which came] from the high 
heaven"452. 

the 

two 

Thus, nefe,lh [the cloud] and do,xa 
[glory], 
classical ecstatic 
representations of ghostual experience, 
recur and at Niketas and they punctuate 
the ecstatic realities of Saint Symeon. 

From this is observed, that Saint 
Niketas proves himself a fidel disciple of 
Saint Symeon the New Theologian even 
and in the smallest details. 

Speaking about the apparation of 
Saint Symeon the Pious in the light, 
Niketas uses the substantive o]ra/ma [sight/ 
vision]. Symeon, his Father, had a „tou/ 
friktou/ o`ra,matoj" [frightening vision], in 
which he saw his Father, Saint Symeon 
the Pious453. 

At the end of the first chapter of 
Life, in I, 9, Niketas presents the second 
symeonian ecstasy without as modern 

450 Idem, I, 5, 14, p. 8/ Idem, p. 19/ Ibidem. 
451 Idem, I, 5, 13-14, p. 8/ Ibidem/ Ibidem. 
452 Idem, I, 5, 14-16, p. 8/ Ibidem/ Ibidem. 
453 Idem, I, 5, 18, p. 10/ Ibidem/ Ibidem. 

 
 

editors of the text to include in subtitle 
this thing. 

On the way to Constantinople, 
weeping and mourning, being again 
alone, Symeon has the third divine sight 
[if we consider the first, described by 
Niketas, as being two sights], in the 
middle of the mountains454. 

Here, he was walking on mountain 
road, and „suddenly the grace of the 
Ghost from above wrapped him on the 
Righteous as a fire, that once Paul [Acts 
9, 3; 22, 6] and filled him integer of joy 
and unspeakable sweetness, increasing in 
him [evpauxh,sasa] the love of God and faith 
in his ghostual Father"455. 

Niketas does not want to make from 
the third symeonian ecstasy it describes 
to 
revelation 
an another 
Damascus, ie a muster of identical se- 
quentiality with the ecstasy of Paul, but 
he presents the ecstasy in the form in 
which it happened. 

road 

in 

The annexation of the symeonian 
ecstasy at the pauline one does not keep 
than of the detail to go to a principal 
town, at the fact that it occurs while the 
mystic was on road and at that one that 
the light wrapped him suddenly. But the 
two ecstasies are not identical in nature 
and nor God did not want the same thing 
when He gave the two. 

454 Idem, I, 5, 12-18, p. 16-18/ Idem, p. 25/ Idem, p. 

251. 

455 Idem, I, 5, 18-22, p. 18/ Ibidem/ Ibidem. 

 
 

If in the case of Paul, the ecstasy was 
a converting meeting with his Lord, in the 
case of Symeon, the ecstasy from road 
had the role to increase the love of 
Symeon to God and to his ghostual 
Father, the Saint Symeon the Pious. 

in 

We must see 

this ecstatic 
description of Saint Niketas the decisive 
role which has the ecstasy in our ghostual 
growth. 

The ecstasy and the ghostual Father, 
that God's direct guidance and direct 
guidance of Father, of his spiritual 
Mentor, blends in divine mode in the for- 
mation of Symeon. 

Symeon needs divine-human certi- 
tudes for to grow in Christ, the divine 
revelations but and the personal example, 
charismatic, of the ghostual Father. He is 
led by the Ghost, through divine light but 
and the ghostual Father, through the 
same Ghost, Who dwells in him. 

If in the two previous ecstasies we 
had the cloud and the glory, in the third 
we have part of the image of the fire, of 
pu/r, which wrapped him. 

In II, 19, we have part the fourth 
ecstatic symeonian experience described 
by Niketas. 

Is by itself understood that we have 
another consecution of the symeonian 
sights, as long as in Koutsas's edition this 
the fourth ecstatic place is counted as the 

 

second456 and in Hausherr's edition they 
are not supertitles at subchapters. 

After an interview with his Father, 
in which he prophets him an astonishing 
increase in himself of the grace, Symeon 
enters in his cell and has place the sight 
which we denominate as being the 4th457. 
Symeon makes a prolegomenon of 
the ecstasy, presenting it as rapid help 
came from part of God458. Thus, „the light 
arose as early morning [prw,i?mon], and, 
unexpectedly, wrapped him from above a 
bright light like a lightning [avstraph/|] [acc. 
Acts 26, 13], which catched his mind, 
raptured it with all and filled it with a 
too-sweet joyousness"459. 

Niketas presents the 4th ecstasy as a 
rapture of the mind in light, where it is 
filled with an extraordinary joyousness. 

Suddenly the night disappears and 
the light appears in the life of Saint 
Symeon as a blinding light of morning, as 
a luminous lightning, which wrapped him 
entirely. 

While Symeon was with his face at 
ground in behind of this ecstasy and 
cried, he saw „a frightening miracle" 460, 
namely „he saw with the mind a bright 
cloud [fwtoeidh/ nefe,lhn] falling in entirely 

456 To see the supertitle from II, 19 out of Ică jr. 4, 

p. 257. 

457 OC 12, II, 19, 7-8, p. 28/ Life, ed. Iliescu, p. 34/ 

Ică jr. 4, p. 257. 

458 Idem, II, 19, 12-13, p. 28/ Ibidem/ Ibidem. 
459 Idem, II, 19, 13-16, p. 28/ Ibidem/ Ibidem. 
460 Idem, II, 19, 19, p. 29/ Idem, p. 35/ Ibidem. 

 
 

over him, producing all the pleasure and 
sweetness in his soul and it filled him 
with divine grace reducing to the end the 
thickness 
fleshly 
thought"461. 

earthly 

the 

of 

We have therefore, as and in the 
case of the ecstasies I and II, an 
the 
immediate 
ecstasies IV and V. The light is seen as a 
lightning but and as a bright cloud, it 
sanctifies Symeon, in evident mode. 

continuity between 

The 6th ecstasy described by Saint 
Niketas occurs also in the night462, in the 
moment when Saint Symeon wanted to 
write his father and to teach, how to 
correspond this one with men Saints 
[a;ndraj Ἁgi,ouj] and, especially, with Saint 
Symeon the Pious463. 

Just when Symeon began his letter 
to his natural father, „suddenly, shone 
him an infinite light [fw/j a;peiron] from 
heaven and it tore the roof of his house 
and filled again the soul of him with a joy 
and untold pleasure, thus that the im- 
mensity of that light, the candlestick 
[lu,cnon] that lighted - because it was 
night - was dark with all. 

And, behold, as from this divine 
light came a voice that said: <the Apostle 
and the disciple of Christ, the mediator 
and our ambassador at God>"464. 

461 Idem, II, 19, 20-23, p. 28-30/ Ibidem/ Ibidem. 
462 Idem, III, 23, 11, p. 32/ Idem, p. 38/ Idem, p. 

259. 

463 Idem, III, 23, 3-6, p. 32/ Ibidem/ Ibidem. 
464 Idem, III, 23, 8-13, p. 32/ Ibidem/ Ibidem. 

 
 

Putting in antithesis the heavenly 
light and the light of the candlestick has 
the role to emphasize the immensity of 
the divine light which saw Symeon and 
this ecstasy is a new guarantee from part 
of God of the holiness of Saint Symeon 
the Pious, the Father of Saint Symeon. 

Symeon, after how we find from III, 

24, was not a monk at this data465. 
He was still a novice 
Monastery of Saint Mammas466. 

in the 

All 6 ecstasies presented by Niketas 
are anterior to his monastic life and they 
had the role to initiate him and to 
strengthen Symeon in mystical life and, in 
the same time, to increase his confidence 
in his Father, in Saint Symeon the Pious. 
Symeon enters in the monastic life 
as a man with a great ghostual en- 
hancement, with a great zeal for holiness 
and with a steadfast confidence in the 
holiness of his Father. 

God Himself watched this whole 
interior union of Symeon with his Father 
and Symeon never abdicated from it. The 
whole interior rallying at life of God and 
the full confidence in his Father were the 
two major interior coordinates of the New 
Theologian. 

The end of the 23rd section narrates 
the fact, that Symeon wrote that letter to 
his father in ecstatic mode, being in light, 

465 Idem, III, 24, 1-4, p. 34/ Ibidem/ Idem, p. 260. 
466 Idem, III, 22, 4, p. 32/ Idem, p. 37/ Idem, p. 

258. 

 
 

because God guided his hand to write467. 
Niketas uses the expression „dictated 
from above"[th.n a;nwqen r`hqei/san] for that 
to remind us the detail, that the express 
revelation of truths, in written form, is 
not a singular thing but it is refind at 
Saints of Scripture and in the lives of 
many Saints of the Church. 

The light of God made again for 
Symeon a day without evening in the 
middle of the night and Symeon writes 
those whom God speaks to him, being 
surrounded by divine light. 

After his entry into monasticism, 
our Father lived a life of „an extreme 
purity"[a;kron evkkaqarqe,nti]468. 

In III, 24, Niketas says that Saint 
Symeon „became entire attention, entire 
full of the warmth of the Ghost, entire full 
of divine revelations and lightenments 
[qei,wn avpokalu,yewn kai. evlla,myewn]"469. 

From here on neither Nikita and nor 
us can no longer have an inventory, 
however probabilistic, of the symeonian 
ecstasies. 

From III, 26 results that the divine 
sight it becomes quotidian Saint Symeon 
shortly after what he became a monk. 

About this quotidianness of the sight 
of the light, Saint Niketas writes: „From 

467 Idem, III, 23, 17-20, p. 32-34/ Idem, p. 38/ 

Idem, p. 260. 

468 Idem, III, 25, 1-2, p. 34/ Idem, p. 39/ Idem, p. 

260. 

261. 

469 Idem, III, 26, 3-5, p. 36/ Idem, p. 40/ Idem, p. 

 
 

this reason and before all, gathering 
himself the whole from the ones from 
outside, he stood at prayer. 

And, at the beginning of the day, as 
the one unharmed [by anything], was 
ravished [a`rpa,zwn] up his mind and he 
united 
immaterial 
mode, with the God the One immaterial, 
he did not have the thinking attracted of 
no care, nor divided in senses. 

[suggino,menoj], 

in 

For the Divine Himself, before his 
prayers, take it soon and enveloped it the 
mind of his soul in His natural/ proper 
light [tw|/ evmfu,tw| fwti.] and it melted the 
earthly from it, filling it by the warmth of 
the Ghost and the heart by all joy- 
ousness"470. 

Saint Symeon united with the light 
still before at morning prayer, at when he 
woke and it, the light, removed from his 
soul every thought and earthly stain. 

Niketas accentuated the role of the 
light in the life of Symeon through that, 
that it makes him daily with an immaterial mind, abstracted from all care 
and earthly reality. 

But we have at Niketas and a 
trenchant emphasis of the fact that divine 
light, which saw Symeon, it is proper of 
God, that it is of His, that it is something 
natural for God, it is proper Himself. 

Life together with God excludes any 
impurity and bodily care. The ghostual 

470 Idem, III, 26, 11-18, p. 36/ Idem, p. 40-41/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

life is an immaterial life, lived in the light, 
lived as continues union with divine light. 
The end of the 27th chapter shows 
us the nights full of grace of Symeon, in 
which he saw himself „sometimes, 
coming out of himself, through divine 
contemplations and he united, in mystic 
face, with God"471. 

From IV, 29, 1, we find that this 
quotidian filling with light of Symeon 
happened in the two years of monasti- 
cism, which preceded the moment of his 
ordination into priest472. 

In IV, 30, the chapter dedicated of 
his cheirotonia, Niketas 
that 
Symeon, „the seer of the frightening vi- 
sions, that he contemplated with eyes of 
Cherub"473, received the priesthood after 
much interior resistance"474. 

says, 

In the moment of cheirotonia, 
„when the most-wise Symeon was made 
priest by the bishop, and he said prayer 
over him, and he had the knee and the 
head bowed in the face of the Mystery, he 
saw a vision and, behold!, the Holy Ghost 
descending in the face of infinite light, 
simple and formless [avpei,rou fwto.j avplou/n 
kai. avnei,deon], it covered his most-holy 
head, [Ghost] Whom, in the 48 years of 
priesthood, he saw Him descending 

471 Idem, III, 27, 14-15, p. 38/ Idem, p. 42/ Idem, p. 

262. 

472 Idem, IV, 29, 1, p. 40/ Idem, p. 44/ Ibidem. 
473 Idem, IV, 30, 12-13, p. 40-42/ Idem, p. 45/ 

Idem, p. 263. 

474 Idem, IV, 30, 6-7, p. 40/ Ibidem/ Ibidem. 

 
 

[katerco,menon] over the Holy Sacrifice, 
brought by him to God, [after] how he 
himself said to someone, hiding himself, 
as and how he spoke about another one 
and [it] is written in his sayings"475. 

According to this testimony of 
Niketas, it results that the number of the 
symeonian ecstasies is impossible to say, 
for that Symeon lived mostly in the divine 
light, he was enlightened by grace and he 
was filled by the Holy Ghost. 

Symeon receives the priesthood into 
consciousness, he seeing the grace that 
came in him and constantly reviewing it 
down over the Venerable Gifts, which he 
served. 

His interiorization with the light was 
and is, with true, difficult to understand 
by those who did not have any gracious 
experience in their lives. 

The 

reporting of Symeon at 
Church's life is on measure of his mystical 
experience and it is seen everywhere in 
his theological writings. 

The height and the correctness of 
symeonian theology is not given by style, 
by erudition or by rhetorical emphasis 
with which he writes but of the greatness 
of his mystical experiences. 

The experience, the mystical and 
liturgical realism of Symeon, the biblical 
realism and ecclesial of his work are the 
expression of his deep interiorization with 

475 Idem, IV, 30, 13-21, p. 42/ Idem, p. 45-46/ 

Idem, p. 263-264. 

 
 

the 

33rd 

God. Precisely because there was, in real 
mode, this his personal union with God, 
Symeon could produce a conquering 
theology, frighteningly high and beautiful, 
the divine. 
In 

chapter, Niketas 
describes the image of liturgist of Saint 
Symeon: „he liturgised together with 
cohorts of the top, he sitting in the seat of 
priests, [and] he brought always [avei.] to 
God the Sacrifice without the blood, in 
the sight of the Ghost [evn ovptasi,a| tou/ 
Pneu,matoj] and with a form of the face 
like the face of an Angel" 476. 

Symeon served, in real mode, with 
the heavenly Powers, he saw the descent 
of the divine grace over the Venerable 
Gifts and, he being full of grace, he was 
like an Angel in the flesh. 

By the adverb avei., Niketas wanted to 
say that Symeon saw in every time, into a 
some mode, the coming of the Holy 
Ghost over him and over the Venerable 
Gifts in front of him. 

The sight of the light by Saint 
Symeon, according to these biographical 
details, did not happen only into a private 
space, away from the eyes of others, but it 
also take place and in the frame of the 
liturgical services, when Simeon was 
surrounded by people. 

Niketas insists on the pnevmatic 
aspect of Symeon's being then when he 

476 Idem, IV, 33, 2-5, p. 44/ Idem, p. 47/ Idem, p. 

265. 

 
 

like a 

[scedo.n 

Niketas 

served: „the grace of the Ghost made him 
fire and almost un- 
whole 
for 
avpro,sitoj] 
approachable 
human eyes during his Liturgy"477. 
in Symeon 
sees 

the 
attributes of the divine light, because he 
was filled with the Ghost. He was w`j pu/r 
[like the fire] and scedo.n avpro,sitoj [almost 
unapproachable] for those who watched 
him. 

For that he was filled with the light, 
with the holiness of God, Symeon is 
characterized through the intermedium 
of the light divine entitlings. 

The divine light that spring out from 
him, because it was in him, it made 
Symeon to be like a Angel, ie a being 
frighteningly beautiful and unapproach- 
able for an unghostual human mind. 

Two of his disciples see Symeon in 

mystical situations. 
Symeon 

sign 

from 

Ephesus, 

the 
Ephesian, sees him during the Divine 
Liturgy dressed in patriarchal vestment 
stolh.n]478, 
that 
[patriarcikh.n 
Symeon could be ordained whenever as 
patriarch of Constantinople, as long as 
God allowed this thing and Meletius, 
tonsured as a monk by Symeon, he 
confesses to Niketas: „Often I saw a 
bright cloud [nefe,lh fwtinh.n] covering 
him whole, when he stood in altar during 

477 Idem, IV, 33, 11-13, p. 44/ Idem, p. 48/ Ibidem. 
478 Idem, IV, 33, 14-19, p. 44/ Ibidem/ Idem, p. 

265-266. 

 
 

Holy before putting. And, on right word, 
for those who are distinguished through 
the height of virtues, they are worthy and 
of the divine glory"479. 

Niketas demonstrated by this wit- 
nesses that not only Symeon confessed 
himself that he sees the light of God, but 
and other ghostual people, from around 
him, ascertained the presence of the Ghost 
in his being. 

Symeon could not hide, could not 
hide the amazing ghostual increase, for 
that the Holy Ghost Himself was the One 
who gave him away and which confessed 
him as holy man in front of disciples, of 
friends and of his hierarchical superiors 
and of the people that listen him. 

But Niketas is still doing something 
in mystical biography of 

essential 
Symeon. 

He shows that the bright cloud or 
the glory of Trinity that was seen on 
Sinai, on Tabor, at the bank of the Jordan 
or in way to Damascus and in island 
Patmos were not ecstatic unrepeatable 
evidences in the economy of salvation, 
but the presence of the Ghost is quotidian 
in the life of those who sanctify them- 
selves, anytime they live and wherever 
they are on the face of the earth. 

The sight of the light not keeps of 
place, of the historical moment, of social 
or ecclesial rank, of age, of gender, of 

479 Idem, IV, 33, 19-23, p. 44/ Ibidem/ Idem, p. 

266. 

 
 

ethnicity or financial situation of the 
believer, but of his inner purity, the 
holiness of his person, which is the only 
requirement for that the Lord reveals to 
us His light. 

Just therefore Meletius sees Symeon 
covered by the bright cloud of glory the 
Godhead and Niketas says that he was 
like fire, like an Angel when he served. 

Everyone perceives Symeon, the full 
of the Ghost, on measure of his ghostual 
growth and each of them Symeon showed 
them into an apart mode. 

In the 36th chapter, we have 
described another ecstasy of Symeon 
spent the night. It has a special character 
from cause the charisma that he received 
it in behind it. 

Niketas describes the ecstasy in the 
following terms: „This being, therefore, 
the work that the brave one had it in 
hidden in every day, into a night, while he 
stood and offered his prayers to the Lord, 
he saw a vision and, behold!, a bright 
cloud [nefe,lh fwto.j] descending from 
heaven through the roof of house was 
placed over his honorable head and, 
covering it whole for a lot of watches, it 
filled by a very ardent pleasure and untold 
and by a joyousness and a cheerfulness 
impossible to said, and from there he 
heard and a mystic voice [mustikh/j fwnh/j] 
that taught him foreign mysteries [xe,na 
musth,ria] and hidden [kekrumme,na]. 

 

Therefore, even and when this cloud 
has been lifted, he found his heart in 
God's wisdom [sofi,a| Qeou/] sheding the 
waters of the divine grace. 

And then he had not been himself, 
but the grace of God pulled him whole to 
Himself and it made from his tongue a 
reed what writes sharp [Ps. 44, 1] and from 
his thought a fountain of the wisdom of 
God [Bar. 3, 12]. 

Therefore, although he was with all 
unlearned in the teachings of the outside 
[avmaqh.j w;n pa,nth tw/n qu,raqen maqhma,twn], 
he theologized [evqeolo,gei] like the Beloved 
and the entire nights he traversed, in 
order, those of theology [th/j qeologi,aj 
o]laij]"480, for that „he was worthy by the 
apostolic gift, saying the word of the 
teaching [avpostolukh/j avxiwqei.j dwrei/aj, tou/ 
lo,gou th/j didaskali,aj fhmi,]"481, as an 
organ of the Ghost482. 

During this ecstasy, Symeon receives 
the charisma of the theology. Now 
Symeon is taught by God, in mystic 
mode, the dogmas of faith and Symeon 
feels himself taken in posesion, inhabited, 
mastered by the Holy Ghost, Who 
teaches him all. 

Niketas do not mention at a venture 
the detail that Symeon lacked culture and 
science of his time, ie teaching from 

480 Idem, V, 36, 1-15, p. 48/ Idem, p. 51-52/ Idem, 

p. 267-268. 

481 Idem, V, 37, 9-10, p. 50/ Idem, p. 52/ Idem, p. 

268. 

482 Idem, V, 37, 10-11, p. 50/ Ibidem/ Ibidem. 

 
 

outside. Niketas remembers this thing, 
for to put in prime-plan the theology as 
charisma. 

Just for that Symeon is taught by the 
Ghost, for that he received at above the 
theological teaching, he is the Theologian 
par excellence of the Church. 

Niketas, as and Symeon otherwise, 
pointing out the fact that we have a real 
theological knowledge only as a result of 
the ecstatic revelations from part of God, 
tells us bluntly for all that we can not 
confide in our own theological deduc- 
tions, because God single teaches us 
about Himself, that only He can show us 
the true theology and that on it we 
receive as a result of the personal purity. 
Theology is a divine gift and not an 

exclusive product of human intelligence. 

In 

the 69th chapter, Niketas 
describes to us an another ecstasy of 
Saint Symeon, in that the divine light 
penetrates his whole body and makes our 
Father to be only light, only the heavenly 
fire: 

„Into a day, therefore, how he 
standing at a pure prayer and talking with 
God, he saw a vision. And, behold!, the 
air began to shine in his mind and being 
in cell seemed him that he spends in 
daylight. But it was night, at the first 
watch. 

And how began to light [fai,nein] at 
above, as the brightnesses of the morning 
sun...home and all [things] have passed 

 

and he thought that he was not in the 
house. 

As out of himself with all [evxi,statw 
o]lwj], he observed with all the mind that 
light which shows to him: it grew a little 
and made the air to shine and brighter 
and he realized that he ended up with 
whole body in outside of the earth. 

And how that light continues to 
shine even more clear and it appeared 
shining above him as the noon sun, he 
understood that he stood in the middle of 
what he saw and he was filled whole, in 
all the body, of the happiness and of the 
tears of pleasure that invaded him. 

For he saw the light itself touching, 
in amazing face, at his body and entering 
a little in the members of him [ka,t' 
ovli,gon gino,menon evn toi/j me,lesin auvtou]. 
[...] 

He saw so how little by little that 
light was given whole his entire body, the 
heart and his visceras and it makes him 
whole fire and light [pu/r o]lon kai. fw/j]"483. 
Being taught by a heavenly voice 
about the what were done with him484, 
Symeon understood that „the glory that 
enveloped him...[is] the happiness that has 
to be given to the Saints in the eternal 
face"485. 

483 Idem, IX, 69, 1-16, 18-20, p. 92-94/ Idem, p. 

88-89/ Idem, p. 288. 

484 Idem, IX, 69, 22-23, p. 94/ Idem, p. 89/ 

Ibidem. 

485 Idem, IX, 70, 1-4, p. 94/ Idem, p. 90/ Idem, p. 

289. 

 
 

This ecstasy initiates Symeon in the 
eternal existence of Saints, when all will 
have the bodies fully transfigured and the 
light will live in them in eternal mode. 

Presenting 

the direct 

action, 
intensive, transfiguring of light on body, 
Niketas speaks us, in subsidiary, and 
about full filling of the soul by the Holy 
Ghost, ie about the full pnevmatization of 
human being. 

What the Holy Ghost did in this case 
with Symeon was not than that at 
entrusted to him, in personal mode and 
experiential, about how shown the full 
pnevmatization of the risen body of the 
Lord and, through He, of all Saints. 

Symeon foretasted in ecstatic mode 
the state of full deification of man, and 
namely our eshatological condition, that 
of resurrected beings and transfigured by 
the grace of the Trinity. 

Saint Symeon needed to be taught 
by the Ghost opposite of what had been 
done with him. Namely is needed by a 
divine express 
that we 
lighting 
understand the ecstatic sights that we 
have. 

for 

The ecstasies are explained to us all 
by the Holy Ghost, in measure in that God 
considers necessary this thing at personal 
level. 

In 

the 71th 

chapter, Niketas 
authenticates the amazing increase in 
holiness of Symeon: for he had become 
„only of the Ghost and he was full of His 

 

divine charismata, he being extreme clean 
with mind and he saw, on right word, as 
the Prophets of old [oi` Profh/tai pa,lai] 
the visions and the frightening revela- 
tions of the Lord. 

And he being thus and he having the 
apostolic mind [avpostolikh.n th.n di,anoian], 
since he was under the work of God's 
Ghost and he was put in motion by Him, 
he had the grace of the word pouring out 
through his lips [Ps. 44, 3]"486. 

had 

Symeon 

Putting of Symeon among of 
Prophets and Apostles, because of his 
visions, is not, we think, an exaggeration 
from part of Niketas, but a pertinent 
observation concerning at his ecstatic life. 
divine 
revelations, alike with Prophets and 
Apostles and „driven by impetuous [th/| 
biai,a|] breath of the Ghost, he made public 
[a;kwn dhmosieu,ei], [even without his will], 
those that he saw in God's discoveries 
and visions, then when he reached 
beyond nature"487. 

colossal 

Symeon had visions from God and 
also God pushes him to make them public 
and this revealing of his theological 
revelations was itself the accurate mode, 
concrete, at to do theology. 

Symeon does not leave confiscated 
the theology in the hands of men unclean 

486 Idem, IX, 71, 9-15, p. 96/ Idem, p. 91/ Ibidem. 
487 Idem, XII, 111, 8-10, p. 154/ Idem, p. 139/ Idem, 

p. 318. 

 
 
 

of passions but he shows through his life, 
that to do theology means to have a 
charisma of God and that the entire 
content of theology is ecstatic and it must 
be received from God for as to be a 
credible speech about Him. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Soteriology 

2. 5. The Path of Deification and 

the Sight of God 

In this chapter we try to present 
symeonian soteriology from the perspec- 
tive of three classical stages in orthodox 
theology: the cleaning of passions, the 
unpassion and the deification, which and 
he accepts it in his writings, as we shall 
see. 

But Symeon stresses continuously 
the fact that we come to sanctify our lives 
if we are in living obedience to a ghostual 
Father, which to coordinate step by step 
our life. 

Thereby the personal salvation is 
seen as a continuous advance in holiness, 
through the experience of the sight of 
God God, in daily obedience to a ghostual 
Father. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2. 5. 1. The Emergence of Light 
in Those Who are Cleansed of Pas- 
sions 

In the Hymn 8, our Father shows 
that those who love God are loved in turn 
by God as some His friends and to them 
He is shown488. 

God appears in our life as a sun 
(h[lioj), as a real sun, although it is 
kekrumme,noj (secret/ hidden) for all mortal 
nature489 but, especially, for the whole 
mind that intellectualizes the reality and 
the manifestations of God in the world 
and in the faithful man. 

The light is it that rises in those of 
God490 and, says Symeon, „You are seen 
by themselves and into You pop up who 
that once were dark, unchaste, adulter- 
ous and decayed, sinners, tax collectors. 
[For that] repenting, they are sons of Thy 
divine light (uivoi. fwto,j Sou qei,ou), light 
gives birth to all from the light, [from 
itself], since, with true, the light makes 
them perfect, sons of God, that some who 
take/ know [all], and [are] gods by 
grace"491. 

The decayed life which we had 
formerly, washed through the tears of 
repentance, is not an impediment for the 
sight of God. 

488 SC 156, Hymns, VIII, 1-5, p. 214/ Ică jr. 3, p. 70. 
489 Idem, Hymns, VIII, 6, p. 214/ Ibidem. 
490 Idem, Hymns, VIII, 7, p. 214/ Ibidem. 
491 Idem, Hymns, VIII, 7-12, p. 214/ Ibidem. 

 
 
 

The repentance is at Saint Symeon 
the interior estate that makes God to 
spring into our being, ie to give us the 
sight of His light. 

From the passage quoted above 
reemerge in clear mode that divine light 
is what that makes us sons of God and 
that light brings us the perfection, the 
holiness. 

in 
The estate of holiness keeps 
fundamental mode of the seeing of the 
divine light. 

Just therefore we debate the sight of 
God as the fundamental reality in person- 
al salvation, for that the holiness is living 
in grace and sight of the divine light. 

The repentance and the purity are 
contiguous at Symeon. The repentance is 
not, at fact, only a distinct thurm in the 
divine-human process of the cleaning of 
passions. For Symeon the cleaning is 
endless/ without 
[avte,lestoj h` 
ka,qarsij] for that the desire of cleaning 
and the longing to see the light are end- 
less492. 

final 

Desire of light comes from the sight 
of it and as we see more light, on both we 
feel that we have in noway the wealth of 
it in integral mode493. 

The light seen by Symeon is as a 
sweet sun [gluku,j o` h[lioj], lived in 
unspeakable mode in our senses494. 

492 Idem, Hymns, VIII, 39-40, p. 218/ Idem, p. 71. 
493 Idem, Hymns, VIII, 50-51, p. 218/ Ibidem. 
494 Idem, Hymns, VIII, 54, p. 218/ Ibidem. 

 
 

The sweetness of light is not refelt 
by the soul in opposition with the body, 
but, after how we see from the symeonian 
text, the soul and the body feel, they 
communicate in proper mode, real, by the 
light of God, they resenting it as sweet. 

The divine sun, the light, comes in 
us not producing an interior disaster but, 
contrariwise, a re-binding, a relationship 
of us with God. 

What sweetens our senses, what 
sanctifies us both the ghostual senses and 
those bodily is the divine light, which 
attracts the soul to an inexpressible 
longing and divine [po,qon avne,kfraston kai. 
qei/on] 495 by Holy Trinity. 

The light that comes from above and 
that springs in our being as a sun it does 
not want to leave us on earth, but hangs 
us, through the longing for God, at the 
light of the Trinity. 

The light springs in us for that to 
burn us for longing and wants that us to 
keep in our being all what is shown to us 
in ecstasy, all that immensity and amaz- 
ing wealth of divine light496. 

The sight of light is but a spare of us 

by God497. 

When God has mercy on someone - 
and not when we consider that we must 
have mercy - „[then], suddenly, after how 
I saw Him shining before my face, thus I 

495 Idem, Hymns, VIII, 55, p. 218/ Ibidem. 
496 Idem, Hymns, VIII, 56-57, p. 218/ Ibidem. 
497 Idem, Hymns, VIII, 62, p. 218/ Ibidem. 

 
 

see Him shining utterly in me and utterly 
fills me with all joy, of all fullness of 
desire and most divine sweetness, on me, 
the humble [His servant]"498. 

From 

the confession of Saint 
Symeon results the fact that Christ, the 
One full of glory, which the Disciples saw 
Him in outside of their body, he, and all 
who see the divine light, they see Him in 
plenary mode, full of the Ghost, in 
themselves. 

Christ's ascension into heaven and 
the descent of Holy Ghost to those who 
expected the fulfillment of the promise is 
in fact „a presence of depth and of 
ghostual elevation"499 of Christ in those 
and in our being. 

The sight of Christ's glory or the 
indwelling of Trinity's light in us is what 
that fulfills us and perfects us and this 
dwelling is real and acknowledged by us. 
About the sight Symeon says that it 
is a capital event, defining, in our being: 
„the transformation/ [our] change is 
evident, is a foreign change. Which what 
is made perfect in me and hit me [on me] 
is unspeakable. 

For that, if would see someone that 
sun dwelt [in us], that with all [how we 
see], we see entering in heart, and living 
in us in entirety and shining also [in 
entirely], would not be dead from cause 

498 Idem, Hymns, VIII, 63-66, p. 218-220/ Ibidem. 
499 Acc. Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, The 
Orthodox Dogmatic Theology [Teologia Dogmatică 
Ortodoxă], ed. II, vol. 2, ed. cit., p. 122-123. 

 
 

of the miracle and should not become 
speechless and [once with he] and all 
those who meet the man who lived it?"500. 
The divine light produces a radical 
change in our being, a foreign one from 
our daily experience. After that we will 
not ever be the ones before, whatever we 
do. The sight of light means our accep- 
tance by God in the communion of His 
divine life. It is a crossing over our earthly 
condition, for that we get „the divine 
glory" 501 and we enrich „from Himself the 
Source of living forever"502. 

And this is possible, for that „the 
sight of the divine light does not depend 
however only of his spreading through 
the body of Christ, but and of the 
voluntary opening for it of the human 
persons"503, how said Father Professor 
Dumitru Stăniloae. 

In the Hymn 7, the sun shines in the 
heart of Symeon in immaterial mode 
(a;u>lwj)504 and he wants the light for that 
to compose hymns of thanks to his Father, 
Saint Symeon the Pious505. 

500 SC 156, Hymns, VIII, 67-73, p. 220/ Ică jr. 3, p. 

71. 

501 Idem, Hymns, VIII, 93, p. 222/ Idem, p. 72. 
502 Idem, Hymns, VIII, 97, p. 222/ Ibidem. 
503 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, The 
Personal Relation with Christ in the Light of Divine 
Infinity, after Saint Symeon the New Theologian 
[Legătura personală cu Hristos în lumina infinităţii 
dumnezeieşti, după Sfântul Simeon Noul Teolog], in 
Orthodox Dogmatic Theology Studies [Studii de teologie 
dogmatică ortodoxă], op. cit., p. 315. 

504 SC 156, Hymns, VII, 3-4, p. 208/ Ică jr. 3, p. 68. 
505 Idem, Hymns, VII, 7-9, p. 208/ Ibidem. 

 
 

The doxological function of ecstatic 
experience 
is combined with experi- 
mentation of the relation with God as 
longing, as desire always ardent for to see 
Him. 

At Symeon the longing for God is 
po,noj506, is suffering, pain, acute weight of 
its entire innerness. 

Just for this symeonian's ascesis is 
not, more chosen, one of borne of the 
physical burdens, but rather of the 
intensity of feeling, of education in inner 
waiting of the divine mercy, of borne of 
the exigencies of faith and of longing for 
God. 

The cleaning of passions 

is at 
Symeon an evidence sanctioned by God 
Himself, for that He looks like a sun that 
illuminates fully our being. 

In symeonian theology, the sun is 
not a literary motive but an ecstatic 
evidence. 

Symeon does not speak of religious 
symbols, he does not portray symbolic 
paintings, 
ie a continuous series of 
metaphors without substance divine, but 
he reveals the mode how is shown the 
divine light in his being. 

Just therefore, our exegesis at the 
opera of Symeon does not have and nor 
must to have ever a character pure 
literary but the one eminently theological, 
for that he talks about the real presence of 
light in his life. 

506 Idem, Hymns, VII, 17, p. 210/ Ibidem. 

 
 

The symeonian theology is, with 
precedence, the theology of confession, of 
ecstatic confession and must be perceived 
as such. 

The slip from this coordinate of 
ecstatic confession, in boarding of his 
theology, is not destinated than to a 
cheap sensationalism or a literaturisation 
too little valid for the theological spec- 
trum. 

Only if it is perceived as a clear 
testimony, unliar of a holy life, full of 
divine revelations, the symeonian theolo- 
gy is, with true, a protreptic for our lives. 
Symeon requires facts, e;rgwn from 
us, for that and God saves us if we show 
facts, if we are not idle507. 

But for he the good works are not a 
scope in itself, but „all ascesis and all facts 
that are done by us are that impart us by 
divine light like a rushlight" 508. 

The divine sun and human rushlight, 
although total contrasting into a theology 
that would follow the difference of degree 
between them, are not without an inner 
connection in symeonian theology. 
light, with all 

its 
frightening and unthinkable immensity 
for the faithful man, however does not 
crush the human rushlight, the human 
being, but fills it with grace. Union 
between God and man through ecstasy, 

The divine 

507 Idem, Hymns, XV, 33, p. 278/ Idem, p. 90. 
508 SC 174, Hymns, XXXIII, 130-132, p. 422/ Idem, 

p. 202. 

 
 

through the sight of the light, it's a real 
union, conscious. 

Faithful man understands what 
happens with him. Just therefore, Symeon 
stresses repeatedly that „e[nwsij...gi,netai 
avmfote,rwn evn gnw,sei" (union of the two 
[of God with man] 
into 
acquaintance/ consciousness)509. 

fully 

is 

The ascesis required by Symeon is 
an interior awareness of ghostual changes 
that occur with us, the awareness that 
culminates with the sight of the light, in 
that we never lose the understanding of 
the fact, that what we see is something 
real and not a mental fantasy, that is not 
exceeding the world in which we are. 

the 

The 

light 

sight of 

into 
fot 
consciousness [evn gnw,sei] means 
Symeon 
reception, over- 
whelming of the divine realities that are 
facilitated to us in ecstatic mode. 

the acute 

Thus explains the fact why Symeon 
problematizes not what he sees, but he 
wonders continually by the amazing 
wealth of ecstasies that he had. 

In the Hymn 34, 79, assimilating the 
avstraph. with an h[lioj me,gaj, Symeon says 
that the sight of the light, however we 
would show it, as flash or as a huge sun, 
does nothing else in us than interior 
enlightens us510. But here, in the Hymn 

509 Idem, Hymns, XXXIV, 20, p. 428/ Idem, p. 

203. 

510 Idem, Hymns, XXXIV, 78-80, p. 434/ Idem, p. 

205. 

 
 

34, we have a formula that guarantees, in 
our opinion, the hesychast dimension of 
the symeonian experience. 

He says that the light shines in us 
and it is understood noerw/j evn kardi,a|, 
with the mind in the heart511. 

If Simeon had not seen the sight of 
the light as a result of unceasing prayer, 
we have not had in his descriptions the 
placements of the ecstasy in the frame of 
assiduous peculiar prayers. 

In the Hymn 35, our soul is the 
mirror [e;soptron] that receives the ray of 
the divine sun, ie the rays of Godhead 
[avkti/naj th/j Qeo,thto,j]512. But we are 
mirrors in that not only that is reflected 
the light, but it and impresses in us, for 
that we are living mirrors, ghostual. 

In the Hymn 42, suitable to the 
proceeding of the terminological assimi- 
lation about which we talked, Symeon 
affirms: „And in union [with You], I see 
You as on a sun, and I see You as on a 
star, and I keep You in my bosom as on a 
pearl and I see You as on a rushlight 
located inside of a vessel"513. 

511 Idem, Hymns, XXXIV, 78, p. 434/ Ibidem. This 
formula and the whole boarding of the sight of God at 
Saint Symeon, makes us convinced at the fact that 
Symeon was a hesychast and that the hesychast prayer 
method, kept in traditional mode on his name, it 
belongs and not is no an exaggeration of Tradition's 
reception. 

512 SC 174, Hymns, XXXV, 55-59, p. 444/ Idem, p. 

208. 

230. 

513 SC 196, Hymns, XLII, 85-87, p. 44/ Idem, p. 

 
 

All forms under which is seen the 
light and is indicated scripturally repre- 
sents for Symeon a divine reality that 
reveals ecstatic the believer. 

But exist the sight as long as exist 

the union with Trinity's light. 

The light gushing into our being, 
rises in us, only on the fund of ardent 
search, of God's unquenchable and an 
ascesis conscious by the work of the grace 
in our being514, for to rise to the com- 
munion of life and love of Most Holy 
Trinity. 

514 Into an article by youth, Father Professor 
Dumitru Popescu said about the relation between the 
good works and salvation at Saint Symeon: „the facts do 
not operate the believer's salvation from outside, 
automatic and mechanical, but rather they have a 
sense", acc. Mast. 
soteriological and ontological 
D.[umitru] Popescu, The Good Works after Saint 
Symeon the New Theologian, in rev. The Orthodoxy XIV 
(1962), no. 4, p. 542-543. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2. 5. 2. The Unpassion and the 

Divine Light 

The sight of the light does not mean 
at Symeon than the beginning of con- 
scious ghostual life. The first ecstasy does 
not mean the human deification but the 
real beginning of the dispassion, of the 
purification of passions. 

Therefore he is not absolutising the 
sporadic sight, that takes you by surprise, 
namely the sight of the beginners, but he 
speaks about the advance in purity and in 
the permanentness of light in us as the 
real state, plenary of the deification. 

right scope 

The Ethical Discours 4, that holds 
perfectly on the entitling of this section, 
the speech about 
has 
unpassion/ apathy [avpa,qeian], about how 
shows in fact the unpassion in the one 
who sanctifies life. 

the one who 

Saint Symeon begins his speech 
from a maximal quota, for that he asks 
from 
speaks about 
unpassion to have the soul loose of „pa,shj 
evpiqumi,aj ponhra/j kai. evmpaqou/j logismou/" 
[all evil desire and of the passionate 
thought]515. 

In addition to experience the state of 
unpassion Symeon requests and an 
excessive clarity of mind for to speak on 
this subject, for that the speaker about 

515 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 4-5, p. 8/ 

Ică jr. 1, p. 219. 

 
 
 
 

unpassion should not have a „troublous 
mind" and not an „unclean heart" when 
debates it516. 

Those that are unpassioned, says 
Symeon, and talk about unpassion ignite 
and more by the longing for it517, while 
those who are bound, even and in very 
little, through any passion, of this world, 
are far by „its haven"518. 

The haven of the unpassion excludes 
the interior darkening and the inner fight 
with the holiness519. 

Doing the first step in discussing of 
the state of unpassion of the ghostual 
man, Symeon speaks of its acquisition 
through noera/j aivsqh,sewj [the feeling of 
mind], through qewri,aj [contemplation/ 
sight] and through pantourgou/ evnergei,aj 
auvth/j pei/ran o[lwj [the work of-allworking of that total experience/ full], of 
the presence of light in our being520. 

He puts the whole process of 
cleaning the passions thus, on account of 
divine illuminations, of ecstatic sights and 
of light's works in our being. 

Symeon focuses on the ghostual 
aspect of the process of dispassion and of 

516 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 10, p. 8/ 

Ibidem. 

517 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 18-21, p. 8-

10/ Idem, p. 219-220. 

518 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 21-24, p. 10/ 

Idem, p. 220. 

519 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 30-33, p. 10/ 

Ibidem. 

520 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 34-35, p. 10/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

When 

the reaching in state of unpassion of 
whole being, without as by this to put in 
shadow the whole ascesis in that is 
integrated and the body, in that we are 
fully integrated in our relation with God. 
about 
unpassion does not dissociate the soul 
from the body (after how he does not in 
frame of the ecstasy), but he focuses on 
the aspect which he wants to discuss it, 
keeping into a normal balance both 
dimensions of the human person. 

Symeon 

speaks 

If for one who has unpassion this is 
a pei/ran o[lwj, a total experience, holistic 
of our being, a feeling of living work, 
current of divine light in our being, at 
opposite pole, the one who doesn't have 
and spoken about 
it 
fraudulent, venturing in „many thoughts 
and in diverse analogies"521, without that 
he has the interior certainties of its522. 

it he 

treats 

Symeon, no doubt, had in view on 
experimenters and theologians who selftitled knowledgeable of the process of 
personal sanctification but could not say 
something concrete about the details of 
this divine-human process. 

Symeon does not take revenge in 
their face if he talks about this subject, 
but he narrates the state of unpassion 
which he lived and which he could explain 
very coherent and credible. 

521 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 36-37, p. 10/ 

Ibidem. 

522 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 39, p. 10/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

In 

face of analogies and of 
theological phraseology, Symeon came 
with admirable concreteness of his mysti- 
cal experience. 

Nobody whole at mind could react 
negatively in face of his experience, as 
long as he gives clear testimonies, 
concrete, at each theological problem 
that received general responses, nonexperiential, from academic theology of 
his time. 

for 

Symeon is credible in his theological 
in 
discourse 
meticulous mode the theology of the 
Church and he could explain it coherently 
thanks to his ghostual experience523. 

that he endorsed 

In the discourse of face, he says in 
trenchant mode this thing, when he 
speaks of authentic sources which we can 
base in the treatment of unpassion's 
reality. 

The first source in the treatment of 
the subject is the experience of the 
previous Saints, who lived the state of 
unpassion as their proper quotidian life524. 
The second source is our proper mystical 

523 In the early pages of his doctoral thesis, 
dedicated to the theology of Saint Simeon, MR Hilarion 
Alfeyev said the following: „My belief is that at Symeon 
we find a mysticism that is absolutely traditional, in the 
orthodox acceptation of the term and this thing I will 
try to prove throughout this work", acc. Hilarion 
Alfeyev, St. Symeon the New Theologian and Orthodox 
Tradition, Ed. by Oxford University Press, Oxford and 
New York, 2000, p. 4. 

524 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 52-54, p. 

12/ Idem, p. 220. 

 
 

experience, that, as long as is real, is 
identical in essence with the one of the 
previous Saints525. 

Symeon was not only convinced of 
the identity between his mystical experi- 
ence, mysterious and the Saints always, 
but, moreover, without this 
interior 
certitude he could not ever write 
anything and he would not be considered 
of it as something authentic, fully ortho- 
dox. 

He lived as a living member of the 
Church, fully convinced of his situation in 
interior of the infinite connections that 
bind us to each other526 and, in the same 
time, he knowing very well his helpless- 
ness and the personal ignorance. 

525 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 54-59, p. 12/ 

Ibidem. 

526 If Father Professor Dumitru Stăniloae used 
the image of „the net of the meshs" (acc. Rev. Prof. 
D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, The Orthodox Dogmatic 
Theology [Teologia Dogmatică Ortodoxă], vol. 1, ed. cit., 
p. 202. To see the whole image in p. 201-202) for to show 
the multiple links between human persons, we propose 
the image of endless network of computers, with 
unsuspected of many connections, which is connected 
to the same source of energy. 

The Church's members are connected with all at 
the life of the Holy Trinity from where comes to us the 
divine grace. If someone is connected at grace, if is wired 
at Trinity's life, he will feel the same divine power and 
the same divine work as and his forerunners or as and 
his contemporaries which are connected at grace. 

For this motive Symeon feels connected at the life 
of God, for that God shows His glory in his being, he 
feels how works the grace in him, how he sanctifies by 
what lives and thinks he and he sees that his experience 
is not a singular, but it is found and at Saints before him 
and at all living members, aware of the grace of them, 
of the Church. 

 
 
 

But, retaking the traditional exegesis 
at Jn.14, 2, Symeon, based on his great 
that 
ghostual discernment, 
„polloi. me.n Ἅgioi, ovli,goi de. avpaqei/j" 
[many are Saints, but few are unpas- 
sioned]527. 

affirms 

Our Father wants to say that Saints, 
in their earthly life, had varying degrees of 
holiness (if we look, in parallel mode, at 
their lives) and, likewise, are and in 
eternity, for that each grows on measure 
of his proper comprehension. 

While some have had a beginning 
and a certain advance in life full of grace, 
namely of holiness, others reached yet of 
here at the state of unpassion. 

Just therefore Symeon speaks about 
unpassion as about a high degree of 
holiness, without as thereby he excluds 
from the row of Saints on those who have 
not acquired yet of here the unpassion. 

Ἀpa,qeia yuch/j [The apathy of the 
soul] and avpa,qeia sw,matoj [the apathy of 
the body] are not identical, says Syme- 
on528. 

The apathy/ the unpassion of the 
body is not useful of the single one, while 
the unpassion of the soul attracts after it 
and the body, for that introduces of it in 
the process of sanctification529. 

527 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 62, p. 12/ 

Ică jr. 1, p. 221. 

528 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 65-66, p. 12/ 

Ibidem. 

529 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 66-67, p. 12/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

Acquiring of virtues and the sight of 
the light are those that lead us to 
unpassion, for Symeon, and no waivers as 
such at certain things or passions, that 
not lead us immediately to something 
positive, to our fill by grace530. 

For our Father the unpassion is a 
filling of grace, of something concrete 
from point of view ghostual and is not a 
ontological negative state. 

Putting in antithesis of the various 
virtues and states which we have here 
does not than take out in relief difference 
of holiness of some and of others. 

Symeon knows and the beginning of 
virtues and their completeness for that he 
traveled all this interior process and he 
knows to talk about it in fidelity mode. 

His demarche is that one of known 
to us the fact, that some ghostual states 
are in our power to achieve, to live and 
others are divine gifts531. 

What is dw/ro,n Qeou/ [the gift of God] 
cannot be experienced unless it God gives 
us, after what we exercise in the virtues 
that make us proper to the charismata532. 
Thus standing the things, Symeon 
shows that the perfection of virtue is „of 
the men who walk in the light" 533 and 

530 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 67-84, p. 12-

14/ Ibidem. 

531 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 89-96, p. 14/ 

Idem, p. 222. 

532 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 94-96, p. 14/ 

Ibidem. 

533 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 120, p. 16/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

those who are unpassioned and perfect 
are those who have overcome, in perfect 
mode, the demons in their being534, 
dressing in brilliant [lamprw/j] face in th.n 
zwhfo,ron tou/ Kuri,ou ne,krwsin [killing oflife-bearers of God]535. 

The death about that Symeon speaks 
here, this death which it brings the divine 
brightness, the divine light in our being is 
the true definition of unpassion. 

Ἀpa,qeia is not a state of interior 
insensibility 
symeonian 
in mystical 
theology, a kind of petrification of our 
feeling, in which we do not react interior 
at any stimulus from outside or from 
within us. 

But the unpassion at Symeon is a 
charismatic state, coming behind of a real 
killing of passions from our being, that 
consists in our filling by the light and the 
happiness into it. 

Symeon speaks about unpassion as 
about the divine state in that we are filled 
by all the good from part of God and in 
which He gives us in abundant [dayilw/j] 
mode and unceasing [avdialei,ptwj] the in- 
corruptible delight and eternal [th.n a;fqar- 
ton trufh.n kai. ave,naon]536. 

For our Father, the unpassion is a 
charismatic state that occurs in history 

534 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 135-137, p. 

18/ Idem, p. 223. 

535 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 137-138, p. 

18/ Ibidem. 

536 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 257-259, p. 

26/ Idem, p. 226. 

 
 

and not in outside it, but it represent a 
filling of us by grace. 

The characteristics of unpassion are 
at Symeon avrrh,tou cara/j [unspeakable 
joy]537, our decorating with avrrh,tw| do,xh| 
kai. avstraptou,sh qei,a| stolh/| [un unspeak- 
able glory and with a divine bright 
garment]538, in so kind that, those who 
live this divine state refeel it as to. polu. 
ba,roj th/j do,xhj [a great weight/ burden of 
glory]539, of divine [glory]. 

The positivity of unpassion and the 
fact that it represent a filling of light and 
not a notable absence of interior reac- 
tions, emerges, we believe, sufficient of 
markedly from the following passage, 
where Symeon speaks about 
interior 
unification of man lived in this state of 
holiness: „when the human desire [h` 
evpiqumi,a tou/ avnqrw,pou] was filled with all 
light), uniting 
these (of the divine 
[sugkraqe,n] the whole irascible [qumiko.n] 
part with rational [logistikw/|] part and 
lustful/ willing [evpiqumhtikw/|], then the 
three make one in the sight of the light of 
trinitarian oneness [triadikh/j e`na,doj] and 
into this they know their Master's own 
delight. 

For then will no longer recognize at 
all their threefold division, for they will be 

537 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 260, p. 26/ 

Ibidem. 

538 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 264-265, p. 

26/ Ibidem. 

539 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 268-269, p. 

26/ Ibidem. 

 
 

in all one"540. The divine light is one that 
unifies ghostual and bodily senses of man 
faithful and in this interior unity he 
delights of Lord's glory. 

Symeon presents unpassion as a 
state of inner unification brought to light 
and preserved through the virtues and 
personal charisms. 

This thing is seen more clearly of 
cosmic allegory from 4, 769-788, where 
Symeon resembles on Saint with the 
heaven, where his heart is the disc of 
moon, „the divine love" [a`gi,a avga,ph] is the 
light of moon and „holy unpassion" [a`gi,a 
avpa,qeia] is kukloeidh.j ste,fanoj [the crown 
of roundness/ of the circle] of moon541. 

The unpassion, continues here 
Symeon, is one that protects them and 
keeps them unharmed on Saints of bad 
thought and sin, defends them the 
enemies and makes them unapproachable 
to their adversaries542. 

But here is not word about an 
external protector shield, but about an 
interior shield, which manifests as a desire 
and fulfilled non-acceptance of the sin, of 
the wickedness of any kind. 

Symeon uses here three significant 
verbs, in our opinion, for to describe the 
role of the state of unpassion in Saints. 

540 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 424-429, p. 

38/ Idem, p. 231. 

541 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 774-783, p. 

62-64/ Idem, p. 241. 

542 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 782-788, p. 

64/ Ibidem. 

 
 

He uses on perife,rw [to surround], 
for to indicate the fact that unpassion 
protects us from the inside by all evils 
outside us; on perie,pw [to treat with great 
care, to care] for to show the dynamism of 
unpassion in our being and on peri- 
froure,w [to guard], for to emphasize the 
steadfastness in which keeps us the state 
of unpassion. 

From symeonian allegory results 
very clear, that the unpassion is an 
establishment of holiness in our being, a 
state in which we can keep by all kinds of 
unfriendly attacks. 

Symeon specificates once again that 
the allegory or the icon [eivkw.n], after how 
says his Holiness, that we presented it is 
a prefiguration [evpinohqeisa] of the things 
that occur in Saints and not a fiction543. 
The unpassion is a quotidian interior 
reality for one who has it and it manifests 
as non-attractiveness to the bodily, owing 
to the ardent longing for the eternal and 
of interior fulfillment that brought it the 
light. 

Comparing the icon of the bride with 
the bride herself, namely making the 
difference between perception of reality 
through an image and the reality as such, 
Symeon defines the unpassion as an 
experience in divine light, as the marked 
reality of a life experienced beyond the 
senses, the sensuality. 

543 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 791-794, p. 

64/ Ibidem. 

 
 

in 
He says: those who „joined 
beingly [ouvsiwdw/j] face with God Himself 
and were worthy by the sight [qe,aj] and 
His impartation [meqe,xewj], they no longer 
expect to have passionate inclination nor 
to the icon of creatures [th/| eivko,ni tw/n 
poihma,twn] and nor (any) passionate 
(annexation) by the shadow of the seen 
[th/| skia/| tw/n o`rwme,nwn]. 

For their thinking remaining in 
those above feeling [evn toi/j u`pe.r ai;sqhsin] 
and mixing with them and (being) 
dressed with brightness of the divine 
nature, they have no feeling (directed) to 
those seen, which they had previously" 544. 
Therefore, the unpassion is not an 
amputation of 
the one 
feeling of 
ghostualized but, on the contrary, is 
raising at a mode of life, in which the 
ghostual and bodily senses of man are 
imbued with light and the ghostual man 
lives in the flesh with feeling of eternal 
life. 

Our mixing with the light or our 
union, in beingly face, with God, about 
that speaks Symeon, represents just the 
content of the unpassion. Our nonattraction to sin is not due, in this divine 
state, to a human effort but to the 
immensity of light, of the grace that fills 
us with all. After this passage, Symeon 
guarantees those said about unpassion 
with his proper experience of unpassion. 

544 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 917-924, p. 

74/ Idem, p. 245. 

 
 

He tells his auditorium that this 
maka,rion pa,qoj [happy suffering]545 was 
given and to him, although he feels 
between those who are oi` avperrimme,noi 
[unexpected/ unwanted/ rejected/ abort- 
ed]546. 

After many prayers, said our Father, 
and he was worthy to suffer the love for 
people of God and His grace547. 

The scandalization that can produce 
a such trenchant confession is void, as 
long as the unpassion is real in that who 
gives details about it. 

Symeon is not only convinced by his 
proper experience of unpassion, but he 
acknowledges and its importance for the 
future christians, who want to seek God 
and find Him548. 

Our Father positions prophetically 
in this situation, as one who feels taught 
in mystic face by God549 and who knows 
the real value of his words for those who 
sanctify their life, on the one hand and, 
on the other hand, emphasizes the 
decisive role of his writings in what 
regards the benefit [wvfe,leian] and the 
encouragement [protroph.n] of those who 

545 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 925, p. 74/ 

Ibidem. 

546 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 927, p. 74/ 

Ibidem. 

547 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 927-928, p. 

74/ Ibidem. 

548 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 931-932, p. 

74/ Ibidem. 

549 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 930, p. 74/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

will seek the sight of God550. He considers 
his writings as a part of the Church's 
Tradition551, as authentic transmission of 
the divine truth, revealed through per- 
sonal revelation from part of God and as a 
testimony what will impel considerable on 
those who will sanctify their life in the 
future. 

In the end of his majestic discourse 
that I commented, Symeon more gives 
the 
another 
unpassion. 

eloquent definition of 

Our Father says that what guards us 
unblemished [avmw,mouj] is the ignition into 
our being of the one flame and greater of 
the fire of divine's desire552. 

With other words, the unpassion is 
the state in which we are full of the glory 
of God and in that the glory potentiates 
us and more the longing for God, that we 
are the true pyres burning by the longing 
of God. 

the 

From 

symeonian exposure 
results the fact that the unpassion is a 
divine reality at that we arrive at self in 
the our ghostual increase, if we listen the 
exhortations of the Holy Ghost from our 
heart. 

550 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 930-931, p. 

74/ Ibidem. 

551 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 932, p. 74/ 

Ibidem. 

552 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 936-938, p. 

74/ Idem, p. 246. 

 
 
 
 

The unpassion is our filling of the 
divine light and the adaptation at eternal 
life still here, on earth. 

Any attempt to assimilate of it with 
the insensibility or with a state pure 
human, at which we arrive through selfcensorship is not found in symeonian 
theology. 

At our Father the unpassion is a 
divine gift reached by one who is cleansed 
of passions, which sees the divine light 
and he is filled by it, in so kind that he 
does not seize anymore the pleasures of 
the world, for that he is kidnapped by the 
pleasure infinite greater which produces 
in him the glory of the world what will 
come. 

 
 
 

2. 5. 3. The Light and the Salva- 

tion as Holiness 

Saint Symeon sees the true fulfill- 
ment of human as the reach to holiness 
and he does not propose us a lower bar 
for the desire of our heart. 

For his Holiness the free will is one 
that is able to target a such high [u[yoj]553, 
because „God wants to make us from 
men gods [qeou.j], but with our will, not 
without our will" 554. 

The proper choice and the fulfillment 
of all commandments are at Symeon the 
human effort, of course supported by 
grace, which we must submit it for to be 
proper the name of christian. 

In The Ethical Discourse 13 Symeon 
says, concerning the conditions of our 
sanctification, that we arrive to holiness 
„when we observe with accuracy [avkribw/j 
thrw/men] all that we promised Him and 
will run again for all that we have 
rejected, not returning us again at our 
vomiting like dogs [II Petr. 2, 22]. 

By result, if we keep all that He told 
us and that says to us the Lord Himself, 
we are really faithful [pistoi,], showing 
from facts our faith, and make us Saints 
[Ἄgioi] and accomplished [te,leioi] as and 
He [Mt. 5. 48], in the whole celestial 

553 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, VII, 597, p. 198/ 

Idem, p. 298. 

554 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, VII, 598-599, p. 

198/ Ibidem. 

 
 
 
 

[evpoura,nioi], sons [te,kna] of the heavenly 
God [Jn. 1, 12], like Him [o;moioi Auvtw/|] [I 
Jn. 3, 2] in everything, by adoption [qe,sei] 
and grace [ca,riti]"555. 

After how is observed from this 
quote, Simeon equalizes all the funda- 
mental terms of the phrase. 

He puts the equal sign between 
faithful [pistoi,], Saints [Ἄgioi], accom- 
plished [te,leioi], heavenly people [evpoura,- 
nioi] and the sons of God [Qeou/ te,kna]. 

With other words, in the multiple 
entitlings of holiness we must not see 
only a synonymous reality. The true 
believers are the Saints and the holiness 
means perfection, the filial communion 
with God, our filling by heavenly quali- 
ties. 

 The desire to save us, the facts of 
our faith and the grace, which are 
subsequent to the receipt of the grace 
through Baptism, are those that deify us. 
In the same discourse, Symeon sees 
the sin as non-fulfillment of God's 
commandments556, which are sacred and 
maker-of-life [tw/n a`gi,wn kai. zwopoiw/n]557. 
This sin of the non-deification 
through the fulfillment of command- 
ments, adds Symeon, has serious conse- 
quences on a personal level, for that 

555 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, XIII, 185-192, p. 

412-414/ Idem, p. 386. 

556 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, XIII, 193-204, p. 

414/ Idem, p. 387. 

557 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, XIII, 193-194, p. 

414/ Ibidem. 

 
 

„separate us from the Church of His 
servants Saints [th/j VEkklhsi,aj tw/n Ἁgi,wn 
dou,lwn Auvtou/] and we put off through sin 
the divine garment which we clothe at our 
Baptism, and that, as we believe, is Christ 
[Gal. 3, 27], and not only that, but we are 
deprived of eternal life [th/j aivwni,ou zwh/j] 
and of the shortcoming light itself [tou/ 
avdu,tou fwto,j], of the eternal goodnesses 
[tw/n aivwni,wn avgaqw/n], of consecration 
[tou/ avgiasmou/] and of adoption [th/j 
ui`oqesi,aj]"558. 

And in this second passage quoted, 
Symeon aligns the eternal life with the 
shortcoming light and with the eternal 
goodnesses, that proper realities of living 
of the Saints and of the servants of God. 
the 
commandments, emphasizes he, they are 
self-condemned to Gehenna559. 

Those who do not 

fulfill 

But heavenly people, the deified are 
those who „see with the mind on the Lord, 
...are limpid enlightened and in conscious 
face by His light, ...remain always in the 
sight of His glory...[and] they see in 
themselves on God"560. 

The holiness keep by the command- 
ments but and by the presence of grace in 
our being and the continue sight of the 
divine light. 

558 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, XIII, 201-207, p. 

414 / Ibidem. 

559 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, XIII, 219-220, p. 

416/ Ibidem. 

560 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, XIII, 270-273, p. 

418/ Idem, p. 389. 

 
 

Those who fall from light and from 
the Kingdom of Heavens, says Symeon, 
they must repent and cry for to regain 
them in themselves561. 

For not create the impression that he 
knew not about what he speaks then 
when he speaks about the Saints and 
holiness, Symeon gives the real signal- 
ments of holiness in The Ethical Dis- 
course 9. 

if 

Says He, 

the nations are 
recognized after clothes, ie after the port 
which they have it and after the language 
which they speak it562, „the Saints are 
recognized after their decency [kosmio,th- 
toj] and after the becomingness of their 
walking [tou/ euvsch,mou badi,smatoj] and 
after others from their outside, but the 
distinctive (sign) [gnw,risma], proper to 
them, with that they come before us is 
the word that is born of them with all the 
exactness 
truth 
[avkribei,aj] and 
[avlhqei,aj]"563. 

the 

From these details we find that 
Symeon puts the equal sign between 
holiness and knowledge of the truth. 

The Saints are recognizable for those 
who are cleansed of passions, namely for 
those who see with the eyes of the heart 
on the ones from front of them. 

561 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, XIII, 278-281, p. 

420/ Ibidem. 

562 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IX, 275-276, p. 

240/ Idem, p. 314. 

563 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IX, 277-280, p. 

240/ Idem, p. 314-315. 

 
 

The Saints are those who are 
distinguished by other believers 
just 
through the exactness with that they 
understand and debate the teaching of 
faith and through the truth and the power 
of their words. 

Those who have the Ghost in them, 
they have and the true faith and the facts 
of this belief: „everyone has...the grace of 
the Ghost [th.n ca,rin tou/ Pneu,matoj] 
through the making-of-good [avgaqoergi,aj] 
and the true faith [avlhqinh/j pi,stewj]"564. 
With other words, we cannot have 
the grace of the Ghost, we cannot feel 
Him in us without the true faith and the 
good facts conformable to this divine 
faith. For that the grace to be in us, we 
must confess and to fulfill the divine fund 
of the Orthodox faith. 

But Symeon goes far with the string 
like endless of his confessions and 
presents his reception, of the one who is 
filled with holiness, by those who have 
nothing to do with holiness: 

„And if they hear about someone 
that fought in lawful manner in the 
commandments of God, that he has been 
humbled with heart and with thoughts, 
that he was purged from all kinds of 
passions and he proclaimed to all the 
great things of God [ta. megalei/a tou/ Qeou/] 
- namely how God made them for him, 
according to His non-lying promises and 

564 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IX, 290-291, p. 

240/ Idem, p. 315. 

 
 

how, then when he spoke to the benefit 
of those who heard him, he said that he 
was able to see the light of God and God 
in light of the glory [kathxiw,qh fw/j ivdei/n 
Qeou/ kai. Qeo.n evn fwti. do,xhj], and how he 
knew in conscious face in himself the 
quotidian coming and the work of the 
Holy Ghost [th.n evpifoi,thsin kai. evne,rgeian 
tou/ Ἁgi,ou Pneu,matoj] and he has done 
Saint in the Holy Ghost [Ἅgioj evn Ἁgi,w| 
Pneu,mati ge,gonen] - immediately, as some 
rabid dogs [ku,nej lussw/tej] they bark 
against him and rush to eat him, if is with 
possible, the one who says these"565. 

The road to holiness begins with 
true faith, with the whole process of 
cleaning the passions and with personal 
revelations of the light and of the divine 
mysteries from part of God. 

The ferociousness of his opponents 
totally with his complete 
contrasts 
entrusting on own holiness, given by the 
presence of light in his being. 

In measure in that Symeon would be 
talking without probations guaranteed to 
him by God, without distinction which 
brings the light in us, his opponents 
would have been legitimate to challenge, 
but without to transform in some dogs 
ready to tear a man who speaks to them 
in peaceful mode. 

But then when Symon gives details, 
when he brings guarantees over guaran- 

565 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IX, 359-370, p. 

246/ Idem, p. 317. 

 
 

tees about the wonders of God's mercy to 
himself, his opponents were fighting not 
only with Symeon, but, in the first row, 
with God, Who makes all those promised 
by Him in those who purify their life by 
passions. 

The fight of theological's opponents 
of Simeon's was a struggle with the Holy 
Ghost, namely with One by whom 
Symeon spoke. 
And 

the 
in Hymns we 
identification of salvation with the 
holiness. 

find 

In the Hymn 34, into an apologetic 
context, Symeon said: „Who would have 
called Saint [ever] if he not would be 
imparted by the Holy Ghost?" [h; ti,j 
evklh,qh Ἅgioj mh. metascw.n Ἀgi,ou Pneu,ma- 
toj;]566. 

And as Symeon called impartation 
by the Holy Ghost the ecstatic sight, the 
Saint is the seer of God, he is one who 
feels in him the grace of God. 

In the Hymn 42, our Father is more 
direct in the equalization of salvation with 
holiness. 

Speaking of the exclusion of some 
from the impartation of Holy Mysteries, 
Symeon switches our attention from what 
happens with those who not see now the 
in the Church, at the 
Sacraments, 
eschatological plan of the Kingdom of 
God: „and now sinners are shut out from 

566 SC 174, Hymns, XXXIV, 96-97, p. 434/ Ică jr. 

3, p. 205. 

 
 

the Church and are off with all to impart, 
or, better said, those who are not Saints 
are deprived even and of the sight the 
divine [th/j tw/n qei,wn qe,aj avposterou/ntai 
oi` mh. pe,lontej Ἅgioi]. 

How does, alas!, they will unite then 
with the too-undefiled body of God and 
they shall be members of Christ [I Cor. 6, 
15] defiled? There is not such thing, 
brothers, and will not ever happen! 

And those who are separated from 
the divine body, ie the Church, and the 
choir elected, where they will go? Tell! In 
what kingdom, in which place they hope 
to dwell? Tell me! 

For the Paradise and the bosom of 
Abraham [Lk. 16, 22] and any place of rest 
is surely of the saved [tw/n sw|zome,nwn]. 
And the saved are, with safety, all Saints, 
according as gives witness and teaches 
whole Divine Scripture [oi` de. sw|zo,menoi, 
eivsin Ἅgioi pa,ntwj pa,ntej, w`j pa/sa Qei,a 
marturei/ Grafh. kai. evkdida,skei]. 

if 

For even 

there are many 
(dwelling-places) [Jn. 14, 2], they are but 
one, ie inside the pantry wedding [tou/ 
numfw/noj] [Mt. 22, 10]. 

For as how is a sky and in it the stars 
are distinguished between them in the 
honor and glory [I Cor. 15, 41], so is one 
bridal chamber and a single Kingdom, for 
the Heaven, the Holy City and every 
place of rest are only God"567. 

567 SC 196, Hymns, XLII, 151-171, p. 48-50/ Idem, 

p. 231-232. 

 
 

In the passage quoted now sees very 
clear, how the existence in the Church 
requires a holy life, for that you to be 
proper the Holy of God, the Holy 
Communion and holiness is for the saved. 
And although they differ between them 
as degree of holiness, they live with all in 
the same Kingdom. 

The Kingdom of God does not 
presuppose a uniformity of holiness, for 
that the holiness keeps the person and its 
uniqueness. 

The uniqueness of the relation of 
the Saint with God means the personal 
degree of holiness, which God receives 
such how it is, as long as is a togetherwork with Him. 

Our Father speaks about salvation 
as holiness but he does not indicate 
standards to achieve for to be proper to 
the Kingdom. 

Into a personal definition of 
salvation, he says: „the salvation is 
absolution from all evils and, therewith, 
the finding eternal of all the best"568. 

But, although he speaks here about 
what we receive in eternity, however the 
absolution of passions, of the bad and the 
finding of the best forever to experiences 
still at now and continues in all eternity. 
As far as we are concerned, for us is 
very evident the realistic tone of Saint 
Symeon in relation to salvation. 

568 Idem, Hymns, XLII, 205-206, p. 52/ Idem, p. 

232. 

 
 

there 

For his Holiness 

is no 
salvation of the rank one for Saints and 
salvation of the rank second for other 
believers. In his theology, the salvation 
have the character of the most sustained 
communion with God, in that all what 
happens with us is an interior evidence 
and in that the holiness is not an exterior 
mirage to which all run on forever but, 
rather, is a conscious interiorization and a 
personal understanding all more pro- 
found of God's glory. 

Just therefore it seems to us very 
realistic and credible expressed his 
soteriology, for that the salvation is at 
Symeon a predatory interior reality, is the 
foundation of the believer's personal life 
and presupposes a continuous supply de- 
tails of living it. 

Symeon cannot 

talk about an 
unconscious salvation or indifferent of 
people as long as the gracious link with 
God presupposes awareness of it, joy, the 
holiness and the illumination by grace. 

Symeonian soteriology is a natural 
prolongation of triadology and of his 
christology, where, as we showed in the 
previous sections, God unites Himself 
through His glory, in conscious mode and 
full, with he who purifies by passions and 
who fulfills His commandments from a 
great longing of God569. 

569 Commenting the contribution of Father 
Professor Dumitru Stăniloae at the understanding of 
the symeonian theology, Father Vasile Pop said into an 
article of him: „Only loving God and only in the 

 
 

In Chapters, I, 7, Symeon speaks 
about the indwelling of the Trinity in the 
perfected as about a intensification and 
greater of their longing after God. 

He 

„The 

indwelling 

in 
says: 
conscious 
face and felt of the tri- 
hypostatic Godhead in the perfect [toi/j 
telei,oij] is not a fulfillment of their 
longing [of God] but, rather, a beginning 
and a cause of a loging [of Him] even 
bigger and stronger"570. 

If to the perfect ones the personal 
holiness seems a continuous state of nonholiness is by itself understood that 
Symeon could not speak about a 
salvation in that the holiness is not 
present. 

To be Saints means for Symeon to 
stand in grace and fill us always by grace, 
ie to manifest us in normal mode, as 
some orthodox christians conscious of 
our relation with God. 

What is the most baffling for the 
postmodern reader of Saint Symeon is 
that, at him the holiness is not put on a 
pedestal, at that reach only some, but it is 
the most natural print, quotidian, banal 

consciousness that is loved by God, the man forward 
into a life that never tires of God", cf. Rev. Lect. D.Th. 
Vasile Pop, The Man and God. Hymns of Saint Symeon 
the New Theologian in the Writings of Father Dumitru 
Stăniloae [Omul şi Dumnezeu. Imnele Sfântului Simeon 
Noul Teolog în scrierile părintelui Dumitru Stăniloae], in 
rev. The Theological Horizons [Orizonturi teologice] II 
(2001), nr. 1, p. 72. 

570 SC 51, Chapters, I, 7, 3-6, p. 42/ Idem, p. 366. 

 
 
 

we could say, of an orthodox christian life 
at that we can reach everyone. 
The universalistic 

character of 
symeonian soteriology and non-typo- 
logical in the same time manifests as an 
organic work of the Church, because the 
entry in Church through Baptism means 
the beginning of personal holiness in that 
you can move forward at endless. 

For Symeon no one can obstruct our 
relation with God and the advance in 
holiness, as long as growth means con- 
tinuous increase in the communion with 
Him and receiving sustained help from 
His part towards to understand Him and 
more. 

In the last passage which I quoted 
from Chapters appears before us a reality 
of perfection refelt always as personal 
imperfection. 

Namely the indwelling of the Trinity 
in the perfect does not mean a maladive 
state of jubilation, of proud jubilation 
but, on the contrary, gives rise at a 
unchecked longing towards the coverage 
of that tw/| avtele,stw| te,lei [end without 
end] of the love of God. 

Reaching at end, as says Symeon, 
reaching at the perfection in holiness, 
which is always a personal measure and 
not an impersonal one, does not propa- 
gate in us the feeling that we have 
reached at a satisfactory final from 
personal point of view but, instead, the 
one that we have not found a beginning 

 

[avrch.n] of our longing and of our love for 
God571. 

For that they cannot to comprise the 
perfection of love for God, the perfect 
have the consciousness that they do not 
love God572, for that they do not feel fully 
fulfilled in their love for God. 

This consciousness of impetuous 
love of those perfect, always refelt as 
imperfect and deficient, gives rise at the 
most profound and misunderstood hu- 
mility for those who are not ghostual 
men, for that Saints consider themselves 
unworthy of God's salvation573. 

The sinfulness on which imput to 
themselves the perfect, in definitive, is 
not just at the level of the coarse, in that 
are deepened the sins of juvenescences 
and of their ignorance but, instead, it 
comes from feeling of their unperfection 
in front of supraperfection of God's glory. 
light 
The experience of divine 
creates the consciousness of the congen- 
ital imperfection of the perfect. They 
understand in those ecstatic moments, 
with all their being, that they can never 
be proper to the divine light, for that they 
will never can to comprise the greatness 
of its discoveries. 

The humility of Saints arises from 
the greatness of discoveries [II Cor. 12, 7], 
as to paraphrase on The Divine Paul, 

571 Idem, Chapters, I, 8, 14-15, p. 42/ Ibidem. 
572 Idem, Chapters, I, 8, 15-17, p. 42/ Ibidem. 
573 Idem, Chapters, I, 8, 17-19, p. 42/ Ibidem. 

 
 

from the deep intimate of them with 
God, being a charismatic state. 

It is not with priority the outgrowth 
of remembrance of proper deeds but, in 
essential mode, is an understanding of 
proper power, a reduced power, to en- 
compass the glory of God. 

The feeling of the grace is the 
earnest [avrrabw.n]574 and the full en- 
trusting [plhrofori,an]575 of our salvation. 
this 
enunciation represents a capital truth for 
the authentication of an orthodox be- 
liever. 

soteriology 

symeonian 

In 

The authentic orthodox beliver is 
the conscious of the treasure of grace 
from himself, which not extinguish the 
torch of grace from him and is seer of 
through his continual 
divine glory 
cleansing of passions. 

This believer lives in history and is 
identifiable by other confreres, which and 
they were cleansed of passions and are 
filled of the Ghost, as gives testimony our 
Father: 
„and now are unpassioned 
[avpaqei/j] men, Saints [Ἅgioi] and [men] 
filled of divine light [peplhrome,noi tou/ 
qei,ou fwto,j], which spend in our midst 
and kill their until into both all their 
earthly [members] [Col. 3, 5] of all 
uncleanness and passionate appetence, 
that not only that do not think or no 
more starting sometime, from them- 

574 Idem, Chapters, III, 47, 4, p. 94/ Idem, p. 408. 
575 Idem, Chapters, III, 47, 7, p. 94/ Ibidem. 

 
 

selves, to do the evil, but nor when are 
dragged to this by another do not suffer 
any change of unpassion, which is proper 
to them"576. 

Symeon knew 

from himself the 
holiness and he saw it and in those who 
lived orthodox. He did not feel like an 
imperious need the reporting at the past 
of Church for to talk about holiness, for 
that he confessed openly about the 
holiness of Church's men contemporary 
to himself. 

His theology speaks about this 
continuous reality of holiness in the 
Church and, implicit, about the Church's 
holiness, as Body of Christ. 

In the Catechesis 14, that treats just 
about the reality of ghostual experience, 
Symeon talks about the absolute con- 
sciousness of the one that purifies the 
passions, about this the divine-human 
process that occurs in him: the one that 
puts over his passions „the command- 
ments like some medicines, and the trials 
as on a hot iron, humbling and crying and 
requiring boiling the help of God, he sees 
clearly the grace of the Holy Ghost 
coming [o`ra/| evnargw/j th.n ca,rin tou/ Ἀgi,ou 
Pneu,matoj paragenome,nhn], snatching them 
and erasing them one by one, until his 
soul is made with completely free of all 
this. Because the coming of the Ghost 
does not make him worthy of freedom [to 

576 Idem, Chapters, III, 87, 9-16, p. 108/ Idem, p. 

419. 

 
 

in 
the passions] 
accomplished face and clean [telei,wj kai. 
kaqarw/j]"577. 

in part, but 

just 

The same awareness of the cleaning 
appears and less later, in the catechesis 
cited anterior, where Symeon affirms in 
trenchant mode, that „God, He who 
dwells in him, teaches on an such man 
about the future and the present, not 
through word, but through work, through 
experience and reality [e;rgw| kai. pei,ra| kai. 
pra,gmati]. Because God revealing to his 
mind's eye, looks him how many wants 
[He] and how many are useful to him [the 
faithful], and the other [that exceeds 
him] convinces him not to seek and nor 
to search, nor to spy out with curiosity, 
because even those that God reveals to 
him and shows them [expressly] he can 
not looks with shamelessness"578. 

Our relation of communion with 
God is the one in the frame of which we 
learn from our own illuminations of the 
grace. 

The measure of our ghostual 
knowledge is given by the measure where- 
with God shows us those of His. 

What exceeds us, that measure at 
that we cannot reach noway, is one that 
we do not even want it, for that we can 
not have the longing by it in our heart, if 

577 SC 104, The Catecheses, XIV, 88-96, p. 210/ Ică 

jr. 2, p. 179. 

578 Idem, The Catecheses, XIV, 150-157, p. 216/ 

Idem, p. 181. 

 
 

God would have not attracted us to the 
boundless horizons of this longing. 

In the measure in that we feel an 
untold wish to God, at a some personal 
intensity and we see that we cannot more 
than that, for Symeon this thing means 
that we intuited the measure of our 
ghostual living. 

For 

that, as said and Father 
Professor Dumitru Stăniloae, the sight of 
God „not means that God is known in 
perfect mode. He remains and for the 
eastern christian always a mystery. For 
never the light received from the person 
of Christ is not a complete understanding 
of His person and of the Holy Trinity"579. 

Looking the unbeatable chaining of 
the symeonian reasonings, extracted from 
direct experience of holiness, we cannot 
reach at an other conclusion than of his 
and namely at the fact that the personal 
salvation 
in 
holiness, ie in living in and through the 
grace of God. 

is a personal advance 

Our Father does not grant the 
monopoly of holiness 
to a certain 
categories of believers from the Church, 
but he confesses one salvation for all, on 

579 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, The 
Personal Link with Christ in the Light of Divine Infinity, 
after Saint Symeon the New Theologian [Legătura 
personală cu Hristos în lumina infinităţii dumnezeieşti, 
după Sfântul Simeon Noul Teolog], 
in Orthodox 
Dogmatic Theology Studies [Studii de teologie dogma- 
tică ortodoxă], op. cit., p. 316. 

 
 
 

measure of everyone, as personal sensing 
of divine glory, as a sacred link with God 
the Holy and as an eternal communion 
with Him. 

For Saint Symeon, the holiness is the 
normal state, quotidian of the christian 
orthodox, that is learned primarily from 
the relation alive, gracious and ecstatic 
with God and not from books or through 
an exterior mimicry of it. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2. 5. 4. The Union with God and 

the Communional Images 

The pre-critical editions and the 
critical of symeonian operas suffer of 
what we call false-puritanical pudibondery 
and, equally, and many of the articles 
which dealt of symeonian opera, then 
when is puted the problem of reception of 
the communional images, of biblical 
paradigms or realistic, which illustrates 
the relation between God and believers 
who see His glory. 

From our point of view, we believe 
that a such ghostual impotence, which 
manifests as lack of appetency for the 
realistic-mystical expression of Symeon, 
fundamented on the paradigm of the 
Incarnation, comes from the fact that the 
authors suffer from advanced docetism 
and of damaging interior non-alignment 
at the mysterious process of deification, 
where all these become current personal 
realities. 

The advanced docetism about that 
we speak defends in theological terms the 
total reality of 
in 
the 
christological dogma but it cannot to 
accept its real consequences and in the 
frame of personal salvation. 

Incarnation 

The interior non-alignment at the 
process of deification represents just the 
lack of any interior reporting at the trini- 
tarian God, through the ascesis cleansing 

 
 
 

of passions, for to reach at the sight of 
divine light. 

But both syntagms, under umbrella 
of whom we have grouped a whole serie 
of theologians, that have nothing to do 
with real mystical experience and that 
contests it in terms how can the clear, 
from different personal motives, these 
two talk about the divorce and the 
schizoidy, really staggering, between the 
theology as archiving of theological datas 
and charismatic theology, as direct expe- 
rience and contemporary of us of Trinity's 
life. 

Saint Symeon precisely against of 
such theology and of such theologians, 
that had nothing to do with the direct link 
with God and considered it superfluous, 
gave them the realistic replicas of the 
union of God with the believers. 

His vehemence was not based on 
vainglory and on the revanchist sentiment 
that he must to give a rough replication 
of their, but on the direct experience of 
the mysteries of deification and on the 
zeal to confess the truth in full mode. 

Thus, in the ethical Discourse 1, 
Symeon speaks of our communion with 
God, quoting copiously from John 14 and 
17580 and concluding: „the union [e[nwsin] 
which [the Son] has it in the natural 
[fusikw/j] face with His Father, on this He 

580 The verses quoted here are Jn. 14, 20; 17, 20; 
21; 22; 24; 26, acc. SC 122, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 
40-57, p. 226-228/ Ică jr. 1, p. 133. 

 
 

promises to have in grace [evn ca,riti] and 
to us, if we want [eva.n qe,lwmen]"581. 

The same thing will be repeated still 
two times in the discourse quoted, he 
said: „the glory which the Father gave the 
Son, the Son gives us through the divine 
grace [di,dwsin h`mi/n qei,a| ca,riti]; and a 
thing even greater is that, like He is in 
the Father and the Father in the Son, so 
the Son of God will be in us, and we, if we 
want [eiv boulo,meqa], we will be in grace in 
the Son"582, for that „He taught that the 
union [e[nwsin] which He has with His 
Father, the one we have and we in similar 
[o`moi,wj] face with Him"583. 

The reality of the man's union with 
God connects at Symeon with the full 
assumption of human nature by God the 
Word. 

Just for that the Logos of God took 
the entire human body and He has made
God and man, Symeon speaks about a fill 
of light of each part of our body. 

Our deification does not exclude any 
part of the body and the our soul, for that 
Christ has deified, in full mode, the body 
and His soul, which He assumed in His 
pre-existing hypostasis. 

From this integral assumption of 
humanity and from its pnevmatization, ie 

581 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 63-65, p. 

228/ Ibidem. 

582 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 68-72, p. 

228/ Idem, p. 134. 

583 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 118-119, p. 

232/ Idem, p. 135. 

 
 

from the reality resurrected and glorified 
body of the Lord, Saint Symeon speaks 
about a pnevmatic soteriology, in the 
frame of it the man is integral filled of 
light and makes like of the Lord's body 
[conf. Phil. 3, 21]. 

His exemplifications, in our opinion, 
are admirable through their concreteness 
and their theological non-ambiguity, 
alike with the communional images of 
Scripture. 

In the following we will debate a 
images from 
series of communional 
symeonian theology, which have scandal- 
ized on many, but which have not 
another role, than on that to touch, with 
the utmost rigor, the divine reality of our 
real communion with God. 

We have, therefore, a realism of the 
image, of the human paradigm which 
illustrates the personalist realism of our 
union with God. 

And we begin our descent theo- 
logical in the personalistic symeonian 
imagology with the image of the divine 
breastfeeding. 

In the ethical Discourse 4, into a 
context full christologic-pnevmatological, 
where the deified are presented as 
dressing 
„they see themselves adorned with an 
unspeakable glory and with a divine 
garment bright"584 and where the Master 

in Christ, 

in 

ie 

light and 

584 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 264-265, p. 

26/ Idem, p. 226. 

 
 

„makes Himself to them food and eternal 
drink and immortal"585, in this context 
Symeon introduces the image of the 
divine breastfeeding about that I was 
talking, paraphrasing and changing in the 
same time the pauline image of the 
paternal breastfeeding from I Cor. 3, 1-2. 

In concrete, Symeon says: and the 
Master „is seen by some, as a bright 
breast [fwtoeidh.j mazo.j] puts in the 
mouth of their mind [tw/| tou/ noo.j auvtw/n 
sto,mati evmballo,menoj] and that gives to 
suck [qhla,zein] those, how many are 
babes [nh,pioi] in Christ [I Cor. 3, 1-2] and 
are not in state to receive solid food 
trofh/j], whom He makes 
[sterea/j 
suddenly food and drink, and produces 
them a such sweetness, that they do not 
want or, rather, nor cannot to wrest from 
Him. And to those weaned [avpogala- 
ktisqei/si] He behaves like a loving parent 
of children guiding [paidagwgw/n] and 
educating [paidei,wn] them"586. 

at 

Commuting such the center of 
weight from the ghostual Father [pauline 
the heavenly Father 
paradigm] 
[symeonian paradigm], the text of face 
cannot provoke adverse reactions, as long 
as it expresses, very direct, the reality of 
divine sight. The divine light, the initial 
ecstasy is for beginners as a breast, which 

585 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 270-271, p. 

26/ Ibidem. 

586 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 271-279, p. 

26-28/ Idem, p. 226-227. 

 
 

nurtures and develops them towards the 
receiving of solid food, ie of the divine 
dogmas understood ecstatic. 

Symeon does not bring in primeplan the image of divine breastfeeding for 
to fall into a sexual boarding coarser of 
the ecstasy, how accuse those who are 
ashamed, about whom we were talking at 
beginning, but he uses the pauline 
paradigm at the ecstatic and realistic 
level of the mystical feeding. 

The difference between nh,pioi and 
the ones avpogalaktisqei/si, ie between the 
suckers babes and those who finished 
with breastfeeding, confirms the differ- 
ence of degree of holiness between those 
who start on the road of holiness, 
enlightened being by the sight of the 
Trinity's glory and those who are guided 
through light, those the mystery of God. 
The image of divine breastfeeding or 
of the sight of light as a breast bright 
expresses, as was seen, a distinction of the 
mystical experience extreme of important 
and not a motive of stumbling for the 
readers of Saint Symeon. 

All 

in the ethical Discourse 4, 
Symeon builds, on base of the pauline 
place from Eph. 4, 13, the image of the 
perfect man, where he analyzes each part 
of the mystical body of this man, ie of his 
virtues. What scandalizes again in this 
description extreme of interesting and of 
divine is the reality of the hidden parts of 
man. 

 

But precisely this reality of the 
hidden parts, identified with the sexual 
organs of man, represents the greatest 
virtues of the mystic. 

We render the symeonian passage 
with the cause, as to see the full 
enunciation of our Father: 

The general 

„The members and the parts that 
must covered [me,lh kai. mo,ria a[ evgkalu,p- 
tesqai crew,n] are unceasing prayer of the 
mind, sweetness of the tears that comes 
from their shedding, gladness of heart 
and its unspeakable comfort"587. 
context of 

this 
imagological paradigm suggests us very 
clearly, that is not the word about the 
internal parts of the human body, for that 
these are analyzed step by step, in 
phrases itself standing, as and these of 
face, but the sexual organs of the man, 
taken as a paradigm, for to contemplate 
the ghostually [pneumatikw/j qewrou,mena]588 
his constitutive parts - this emphasizes 
Symeon - and not bodily and sensual. 

If for kidneys and loin, understood 
mystically, Symeon cites Scripture in 
abundant mode [Ps. 25, 2; Eph. 6, 14; I 
Pet. 1, 13; Eph. 3, 6; I Cor. 9, 23]589, for the 
sexual organs, understood mystically, he 
does not bring any scriptural argument, 

587 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 375-378, p. 

34/ Idem, p. 229-230. 

588 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 370, p. 34/ 

Idem, p. 229. 

589 Acc. Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 382-

390, p. 36/ Idem, p. 320. 

 
 

but all the arguments which brings are 
itself virtues as such, that he designates 
right secret experiences, mystical, of 
ghostual human. 

argument 

The unceasing prayer of the mind [h` 
avdia,leiptoj euvch. kata nou/n] - behold, a 
new 
the hesychast 
of 
experience of Saint Symeon! - that was 
the real frame in that he sees the light of 
God, is accompanied by the sweetness of 
joy of heart and of 
tears, of the 
unspeakable comfort, which lives the 
ghostual man that lives clean and sees 
divine light. 

The verb kalu,ptw, an extension of 
the root kalub, where comes and kalu,bh 
[hut]590, indicates us that those who are 
covered, those parts covered are, of fact, 
very intimate, very personal for us and 
are guarded from malicious glances, 
hostile. 

As and the sexual organs, covered 
from good shame, correct, all the same 
and the secret things of ghostual life, tells 
us, with other words, Symeon, are and 
must be kept in the secret of our hearts, 
as long as there is not someone who 
wants to know, with humbleness and 
longing after the divine truth, those that 
occur in the deep of being of those who 
deifies. 

The disclosure without attention of 
the divine discoveries, without discern- 
ment, without reporting at auditorium is 

590 Cf. Liddell-Scott Lexicon, 21632, apud BW 07. 

 
 

an act of ghostual indecency, alike to that 
to expose us the naked body in front of 
masses of people. 

The ghostual exhibitionism, as and 
the bodily besides, asks persons with that 
we have a great communion or that binds 
us a ghostual experience similar as inten- 
sity. 

All into a christologic-pnevmatolo- 
gical context, in the Hymn 15, Saint 
Symeon chooses to talk about „the 
frightening things"591 of our deification. 
These frightening things through 
their divine beauty and through their 
greatness non-understood are the conse- 
quence of the fact that the Son took flesh 
and gave us on His Ghost the divine and 
made us on all His relatives, a single 
house of David592. 

Besides the fact that we are spe,rma, 
the divine [seed] of Christ, and more 
frightening is, tells us, in pressed mode, 
our Father, that our Lord is together with 
us and now and in ages and He lives in all 
who love Him, being in entirety with 
us593. 

The adjective o[loj [integer], fol- 
lowed by a second, of mo,noj [single], make 
crucial distinctions in 15, 134-136. 

Symeon insists on the defining value 
of the two adjectives for to show that our 
relation with Christ is integral, without 

591 SC 156, Hymns, XV, 115, p. 286/ Ică jr. 3, p. 93. 
592 Idem, Hymns, XV, 122-124, p. 286/ Ibidem. 
593 Idem, Hymns, XV, 129-134, p. 286-288/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

rest and that the mystical relation has not 
intermediaries but is a relation mo,non 
mo,noj, of the single with the One single, 
with the Single594. 

The 

integrality of relation with 
Christ of the believer is a direct result of 
the 
integral assumption and of the 
integral deification of His humanity, on 
the one hand and, on the other hand, our 
communion with Christ realizes through 
His Ghost, through the sight of the divine 
light, in direct mode, living only with 
God and through Him. 

Into a natural gradation of the 
exposure, Symeon announces us things 
and more shattering than what said so 
far595, the fact that „make us members of 
Christ [I Cor. 6, 15], and Christ makes 
Himself our members"596. 

With this phrase begins the dilem- 
matic passage, where Symeon confesses 
the presence of Christ in every part of our 
body: 

„Christ [makes Himself] my hand, 
Christ [makes Himself] my foot, of the 
very-villain, and I, the villain, [make 
myself] the hand of Christ and foot of 
Christ. I move the hand and Christ in 
entirety is my hand - for, understand me!, 
is undivided [avme,riston] the divine Godhead -, I move the foot and, behold!, it 
flashes as He. 

594 Idem, Hymns, XV, 135, p. 288/ Ibidem. 
595 Idem, Hymns, XV, 140, p. 288/ Ibidem. 
596 Idem, Hymns, XV, 141, p. 288/ Ibidem. 

 
 

Do not say that I blaspheme, but 
receive these and give worship to Christ, 
That makes you [se poiou/nti] thus! 

For 

if you want and you [su. 
qelh,seiaj], you would become and you 
member of Him, and so all the members 
every one of us will be members of Christ 
and Christ our members; and all the 
indecent He will make them decent [I 
Cor. 12, 23-24], adorning them with the 
beauty and the glory of the Godhead, and 
we will make gods coexisting together 
with God, no-longer-seeing at all the 
indecency of the body, but all likening us 
with Christ through all the body and 
every member of our will be Christ 
integer. 

For He becoming many, He remains 
undivided, and each is Christ Himself 
integer. You recognize so unwrong that 
Christ is and the finger, indeed and [my 
sexual] organ [ba,lanon] and did you not 
tremble and were you not ashamed? 

For God did not ashamed to make 
Himself like you, but you are ashamed to 
make yourself like that One [VAlla. Qeo,j 
soi o[moioj ouvk hv|scu,nqh gene,sqai, su de. 
evkei,nw| o[moioj aivscu,nh| gegone,nai;]? 

I am not ashamed, say you, to make 
me like the One, but when I heard you 
talking, that the One makes Himself like 
of the shameful member [tou/ avsch,monoj 
me,louj], has sneaked me in soul the 
thought that you say a blasphemy. 

 

- Evil you think, for these are not 
shameful [ouv a;schma]. But they are secret/ 
hidden [krupta,] members of Christ, for 
they cover and for the fact that they are 
more honorable than others [I Cor. 12, 
23], as secret/ hidden members and 
unseen by all of the One Mysterious, 
from That is given the seed [I In. 3, 9] in 
the divine copulation [evx ou= to. spe,rma 
di,dotai evn sunousi,a| qei,a|], formed in shat- 
tering face in the divine form by the 
whole Godhead itself, for is God whole 
He who unites with us [o[loj Qeo.j ga,r, ovj 
sunenou/tai meq' h`mw/n], o, shattering mys- 
tery! 

And is made, indeed, an ineffable 
wedding and divine [ga,moj o` a;rrhtoj kai, 
qei/oj]: God unites/ copulates/ mix [mi,gnu- 
tai] with each of us and - I will say again 
these - each unites of pleasure with the 
Master"597. 

To see from this ample quoted text, 
that Symeon substantiates his theological 
affirmations on two capital realities: on 
the integrality of assumption of human 
nature by God and on the mystical 
experience of deification. 

Christ was not ashamed to take the 
integer human flesh and to become man, 
deifying and the human sexual organs 
but we are ashamed to talk about the 
integral assumption of the body by Him 
and we do not want to see how happens 

597 Idem, Hymns, XV, 142-177, p. 288-292/ Idem, 

p. 93-95. 

 
 

and in us this total deification of our 
body. 

For Symeon is not a blasphemy to 
speak about Lord's genitality, as long as 
the problem in cause is seen as trans- 
figured reality, full of light at His Resur- 
rection from the dead. 

If the resurrected body of the Lord 
was full of glory, wants to tell us Symeon 
and the entire teaching of the Church, 
then and we will be full of glory, still now, 
if we deify our whole being. 

But it should be emphasized here 
that our full union with the Lord and His 
existence in every member of our full of 
light is a direct consequence of the 
hypostatic union, for that Symeon speaks 
about a union of us with the deity of 
Christ, which is not divided after the 
number of our members or after the 
number of people who partake of it. 

From this passage is seen very clear 
the steadfastness of Saint Symeon on the 
integralist aspect of the assumption of the 
human body in the hypostasis of the 
Logos, without which there cannot be the 
salvation and the deification of believers. 
Symeon defends the filling of grace 
and the deification of human sexual 
organs of the Lord, after how Saints 
before him had defended, against Apol- 
linarius toward example, the existence of 
mind and of human reason in His 
humanity. 

 

Only if God took and deified every 
human member we can talk about our 
real deification. 

The soteriological symeonian real- 
ism 
is the soteriological realism of 
Church from always, which is based on 
unspeakable hypostatic interpenetration 
of deity and of humanity in the person of 
the incarnate Word and on the abyssal 
relation, through the Ghost, of Christ 
with all believers. 

Just therefore Symeon insists on the 
reality of union and of our wedding with 
God. 

When 

speaks 

Symeon 

about 
sunousi,a| qei,a or about ga,moj does not 
refer at something exterior but at the 
abyssal relation which the glory of God 
provokes in our being. 

Citing I Jn. 3, 9 and speaking about 
the seed of God, about the light that gives 
birth to us as sons of God and that unites 
us with the trinitarian God, Symeon does 
not make than an extensive exegesis of 
the johanneic place. 

His entire theological structure is 
substantiated scriptural and experiential 
and it can deduces very easy, if we follow 
the scriptural quotations that appear in 
his texts as motives of the theological dis- 
sertation or as milestones of identification 
of his own ghostual experiences. 

The union, our wedding with God or 
the sight of His divine light are one and 
the same reality. The multiplicity of 

 

forms in that talking about ecstasy does 
not want to draw the attention, than on 
the fact that the nuances of each human 
characterizations of divine sight repre- 
sents 
richness of 
meanings of the direct experience of the 
divine sight. 

the unspeakable 

The Scripture and the Fathers, 
using diverse examples for to explain us 
the divine sight tell us in definitive, that 
it is a reality much too overwhelming that 
any human example to be able to deplete 
or to encircle into a mode proper to itself. 
theological 
scriptural and 
discourse about the Kingdom of God and 
about the sight have the role only to 
increase the longing after their experi- 
encing and do not replace experience as 
such. 

The 

Therefore 

they are 

invitations, 
continuous suggestionarises of our love 
of God, for to want to taste the unspoken 
ones of God. 

This thing is seen and in the case of 
image of the poor and of the 

the 
princess598. 

light, stays 

The princess, embodiment of the 
divine 
in her bedroom 
[koitw/noj] [r. 879] and the poor lover sits 
out, humiliated for his miserable condi- 
tion. 

But if princess, alias the divine light, 
through a small opening [evk mikra/j ovph/j] 

598 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 874-892, p. 

70-72/ Ică jr. 1, p. 244. 

 
 

[r.881] of the heavenly tent, stretches her 
hand covered with gold, then the lover 
wants to have as wife for ever. 

When the hand of princess, ie the 
light, withdraws and he does not see 
anything, the poor lives „an unbearable 
pain" [qli/yin avfo,rhton] [r. 888] and fills 
of a longing and more vividly for the light. 
The image of the lover for persons 
heavy accessible is an introduction in the 
from 
discussion about 
knowledge of God through the contem- 
plation of His creation at the sight of His 
glory. 

the crossing 

The contemplation of the creatures, 
says Symeon, is a climb in stairs at the 
love, the faith and the pure fear of the 
Lord599. But those who „have united in 
beingly face with God [ouvsiwdw/j tw/| Qew/|] 
Himself and were worthy of the sight 
[qe,aj] and the His impartation [meqe,xewj], 
are not attracted in passionate face or 
with passionate union of the icon of 
those created, nor of the shadow of those 
seen. 

For their thinking spending in those 
beyond of feeling [u`pe.r ai;sqhsin] and 
being mingled with them and clothed 
with the brightness of the divine nature, 
they do not have the feeling straightened 
to those seen as and before"600. 

599 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 911-917, p. 

72-74/ Idem, p. 245. 

600 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 917-924, p. 

74/ Ibidem. 

 
 

Our interior accommodation with 
the divine light is that which moves/ take 
out our feeling from union with the world 
and unites us with those of eternity. 

In symeonian theology, the pas- 
sional part of our being is not desired to 
be destroyed or diminished perhaps, but 
directed towards the divine light and 
towards 
the wishing of God and 
continuous potentiated. 

 As well as the volitional part of 
being the believer as well dia,noia, our 
thinking are redirected by the sight of 
light and just in our filling of light find us 
the true natural movement of human 
being. 

The ghostual life is not at Symeon a 
superior floor of human existence but the 
true mobility of our being, the true 
dynamism and the real fulfillment of us 
in the relation with God. Life in God is 
the normal life of the man and it is a life 
of holiness. 

The image of the cutting of the 
darkness601 is synonymous in its under- 
standing with the opening of the bedroom 
from before. 

The Master of the world put the 
darkness of His light as concealment/ 
cover [avpokrubh.n] [r. 166] of Him. 

But when He wants to renew us the 
being with all, to rise us from the dead 
through the light of His glory [r. 167-168], 

601 SC 122, The Ethical Discourses, I, 12, 166-183, 

p. 284-286/ Idem, p. 155-156. 

 
 

then He „will cut the darkness [diate,mnei 
to. sko,toj] and will pass on there our 
mind and He will lean on there as 
through an opening [evx ovph/j] and He will 
let us see Him into an indistinct face, as 
can be seen the disc of the sun or of the 
moon. 

From here the mind learns itself, or, 
better said, it knows [ginw,skei] and is 
initiated [muei/tai], entrusting itself that 
there is not, with true, another partial 
impartation 
the 
goodies the uttered of God" [r. 169-175] 
than this. 

[merikh/| metoch/|] by 

The cutting of the darkness and the 
crossing through the opening are not than 
two suggestive images of the ecstasy. 

The habituation with the divine light 
from the final of the ethical Discourse 1 
designates however the quotidian experi- 
ence of the light, that is no longer a 
lightning rapture of us by the light, but a 
cohabitation with the light, a continuous 
experience with it, according as live it the 
perfect in holiness. 

In this divine state, the perfect, says 
Symeon, learns from light „wonders over 
wonders and mysteries over mysteries 
and sights over sights, being illuminated 
by it, as to say so, in all the clock. [...] For 
if he would want to write this things, he 
would not reach any paper or any ink, 

 

but he would lack, I believe, and the time 
to tell them in detailedness"602. 

The state of the quotidian sight of 
the light in our being is not a ecstasy but 
a cohabitation with light, where the 
deified „sees himself [in light] and the 
ones concerning himself and on those 
nearly of his and he predicts, knowing 
beforehand [many things]. 

And he knows that, if he will reach 
outside of this prison, and even and more 
after the resurrection [of all from the 
dead] and he will see this light of 
unbearable [a;stekton] so as is it, [then he 
will see] and the goodies from that"603. 

But for to reach at the divine light, 
as presence and continuous sight in our 
being, Symeon puts us before the image 
the dead bones that cannot be reani- 
mated, raised at life than of the Ghost of 
God. 

In the ethical Discourse 7, Symeon 
shows that the bones of all our virtues 
cannot form a living man, a full man, 
without the presence of the Holy Ghost 
in us: 

„For as, if someone put dead bone 
[tij ovstou/n nekro,n] near dead bone and 
articulation [a`rmoni,an] near articulation 
[Eze. 37, 7-8]...[this] at nothing uses, if is 
not the One who makes to see flesh and 
nerves [over them] and He makes not to 

602 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 12, 426-431, p. 

302/ Idem, p. 163. 

603 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 12, 434-439, 

p. 304/ Ibidem. 

 
 

unite the articulations with the nerves, all 
so if over those dead bones is put flesh 
and skin and is made from them a body, 
again neither this will not be of any use, 
[if] lacking the Ghost, Who makes alive 
and moves it, ie [if] is devoid of soul"604. 
The presence of the grace in us 
represents for Symeon the soul of our 
ghostual life. 

Everything that we undertake for 
our salvation is not guaranteed than by 
the divine light, which, then when it 
comes in us, entrustes us by the truth of 
love and of our zeal for the holy life. 

In the image of the girded oven, of 
the soul full by the fire of Godhead, 
Symeon shows the cleaning and the our 
filling by light, as union with the light 
and as brightness of us through it: 

„As the girded oven [evkkaio,menoj 
kli,banoj]...after to gird strong, it makes 
wiht all transparent and like the fire...so 
and the soul...after what...were consumed 
[all bad ones from it, from the cause of 
light,]...remains only the being of the soul 
without passions [h` th/j yuch/j ouvsi,a mo,nh 
cwri.j pa,qouj]...,[moment in that] the 
divine fire and inmmaterial unites with it 
in beingly [ouvsiwdw/j] face and presently 
this lights and shines and imparts [of 
light]. 

[For]...he imparts by the divine light 
and unspeakable [qei,ou kai. avrrh,tou fw- 

604 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, VII, 310-318, p. 

178/ Idem, p. 289. 

 
 

to,j], and he makes fire through im- 
partation [me,qexin]"605. 

The image of union of the divine fire 
with our being is a personalization of all 
what means ardent dynamism in Scrip- 
ture. 

Saint Symeon uses from full the 
image of the light and of the fire, as and 
that of the divine enthusiasm, of unspeak- 
able joy for to emphasize the paradigm of 
the divine sight. 

If in the last image presented by us, 
the fire of the light ignited the heart and 
melted any impurity of heart, in the 
image of the bride who unites with her 
Bridegroom, the principal print that is 
fixed us in soul, that is transmitted us to 
understanding, is the cleanness of heart. 
In the ethical Discourse 15, the bride 
[nu,mfh], our clean soul, our whole being 
full of cleanness, „unites to sleep [th/| 
evnw,sei sugkoitazo,menoj] with the Bridegroom Christ and rises together with Him 
[sunanista,menoj] towards eternal life or, 
instead, [she remains] in Him always and 
she bears on Him, Who [remained] in 
her"606. 

The conjugal union between bride 
and Bridegroom is real and it is one from 
the traditional mystical expressions of 
union with light. 

605 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, VII, 521-537, p. 

192-194/ Idem, p. 296. 

606 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, XV, 34-37, p. 

446/ Idem, p. 401. 

 
 

Symeon does not use only on e[nwsij 
in equation, but he precises, as and Paul 
in Ephes. 5, 23-32, that this union is one 
that is making in koi/toj, in the conjugal 
bed, ie in the largest profoundness of our 
being. 

In the Hymn 15 appears the same 
image of the bride, of the soul-bride of 
Christ, where „the all souls become brides 
with which unites [evnou/tai] The Creator, 
and they [unite] the same with Him, and 
has place the ghostual wedding [o` ga,moj 
pneumatikw/j], This mingling [summignu,me- 
noj] with them into a proper mode to 
God"607. 

Symeon, as and Paul, does not 
render a libidinous image, lascivious of 
our relation with God, as a sublimation of 
sexuality and as a hypostasiation of it in 
the sphere of our mystical reports with 
God, but he uses the realism and the 
dynamics of sexual union as paradigm of 
union with God, which leaves in us real 
traces, concrete, deep. 

The image of the conjugal union is 
deep scriptural and patristic, Symeon 
doing nothing, than to give a personal- 
ization very suggestive, clear, striking in 
the good sense of the word, for the one 
who meets it in his writings. 

Saint Symeon has the astounding 
quality of to be conqueror in his writings, 
in that he uses quotidian 
precisely 

607 SC 156, Hymns, XV, 221-223, p. 294/ Ică jr. 3, 

p. 96. 

 
 

images, extreme of known, banal, which 
raises them, suddenly, at the deep value 
of the mystical experience and, through 
that, he explains the deepest mysteries of 
deification. 

or 

The 

conjugal 

union 
as we will 

the 
drunkenness - 
show 
immediately - realities very concrete and, 
at the first sight, having nothing to do 
with the ecstasy, they become at Symeon 
approachs to the mystery of holiness, of 
the divine union between God and the 
believer man for eternity. 
On Symeon 

interests no 
the 
the example, of the 
conformity of 
the mystical union, 
paradigm with 
ecstatic, but the one between the senses 
of paradigm, which he emphasizes it in 
evident mode. 

In the Catechesis 23608, where he 
conforms the joy of seeing the light with 
the drunkenness which provokes us the 
wine, Symeon is not attentive than at two 
aspects: that of the euphoria which 
provokes the mystical sight and of its 
realism in our entire being. 

The euphoria of the sight of divine 
light aligned of the euphoria of the wine 
is characterized through the strong 
attraction to it [r. 161], through the 
delectation which he feels when he sees 
the 
the 
164], 
insatiableness with that he wants it [r. 

through 

light 

[r. 

608 SC 113, The Catecheses, XXIII, 158-201, p. 24-

28/ Ică jr. 2, p. 254-255. 

 
 

165-167], through the longing of it [r. 167170]. 

But the realism of euphoria and of 
the presence of light in entire being of its 
seer is described by Symeon in terms very 
direct: „the scintillation of the [divine] 
wine [sti,lba tou/ oi;nou] and the radius of 
[heavenly] sun [avkti.j tou/ h`li,ou] that 
scintillates shining on the face of which 
he drinks it perambulate until in his 
bowels/ intestines, until in the hands and 
his feet and until in his back, making him 
in entirety fire [pu/r o]lon] on the one who 
drinks it and in state to burn and to melt 
on enemies who approach by him from 
all parts"609. 

The sight of the light, of the divine 
wine, presents as a filling of us the 
mystical drunkenness is at Symeon a 
transformation of us in men full of 
enthusiasm, of ghostual vitality and 
bodily, that feel in us the light as fire, that 
strengthens us in the battles with the 
demons and makes us frightening for 
them. 

The divin enthusiasm about which 
Symeon speaks is not a human state, of 
human inflammation, but is the shedding 
of the heavenly wine, of the heavenly fire 
in us, ie a divine-human state. 

In the final phrase of the passage 
which we discuss the divine drink, the 
divine wine does not produce the 

609 Idem, The Catecheses, XXIII, 185-191, p. 26/ 

Idem, p. 255. 

 
 

alteration of us but the curing of us610. 
The health [u`gei,an] and the charm of 
beauty which gives birth to the ghostual 
health are at Symeon without ko,ron, 
without satiety611. 

And for that I began this section 
under the sign of the divine paternity, 
with strong maternal accents at ecstatic 
level, speaking of the divine breast- 
feeding, we conclude our exposure about 
the symeonian imagology of the union 
with light all with a maternal confession, 
in that Symeon presents himself as 
feeding on himself from the milk of light: 
 „And remembering us of the joy 
and of that light and of its sweet pleasure, 
we cried and complained us as a suckling 
baby who sees his mother and, remem- 
bering the sweetness of milk, he bursts in 
tears, searching again [the bosom] that, 
as to suck on saturated"612. 

Thus, the joy of light produces 
continuous reminders of it and provokes 
us continually at wishes of it and more 
intense, and more clear and more vivid in 
our being. 

The sight of the light is not a 
secondary search in the life and in the 
theology of Saint Symeon, but represents 

610 Idem, The Catecheses, XXIII, 198-201, p. 28/ 

Ibidem. 

611 Idem, The Catecheses, XXIII, 200-201, p. 28/ 

Ibidem. 

612 SC 196, Hymns, XLIX, 87-91, p. 152-154/ Ică jr. 

3, p. 258. 

 
 
 

itself the finding, the refinding of our 
soul613. 

To refound us the soul says Symeon 
here means „to see God, to reach in His 
light taller than all the creature seen, and 
to have Shepherd and Teacher on God"614. 
From this cause, His sight what and 
the help which 
images with 
the 
represents the union with Him, through 
that he ignites and more the longing for 
Him, do not represent illegitimate images 
in his theology but percussive anthropo- 
morphic expressions of some ecstatic 
experiences that exceed any description. 
By every time Symeon has attracted 
the attention that his images, whatsoever 
would be they, must not taken ad 
litteram, but they must contemplate 
ghostually. 

Just therefore we cannot be of 
accord with they that scandalize by his 
mystical images, as long as they do not 
ask interpreted literally but after their 
mystical meaning, which reveals us the 
profound realities of our communion 
with the Most Holy Trinity. 

613 Epistles, I, apud. Ică jr. 3, p. 317. 
614 Ibidem. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

2. 5. 5. The Divine Light and the 

Ghostual Father 

Maybe into another unfolding of all 
exposure we had to start with this theme 
which we approach now615. 

The 

importance of the ghostual 
Father in the life and the theology of 
Saint Symeon is capital, as long as he 
considers his calling at the mystical life of 
the Church, the receiving of the light and 
the forwardness in its sight as tracks of 
the entrust in his Father and of his 
veneration until at end. 

The divine light is the gift of God 
but to it we reach led by the ghostual 
Father, of the man filled of the Ghost, 
that teaches us those of the unpassion. 

In the Hymn 1, Saint Symeon calls 
his Father Apostle of God616. The title 

615 Saint Justin Popovich, speaking about culture 
and holiness in his profound evaluation of european 
culture, said: „Outside of Saints do not exist teachers 
and pedagogues perfect, nor a true culture without 
holiness. Only the Saint is the true pedagogue and 
teacher; only the holiness is the true light. The true 
culture, the true enlightenment are nothing else than 
the irradiance of holiness. Only Saints are truly 
enlightened", acc. Archim. Justin Popovich, The Man 
and the God-Man. The Abysses and the Acmes of 
Philosophy 
[Omul şi Dumnezeul-Om. Abisurile şi 
culmile filozofiei], introd. study and trans. by Rev. Prof. 
Ioan Ică and Deac. Ioan I. Ică jr., preface by Prof. 
Ioannis N. Karmiris, postface by Panayotis Nellas, Publ. 
Deisis, Sibiu, 1997, p. 83. 

For Saint Symeon the ghostual Father is a Holy 
man, a man in whom is evident the grace of the Holy 
Ghost. 

 
 
 
 

which he confers to Saint Symeon the 
Pious is not one gratuitous. 

In the Hymn 15, speaking about the 
assuming and the deification of humanity 
by Christ in His divine-human hypostasis, 
Symeon shows that his Father reached an 
unpassioned man still of here: Christ „has 
made integer man, being integer God 
with true, the One, not divided [after 
natures], [ie] perfect man in all. Same 
being God and on the entirely [God] in all 
integer members. 

So has made and now, in the last 
times, Saint Symeon the Pious, the 
Studite. 

This is not ashamed by the members 
of any man, neither to see on others 
naked, neiter to be seen he himself 
naked. For he had on Christ integer and 
he himself integer was Christ. And all his 
members and the members of any other, 
in part and on all, on which he was seeing 
as on Christ and therefore he remained 
unmoved [avki,nhtoj], unharmed [avblabh,j] 
and unpassioned [avpaqh,j], as the one that 
was himself integer Christ"617. 

just 

Symeon the Pious is the Apostle of 
the Lord 
for that he reached 
unpassioned as and the Apostles, but he 
received as and the Apostles, through 
divine descovery, the true teaching about 
God. 

616 SC 156, Hymns, I, 49, p. 160/ Ică jr. 3, p. 53. 
617 Idem, Hymns, XV, 202-213, p. 294/ Idem, p. 

95. 

 
 

The ghostual Father is not only an 
orthodox liver or anyone of the priests 
confessors - as though this would be his 
single mode of marking - but, for 
Symeon, that one becomes the ghostual 
Father, which confirms for him God 
Himself, in different modes and un- 
interrupted. 
The 

institution of the ghostual 
paternity is not one of human right, does 
not reclaim it anyone when he wants and 
how he wants, but it is one of divine right, 
is guaranteed by God, Who gives His 
grace to those who love Him. 

In the previous chapter we showed 
how God led him to Symeon the Pious, 
how he received through the prayer and 
his intercession the divine sight, fact for 
that Symeon has never recanted of his 
Father through that have come to him 
the life and the salvation. 

The gratitude and the thanksgiving 
of Symeon for his Father is immense, is 
overwhelming, is vivid and on it we 
refind at all the step in his writings. 

In the Hymn 18 we have a such of 
muster of gratitude full of ghostual 
pathos to the person of his Holy Father: 
„Who led me [w`dh,ghsen] pulling me 
to these beauties? Who raised me at 
unpassion from the abyss of the world? 
Who separated me from the father, the 
brothers [Mk. 10, 29] and the friends, the 
relatives and the pleasures and the joys of 
the world? 

 

Who showed me the path of 
repentance and of mourning, that I found 
the day that has never ended? An Angel 
was, not man. And yet man [Ἅggeloj h=n, 
ouvk a;nqrwpoj. a;nqrwpoj d'], who mocked 
[evmpai,zetai] by the world and trampled 
upon the dragon [Ps. 90, 13] and the de- 
mons tremble in the presence of him"618. 
Symeon expresses his gratitude in 
ablaze mode, stormy, 
ie ghostually, 
through the Holy Ghost, Who was in him 
but he does not exaggerate in noway 
when he qualifies him in such terms on 
his Father. 

For that, through him, he lived the 
unpassion which he saw at his Father, 
Symeon sees in him angelical qualities, 
although he recognizes that the one was 
man, but a man who defeated on demons 
and tread in foots the vile passions. 

The paradoxical humanity of the 
inghostuated man makes the object of 
gratitude of Saint Symeon. He venerates 
on his Father just for that he proves to be 
a man with the divine life and for that God 
Himself presents him on Father right a 
norm of piety. 

God shows in ecstatic mode to 
Symeon that his Father, Saint Symeon the 
Pious, is the man that he needs, for that 
he is His friend. God sends on Symeon at 
His beloved, at Saints, as to learn from 
them, but, in express mode, He sends at 

618 SC 174, Hymns, XVIII, 124- 132, p. 84-86/ 

Idem, p. 114. 

 
 

the Saint from his proximate nearness, for 
that to grow ghostually through the 
submission and the obedience to that. 

The disclosure of the Father has 
right scope the immediate communion 
with this one and is the entrusting of the 
fact, that and now we can live in holy 
mode if we fulfill the will of God. 

But we know the thrilling shout of 
Symeon to the weakness of his century: 
„Do not say that is with infirmity to 
receive the divine Ghost, do not say that 
is with possibility to save ourselves 
without Him, do not say that someone 
can impart of Him without knowing it! 

Do not say that God does not let 
Himself seen by men, do not say that the 
men do not see the divine light [fw/j 
qei/on] or that the thing is with infirmity in 
the present times! Never is not with 
infirmity [Ouvde,pote avdu,naton] this thing, 
friends, but is very with possibility [li,an 
dunato.n] those who will, but those whose 
life gave them the cleaning of passions 
and made them clean the eye of mind"619. 
This shout to contemporaries and 
followers is, on the one part, a funda- 
mental distrust in the suppression of the 
endless chain of holiness in the Church 
and, in the same time, an absolute 
confidence in the fact, that God will bring 
to every man who seek Him the ghostual 
Father that he needs. 

619 Idem, Hymns, XVII, 125-134, p. 288/ Idem, p. 

170. 

 
 

Symeon cannot conceive the Church 
without Saints and, in the same time, he 
cannot see the salvation and the holiness 
outside of the cleaning of passions and of 
the sight of the divine light. 

The ghostual Fathers are gifts of 
God in our lives, but on they we need to 
seek through our cleaning of passions, 
through our searching perpetual as to 
find authentic ghostual life. 

For the meeting with the Father 
must to sanctify us the life, as to 
understand him and to follow him. 

In the Epistle 3, Symeon substanti- 
ates the sending of the Father in our life 
on the uncurbed love of God for our 
salvation: „if He gave death on the His 
Son the One-Begotten that to save us 
through Him, how is with possibility 
really, that then when we ask Him to 
send us or, as to say better, to show us a 
servant of Him, Holy and true, as to lead 
us to salvation and to teach us His ways; 
how is with possibility, I say, to hide a 
such man from us and to deprive us of a 
guiding? No, no! Not is with possibil- 
ity"620. 

The intimation of the true servant of 
God, of the ghostual Father is a gift of 
God but which we receive it due of the 
interior 
excess of zeal and of the 
cleanness. The same happened and with 
the centurion Cornelius, says Symeon621, 

620 Epistles, III, apud Ică jr. 3, p. 328. 
621 Idem, III, apud Idem, p. 328-329. 

 
 

which received advising through Angel 
and through Apostles due of his godly 
life. 

to 

For 

recognize on Father, 
concludes Symeon, the one that sends us 
God in special mode for us, „we need of 
more zeal and bearing of care"622. 

The entrance of the Father in our life 
is providential and through him we learn 
the ghostual mode through that to ap- 
proach us to God. 

Our approach to the Father and the 
relation with him is, in the same time, an 
advance in our relation with the God of 
our heart. 

In the ethical Discourse 6, Symeon 
regards on the ghostual Father in his 
hypostasis of ghostual doctor [to.n pneuma- 
tiko.n ivatro.n]623. 

This „receives [on his patient], keeps 
him, comforts him, shows him all the 
love and the simplicity, as to entrust him 
that he will cure him with the medicines 
[farma,kwn] which he asked them and he 
will fulfill his lust"624. 

The ghostual Father utilizes the 
medicines which shows to him the Holy 
Ghost, ie he heals on patient together 
with the Ghost. 

He is an authentic medic as long as 
he works with and through God's power 

622 Idem, III, apud Idem, p. 328. 
623 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, VI, 279, p. 

140/ Ică jr. 1, p. 272. 

624 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, VI, 298-301, p. 

140-142/ Idem, p. 273. 

 
 

and, in the same time, is an intercessor of 
us to God and a good counselor625. 

The ghostual experience, in this hard 
and thrilling process of the healing of 
passions, is the principal trump of the 
ghostual Father. 

If we find on the Father, „we receive 
through him the forgiveness of our 
sins"626, for that he leads us at the au- 
thentic mode of cleansing of passions and 
in the same time is our guiding towards 
the sight of God. 

Then when Symeon reports his 
ghostual experience at the experience of 
his Father, he sees his own experience as 
being on full tributary to person and to 
love of his Father: 

„To us...as to speak like a fool [II 
Cor. 11, 23]...[God] revealed to us through 
His Ghost, ...through the intercessions 
[ivkesi,aij] of The Felicitous and our Holy 
Father Symeon, as to see, like says the 
Apostle, the graces that were given to us 
by God [I Cor. 2, 12]. [...] 

And the fact that He took face in us 
[Gal. 4, 19], the One who is with true 
God, what else is then that He premakes 
us and He forges us again with all on us 
ourselves and He changes us at face in 
the face of His divinity? 

Thus I knew that was and Saint 
Symeon the Pious, who lived as ascetic in 
the Studion Monastery and the itself 

625 Epistles, I, apud Ică jr. 3, p. 310. 
626 Idem, I, apud Idem, p. 317. 

 
 

experience giving us insurance about 
those regarding at him [th/| pei,ra| auvth|/ ta. 
peri. tou,tou bebaiwqe,ntej]. 

For through the discovery of the 
Ghost that was in him, he sealing us our 
faith in him, we guard on it without 
contradictions. 

More, igniting from his light, as 
from a lamp, the candlestick of our soul, 
we guard it unextinguished, guarded 
being by the prayers [euvcai/j] and the in- 
tercessions [presbei,aij] of him, 
from 
which freshened being our faith in him 
increase and will increase - I speak with 
boldness in God! - bearing its fruit 
hundredfold in itself the the divine 
light"627. 

The light came in the life of Symeon 
through his Father and is kept in him 
through the intercessions of him. 

Symeon confesses with much con- 
scientiousness 
and he 
considers it a great welldoing in his life 
and not as on a curtailment of his person- 
ality. 

thing 

this 

The true relation ghostual Father - 
ghostual son is one that raises reciprocal 
on two in face of God and of themselves. 
The Father does not feel condemned 
at stagnation if he cares on his ghostual 
son but, contrariwise, he grows ghostual- 
ly through this divine work of birth of the 
new ghostual man and the ghostual son 

627 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, IX, 226-232, 

246-259, p. 236-238/ Ică jr. 1, p. 313-314. 

 
 

does not feel injured in his human dignity 
for that he listens to Father, but just 
through his obedience he acquires his 
true freedom and dignity in the face of 
God, ie on that of to be master over his 
passions. 

The ghostual Father borns through 
many interior torments on his son into 
the Lord. 

In the Epistle 3, Symeon himself, 
which was modeled into the Ghost by his 
Father, he says, at his row, to an 
apprentice: „My beloved in the Lord, I 
received you at my bosom when you 
come to me and I modeled you, with 
through 
much warmth, 
teaching and with many painstakings I 
made you, again, after the face of Christ 
through repentance and I born you, 
again, ghostual child 
through great 
patience, strong painstakings and tears of 
day with day, even if you did not know 
nothing through how many attempts I 
passed for you"628. 

apprentice 

The patience and the torments 
provoked by the misunderstanding and 
the lack of sapience of the ghostual son, 
the care to tell him the truth of salvation 
and the mode in that you lead him to the 
divine 
light on this represents the 
torment of day with day of the ghostual 
Father. 

The ghostual Father palpitates at 
every move for his son, he carries in his 

628 Epistles, III, apud Ică jr. 3, p. 323. 

 
 

heart and he suffers for his unful- 
fillments, after how he enjoys of his 
successes. 

Not only the son shows a total 
transparency and a boundless 
love 
towards Father, but and he is a door 
always open towards his heart and a 
guiding sun in his face. 

In the same Epistle, Symeon shows 
that and the Father must to say the 
greatnesses which he receives from God 
to his spiritual children, as thanksgiving 
brought to God for the gifts received from 
Him: 

„In the same face and all who have 
received a ghostual gift from God, have 
before of all the duty to share it to their 
ghostual sons, and, more then, and to the 
friends, to the acquaintances and to his 
servants, to the rich and to the poor. 

Yet and if he has received word of 
wisdom, word of acquaintance, the gifts 
of healings [I Cor. 12, 8-9], the guidance 
of souls, power of help or the discern- 
ment of salvation"629. 

The special relation of the Father 
with his ghostual sons asks that the first 
to know the receiving of a vision or of a 
gift to be they. The ghostual son must to 
hear from the Father how illuminates 
God on him and through this to 
understand how illuminates God and on 
he himself. The identity of the illumi- 
nation with the Father but on his 

629 Idem, III, apud Idem, p. 325. 

 
 

measure, creates in the ghostual son a 
special soaring towards 
increasingly, 
towards all more cleaning and holiness, 
for that he observes that the holiness, the 
growth in holiness is that brings mutilple 
understanding and gifts over gifts from 
God. 

The ghostual Father is the one that 

„comprises those of the Ghost"630 and he 
can explain from his together-feelings 
with the Ghost of God. 

Those who have not received the 
grace of God as the Apostles and who 
have not seen the light of God631, says 
Symeon, those cannot help on someone 
as to be born into the Ghost. 

Here Symeon does not speak of a 
purely human competence, that of being 
a good pedagogue or a good interpreter 
of Scripture, of the Fathers and of the 
canons of the Church, but of the presence 
of the Ghost in us and of the experience of 
the sight of the light which are the 
materials through that we rebuild the 
human being and we make from it a 
ghostual being. 

Therefore and excludes from start 
Saint Symeon, from any work of man's 
ghostual rebirth, those who were not 
sanctified through the Ghost. 

The ghostual Father is irreplaceable, 
is the personal marvel, living, predatory 
from our life and his departure from us or 

630 Idem, III, apud Idem, p. 334. 
631 Idem, IV, apud Idem, p. 351. 

 
 

his move at the Lord leaves an immense 
void, that we cannot fill it with anything 
else. 

The end of the 4th Epistle, this 
trenchant, the shaking confession of the 
spiritual torments aroused of the love of 
God and of the ghostual Father, gives us 
the possibility to see the interior dramatic 
dimension of life holy and of the struggle 
for the correctness of theological life: 

„[...] I am hated for the love of 
Christ. [...] I am condemned by all 
because I want to honor my Father and 
my ghostual Teacher. [...] 

I am proclaimed by them heretic, 
because I teach on all to seek the grace of 
above and the coming in conscious face of 
the Holy Ghost and that without it not 
makes the forgiveness of sins, nor can 
anyone to release of passions and of the 
irrational lusts, nor to make son of God, 
nor to sanctify accomplished without the 
grace of the Holy Ghost. [...] 

[For] the devil has risen on me his 
servants and he leads war with me as to 
cease to proclaim in words and to do with 
the deed the commandments of the 
Evangel and of the Apostles and to 
endeavor to renew the evangelical living 
which was outdated somewhat and 
became despised, as the men not to have 
boldness that they can be saved without 
to receive the grace of the Holy Ghost 

 

and without unpassion, and to deceive 
without to receive Him and to perish"632. 
Saint Symeon feels outraged un- 
justly of his confreres malicious and 
envious on his ghostual experience and 
on the love toward his Father and, in the 
same time, he knows that his persecution 
is for righteousness, for the remembrance 
of the true evangelical living to his 
contemporaries. 

If from a such theological passage, 
some commentators has pulled the con- 
clusion that Symeon is a precursor of the 
protestantism, this affirmation proves 
itself one gratuitous. Symeon has not 
pushed never on his disciples as to make 
a new Church (evident thing from point 
of view historic), in which to live after the 
example of evangelical living, as Luther, 
Calvin and Zwingli, but he fought against 
a false opinion, generalized in the Church 
of his time, about the true orthodox 
living. 

Symeon shows through the icon of 
his Father, of him and of his apprentices 
Holy that the true evangelical living and 
orthodox was not lost in the Church, but 
that just this the authentic living began to 
be persecuted by the Church's men, 
which do not live at the height of its 
exigences. 

In conclusion, those who were not 
born through a ghostual Father, through 

632 Idem, IV, apud Idem, p. 357, 358. 

 
 
 

a Saint which binds in uninterrupted 
mode of the string of Church's Saints, 
cannot know the relation so much deep 
and overwhelming of the Father with his 
sons, what and of God with us, His sons. 
Saint Symeon shows on the ghostual 
Father right the guarantor of authenticity 
of ghostual life on earth and as the one 
that reborns us, through the Ghost, on 
each in part. 

 
 
 
 
 

Sacramentology 

2. 6. The Holy Mysteries of the 
Church and the Feeling of the Divine 
Grace 

Symeonian sacramentology has a 
direct connection at the reality of God's 
sight, for that in the Holy Mysteries you 
feel the presence of the divine grace, if 
you are received in ecstatic mode on the 
Holy Ghost. 

Saint Symeon deals of all the 
Mysteries of the Church more or less, 
without as to write in express mode a 
special work about the Mysteries of the 
Church. 

But his opera, after how we will see, 
has multiple and enough of important 
sacramentological traces, from which we 
can understand the role and the impor- 
tance which he gave them in the mystical 
life of the Church633. 

633 Father Gheorghe Sima, into an article from 
his period of youth, dedicated of Saint Symeon, said 
that at him, „the Holy Mysteries have...a christologic 
character, pnevmatologic and ecclesial and are not 
simple symbols and ceremonies", acc. PhD Student 
Gheorghe Sima, The Work of the Holy Ghost in the 
Mystery of Repentance at Saint Symeon the New 
Theologian [Lucrarea Sfântului Duh în Taina Pocăinţei 
la Sfântul Simeon Noul Teolog], in rev. Theological 
Studies [Studii Teologice], XLII (1990), no. 3, p. 50. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2. 6. 1. The Holy Baptism and 

the Sight of God 

We have remembered several times 
before now the defining role of Baptism 
in our life, the role of the sacramental 
gate through that we enter in the 
communion with the Most Holy Trinity. 
The Holy Baptism is the moment of 
our entry in the relation with God and, in 
the same time, the moment of our 
living members of the 
creation as 
mystical body, secret of Christ, ie of the 
Holy Church. 

And we begin the commentary at 
the sacramental theology of Symeon with 
a place very concise, in that speaks to us 
about what represents the Baptism in our 
life but and about the ghostual life: 

sins 

[th.n 

„From the divine Baptism we receive 
the 
forgiveness of 
tw/n 
h`marthme,nwn lamba,nomen a;fesin] and we 
are, in the same time, release of curse [th/j 
prw,hn kata,raj evleuqerou,meqa] and through 
the coming of the Holy Ghost we are 
sanctified [a`giazo,meqa]. 

But the perfect grace [th.n telei,an 
ca,rin], after how was said: „I will dwell 
and I will walk into them" [II Cor. 6, 16], 
we do not [receive] then [ouv to,te]. 

For this thing is of those who have a 
safe faith [tw/n bebaiopi,stwn] and show it 
from facts [tw/n e]rgwn]. 

 
 
 

Because, after Baptism, we incline 
towards evil facts and of shame and 
[through these] we cast with all this 
consecration [to.n a`giasmo.n eivj a;pan avpo- 
ballo,meqa]. 

But, through repentance [metanoi,a|], 
confession 
tears 
[evxomologh,sei] 
[da,krusi] we take, on their measure [kata. 
avnalogi,an], first the forgiveness of sins, 
and, together with this, and the sancti- 
fication of above of the grace"634. 

and 

The passage which we have quoted 
is an inexhaustible gold mine for the 
understanding of the role of Baptism in 
our life. 

In the first row, we find that we 
cannot cleanse from sins and we cannot 
fill of the Ghost through ourselves or only 
believing in Christ. 

Saint Symeon binds the forgiveness 
of sins, our cleaning from the curse of sin 
and the coming of the Holy Ghost in us 
by the moment of receiving of the Holy 
Baptism, moment in that we enter in 
Church. 

is 

The Baptism 

for him a 
consecration of us. The sanctification is 
all one with the coming of the Ghost in 
us, which means the forgiveness, the 
deletion of sins from our being. 

The forgiveness and the release of the 
curse are not aprioristic to the coming of 
the Ghost in us but just the coming of the 

634 SC 51, Chapters, III, 45, 9-19, p. 93/ Ică jr. 3, p. 

408. 

 
 

Ghost means the cleaning of sins, the 
deleting of the curse from us and our 
indwelling by the Ghost. 

The sanctification, our filling of 
holiness is a coming of the Ghost in us, ie 
a discovery, a sacramental experiencing in 
us of the coming of the Ghost. 

Symeon 

is categorical 

in what 
regards the coming of the Ghost and he 
speaks of sanctification which the Ghost 
produces in us as about a personal reality. 
He who baptizes refelt in the deep of 
his being the coming of the Ghost, this 
personal discovery, the personal interi- 
orization of God with us, through the 
intermedium of His glory. 

But exists a difference of degree, 
emphasizes our Father, between the 
feelings of the grace by those who are 
baptizing, by beginners, in comparison 
with those who are sunken in holiness or 
are perfect into it. 

The new-baptized infants or the 
new-baptized adults not having a safe 
faith, a faith shown through facts, ie a 
continue life of holiness, assumed, it 
inclines to evil and facts of shame. 

Through a such careless life or 
through the apostasy, the unknowing and 
the forgetfulness of faith into that we 
baptized, we experience the casting of 
proper holiness, of the lose of feeling of 
the grace from our being. 

Saint Symeon uses in this passage 
the verb avpoba,llw, an expressive verb, 

 

something, 

that announces that we cast, leave, 
abandon 
case, 
from us, something that 
something 
defines us 
in fundamental mode as 
members of the Church: the presence of 
the grace from our being. 

in our 

The coming of the Ghost in us and 
the keeping of Him in us represent just 
what we receive from God and what 
makes us living members of the Church. 
În the measure in that we, says 
Symeon, cast this holiness, we cast it with 
all, wholly [a;pan], we cannot enjoy by its 
return in us, than through repentance, 
the sacramental confession of sins and 
tears. 

The holiness being the presence of 
the Holy Ghost in us, His indwelling in us 
and His remaining in us, just therefore at 
Symeon the holiness is fluctuating, is an 
interior reality extreme of dynamic, that 
represents our con-habitation with God. 

For Symeon the holiness is lost 
through sin and regain through repen- 
tance. But the repentance brings in us a 
coming of the Ghost on measure of our 
opening to God - therefore Symeon uses 
in text the expression kata. avnalogi,an - 
and, once with it, and the cleansing from 
sins. 

Into a such soteriological perspec- 
tive, in that the holiness is the togetherhabitation with God in our being and 
where it can be lost into a twinkle and can 
be refound immediate, through repen- 

 

tance, confession of sin and tears, 
through the pain for those that we have 
made and through the re-receiving of the 
Ghost, we understand why Symeon 
insists so much on the reality of the 
feeling of grace, of continuous feeling of 
God in us. 

The ghostual life is a life of the 
permanent 
feeling of grace, which 
integrates and the awareness of loss or of 
attenuation of its feeling through our sins 
but and its abundant receiving through 
our facts of piety. 

The entire symptomatology of the 
presence of God's grace in us has to do 
with ghostual life, mystical of Church 
and, after how we see at Symeon, the 
ghostual 
life begins with the Holy 
Baptism and continues on all the par- 
course of our life and in eternity. 

If we cast on the Ghost from us, if 
we disembarrass of Him through sin, on 
the measure of our repentance, of our 
return, the Holy Ghost returns in us and 
is always with us. 

The connexion between Baptism 
and the ghostual life or, better said, the 
continuation of divine life in us, planted 
at Baptism in our being, is made through 
continuous repentance for our sins. 

Speaking about repentance in our 
life, he says 
is a work 
that this 
u`pemfai,nei635, an open reality, temporal 
indeterminated. 

635 Idem, Chapters, III, 46, 1-2, p. 94/ Ibidem. 

 
 

The Baptism is the moment in that 
our souls receive the earnest that will be 
brides of Christ636. 

But Symeon emphasizes the fact, 
that we must take the earnest from 
Baptism, ie on the Ghost in our being and 
to have Him in conscious [gnwstw/j] face 
in ourselves637. 

The receiving of the earnest at 
Baptism does not presuppose however 
and the consciousness of secure salvation 
of our person, nor an indifferent com- 
life or one 
portment 
triumphalist opposite of the errors of 
other kinds of believers, which are in 
outside of the Church. 

to ghostual 

The earnest, emphasizes Symeon, 
the presence of the Ghost, must be refelt 
of our entire being, through „the work of 
the commandments and the acquiring of 
the virtues"638. 

Just in the frames of ghostual life, of 
life lived through the commandments 
and virtues, we feel the safe presence of 
the Ghost in us. 

romanian 

commentator of 

636 Idem, Chapters, III, 47, 3-4, p. 94/ Ibidem. 
637 Idem, Chapters, III, 47, 10-12, p. 94/ Ibidem. 
A 

symeonian 
theology remarks the fact, that „the secret feeling of the 
presence of grace or of the work of Ghost is in 
indissoluble correlation with the sight of the Christ's 
glory in light and love", acc. Rev. Lect. PhD student 
Călin-Ioan Duşe, The Mystery of Holy Baptism at Saint 
Symeon the New Theologian [Taina Sfântului Botez la 
Sfântul Simeon Noul Teolog], in Theological Horizons 
[Orizonturi Teologice] I (2000), no. 3, p. 164. 

638SC 51, Chapters, III, 48, 15-16, p. 94/ Ică jr. 3, p. 

408. 

 
 

Symeon puts the earnest in the 
direct link with the stable feeling, firm 
[avsfalh.j] of the Ghost. 

Our current dwelling by the Ghost is 
possible only through our total attach- 
ment to His presence and through a life 
of holiness. Our bonding by the Ghost, 
our inflaming feeling and the confession 
of abyssal relation with Him represent 
and our personal holiness and the 
ecclesial character of our being. 

The salvation and the holiness are at 
Symeon our living experience, continu- 
ous, of our relation with God, into that 
initiated us the Holy Baptism and which 
we keep it trough a tireless fight with the 
sin and through the fulfillment of all His 
commandments. 

Speaking of earnest or of ring [to.n 
daktu,lion]639, ie of receiving of the Ghost 
at Baptism, Symeon speaks in Chapters 
III, 50 about Baptism as about a our 
betrothal with Christ. 

If in Baptism we betrothed with 
Christ through the Holy Ghost and our 
christian life is a life lived in beautiful 
fidelity to our Bridegroom, then the 
Kingdom of Heavens, says Symeon, and 
the eternal goods, we receive them after 
we leave from here, after our dormition, 
having through earnest the certitude of 
eternal marriage with our Bridegroom640. 

639 Idem, Chapters, III, 49, 24, p. 94/ Idem, p. 

409. 

640 Idem, Chapters, III, 50, 27-33, 1-4, p. 94-95/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

Into a such perspective as the 
symeonian, our life in Church is a life of 
intense longing for our Bridegroom, of 
calling and feelings in cleanness for Him, 
in unceasing calling of Him in our being, 
for to prepare us of the great crossing to 
Him and to our eternal wedding with 
Him. 

The personal eshatology transforms 
thus into a crossing in rejoicing, into an 
eternal wedding with our Bridegroom 
and of Church in its integrality and not 
into a loneliness without finish, excruci- 
ating and aberrant. 

The death is an entrance in joy for 
one who has lived in holiness, is the 
complete fulfillment of personal life and 
an eternal forwardness in the com- 
munion with the Bridegroom Christ. 

From symeonian perspective the life 
has sense, one eternal, for that the joy of 
communion with God transcends history 
and makes from the the sacramental act 
of Baptism, spent in history and, in the 
same time, in eternity, an opening and a 
real entrance and abyssal of us in eternal 
life. 

Symeon also deals of Baptism in this 
third series of chapters and in the 
chapters 89 and 90. 

In the chapter 89, the Baptism is 
evaluated from the point of view of 
freedom of the human will. 

Our Father tells us, that „the power 
to determine on ourselves [auvtexou,sion] 

 

the 

freedom of our 

choice 
and 
[auvtoproai,reton] are not removed [avfai- 
rei/tai] [from us] through Baptism, but it 
gives us the freedom to not be tyrannized 
against of our will [a;kontaj h`maj turan- 
nei/sqai] by the devil. 

For after Baptism stays in our power 
either to remain from proper will in the 
commandments of the Lord Christ, into 
Whom we baptized, and to walk on the 
path of His commandments, either to 
deviate us from this straight road and to 
return us at the adversary [to.n avnti,palon] 
and the our enemy [evcqro.n], the devil, 
through the evil facts"641. 

The Baptism, regarded under the 
aspect of our deparasiticalness of demons 
and of their tyranny is a chasing of the 
demons from us through the coming of 
the Ghost and of our dwelling by grace 
but, in the same time, is and the moment 
of proper independence, experienced as 
real dependence, deep of God. 

The true freedom of man, reminds us 
our Father, we do not receive it through 
birth, ie through natural descent, but it is 
a gift of God that we receive it in 
Baptism, from He Himself. 

The exercising in the true freedom 
means the exercesing in the fulfillment of 
the commandments and in our feelings 
into the Ghost, for that „those who 
succumb after Baptism to the wills of the 

641 Idem, Chapters, III, 89, 8-16, p. 109/ Idem, p. 

420. 

 
 

wicked and make the things willed by 
that, those are alienated [avpallotriou/si] 
on themselves of the holy womb of the 
Baptism"642, ie of the eternal life of the 
Ghost. 

The verb avpallotrio,w [to remove, to 
alienate], as and the verb avpoba,llw, of 
that I remembered previously, are verbs 
that represent, in distinct mode, in the 
writing of Symeon, our personal action 
through which we choose evil, against us, 
through which we choose the communion 
with demons. Our alienation from God is 
a personal choice but one evil, not good, 
through which we renounce at the dignity 
of sons, friends, of communionals of God, 
in the favor of maliciousness and of 
inconsistent rejection of our racordation 
at the life of God, at the true life. 

Our removal of the holiness of the 
Baptism means our casting of the Holy 
Ghost, of the One who is live in us from 
Baptism. 

But through the ethical Discourse 10 
we approach and more of discussing of 
the interior relation between the grace of 
Baptism and the sight of the divine light. 
Speaking here about Baptism, our 
Father attentionates on his listeners that 
the receiving of the Baptism, without the 
feeling in us of the Ghost, is a catastrophe 
for our life643. We cannot be, he says here 

642 Idem, Chapters, III, 90, 17-19, p. 109/ Ibidem. 
643 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, X, 166-170, p. 

270/ Ică jr. 1, p. 327. 

 
 

in accentuated mode, we cannot be, „in 
unfelt face/ imperceptible [interior] [avne- 
paisqh,twj], sons of the day and of the 
light"644. 

As to be the sons of glory we must 
perceive with the eyes of the heart, to see 
the light of God. And for that to save us 
must not to enter only in the water of 
Baptism and to boast us that we are 
orthodox-christians, but and to live and to 
keep the Ghost in us: „because our 
salvation is not only in the water of the 
Baptism, but and in the Ghost"645. 

If we baptize us in water must to 
show that is live, in daily mode, the Ghost 
of God in us and that we have the facts of 
the Light. 

With other words, the orthodoxchristian life is the ghostual life, the state 
of to-be-always in the grace of Trinity, the 
experience, in quotidian mode, with and 
through the glory of God. 

The treating of sacramental reality of 
Baptism is not at Symeon one sweetish or 
relativistic from point of view dogmatictheological. 
The 

realism of 
Baptism, the living experience of the real 
act of our union with the Ghost, is a 
characteristic of our whole life. 

contrary, 

the 

Symeon does not report at his 
personal past as to speak about Baptism. 

644 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 169-170, p. 

270/ Ibidem. 

645 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 188-189, p. 

272/ Idem, p. 328. 

 
 

He reports at the Ghost from him, that 
attests the fact, that in his childhood he 
was baptized in Christ, that he was united 
with Christ and with the Ghost through 
Baptism. 

The consequences of Baptism are 
quotidian 
for Symeon. In the same 
discourse quoted anterior, in the ethical 
Discourse 10, in the frame of polemic in 
going with a certain mentality incitizenly 
then and now in Church, Symeon says 
something surprising for those who see in 
fixed mode, non-dynamic, the action of 
the Holy Mysteries in our life. 

He says that „not all the baptized 
receive through Baptism on Christ, but 
only those who have safe faith [bebaio,pis- 
toi] and have prepared themselves in the 
perfect knowledge [evn gnw,sei telei,a|] or 
into an anterior clearing [prokaqa,rsei] and 
thus they came at Baptism"646. 

The 

instinctual reaction at the 
hearing of a such theological statement, 
based on the premise of static evidence of 
Baptism is an error, if we do not let 
Symeon to explain us until at end what 
he has to say in definitive about the 
feeling of the Ghost at Baptism. 

For Symeon, the Baptism is not an 
act ended once with the otpust of service 
and the evidence of grace received then is 
interior one, overwhelming. For our 
Father the Baptism is a real receiving and 

646 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 324-328, p. 

282/ Idem, p. 332. 

 
 

conscious of the Ghost in our being, ie of 
the interior dynamism overwhelming, that 
makes us extreme of enthusiastic and of 
vigorous in the experience of the ghostual 
life. 

After how we have seen anterior, 
Symeon is not against the pedobaptism, 
but he confesses, without denial, the 
receiving of earnest of the Ghost through 
Baptism. 

The phrase aforesaid of Symeon 
does not refer at the Baptism of the babes 
but at those who have matured in faith 
and who have received on the Ghost into 
consciousness, in ecstatic mode. 

In the support of the conscious 
experience of the Ghost in our being, he 
brings right testimony A. Ap. 8, 14-17647. 
His commentary at this lucan text 
and at Gal. 3, 27 is that „just received the 
Holy Ghost, [those] have received on the 
Lord Jesus. For is not one Christ and 
something else the Ghost"648. 

Symeon does not propose us a re- 
nunciation at Baptism but a con- 
sciousness and a reliving of union with 
Christ through the Ghost. The sight of 
light that emanates, gushes from the 
divine-human person of Christ, ie the 
ecstatic sight, is a reliving fully assumed, a 
direct reconfirmation, coming from part 
of God, of the earnest of Baptism. 

647 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 330-336, p. 

282-284/ Ibidem. 

648 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 342-344, p. 

284/ Ibidem. 

 
 

The ecstasy does not replace the 
Baptism but acknowledges its extraor- 
dinary latencies, on the measure of power 
of faith, of the increase in faith and 
holiness of the believer. 

But, in the measure in that the 
Baptism was received by us in babyhood 
and we parted without knowing, through 
our sins, of the feeling of the Ghost, the 
sight of divine light is not only a 
reconfirmation of the earnest received 
but it is refelt in personal mode as the 
first true knowledge of God. 

Symeon emphasizes this thing of 
many times and we have shown this. Just 
therefore, he folds on the lucan text 
aforesaid, he emphasizes 
the 
receiving of the Ghost into consciousness, 
in ecstatic mode, means of fact the full 
awareness, firm, that we have received on 
Christ and on the Ghost, that we have 
received the grace of Trinity. 

that 

And after what we have said all 
these, our underlinings at the text from 
10, 324-328 its find their total ghostual 
transparency, because, as says here, only 
„those who have safe faith [bebaio,pistoi] 
and have prepared themselves in the 
perfect knowledge [evn gnw,sei telei,a|] or 
into an anterior clearing [prokaqa,rsei]", 
fell, in evident mode, that they are 
inhabited by the glory of the Trinity. 

The 

increase 

in grace and the 
ecstatic sight represent the safe faith, 
proven ecstatic, of which speaks us 

 

Symeon and the perfect knowledge is a 
fruit of the ecstatic sight, of entrusting, 
re-entrusting from part of God, that the 
earnest of sight and of eternal union with 
Him is in us. 

From the moment when Symeon 
enters on evangelic terrain in the ethical 
Discourse 10, we assist at a tour of force 
citational in the support of conscious 
indwelling of Christ in us. 

He cites Jn. 1, 1-5, for to show that 
God is everywhere through the light of 
His glory649. From Lk. 10, 22 results that 
the Son discovers Himself to anyone He 
wills650 and from Jn. 1, 12-14 results that 
we become in real mode the sons of God 
through faith and Baptism, and that we 
can see the glory of God in our being651. 
However not are only these scrip- 
tural quotations 
through which he 
substantiates the theology of feeling of 
glory by the baptized, but these come in 
relief in his discourse. 

Connecting I Pet. 1, 16, Lk. 6, 36 and 
A. Ap. 1, 5652, ie the interior dimension of 
holiness as likeness with God with the 
receiving of Baptism in the Holy Ghost, 
Symeon says that those who are baptized 
into the Ghost, ie those who see the 

649 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 370-379, p. 

286/ Idem, p. 334. 

650 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 401-403, p. 

288/ Ibidem. 

651 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 419-425, p. 

290/ Idem, p. 335. 

652 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 436-445, p. 

290-292/ Idem, p. 335-336. 

 
 

divine light, „they make light and know 
on the One who born them, for they and 
see Him on This one"653. 

But the ecstatic sight presupposes 
the Baptism, for that in both cases we 
meet us in real mode with the One who 
recreated us on us, through the Ghost, 
with Christ. 

The distinction on that always 
makes Symeon between pedobaptism and 
ecstatic sight is it that then we received 
the earnest without to have a certain 
increase in faith, that allow us the sight of 
His glory into acquaintance, while the 
ecstatic sight presupposes an acknowl- 
edged knowledge of the One who recreated us ghostually in Baptism. 

But Symeon does not leave us to 
understand that in the case of Baptism, 
from the cause of babyhood mind, we do 
not receive the Ghost. He tells us that 
babies receive on the Ghost but they 
cannot receive Him 
interior at the 
intensity which requires the engaged 
ghostual life, the relation of great love 
with God. This theological discourse is a 
surprise in chain for those who want to 
know the baptismal theology of Saint 
Symeon. 

Symeon testifies powerfully that the 
receiving of the Holy Ghost in ecstatic 
mode makes you faithful with true654. 

653 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 446-447, p. 

292/ Idem, p. 336. 

654 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 488-489, p. 

294/ Idem, p. 337. 

 
 

Those who have not on the Ghost in 
them655, says Symeon [to read: those who 
do not feel in them, in real mode, on the 
Ghost], „they are not faithful from 
heart"656. 
The 

a 
reactualization of the Baptism with other 
words, after how the tears are at Symeon 
a second Baptism657. 

ecstatic 

sight 

is 

If we do not reactualize permanent 
our union with Christ, our communion 
with Him, if we do not feel always His 
glory in us, then we have casted the grace 
of Baptism and His union with us. 

Therefore says Symeon that is a 
blasphemy to affirm that believers receive 
Him and have on Christ in them in unfelt 
interior face, unseizable interior 658. 

If we do not actualize the Baptism 
we do not feel anything in our being and 
we are non-believers in fact, for that we 
do not show any gift from God in our life. 
If we can show that in us is the 
earnest, that is the Ghost, then we show 
that we are agreed by God, that He loves 
us and that He has given us something 
that is always with us, ie the divine grace. 

655 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 498-500, p. 

294/ Ibidem. 

656 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 500, p. 294/ 

Ibidem. 

657 About tears as our second baptism or as those 
who continually cleanses us, to see Ică jr. 2, p. 33; p. 
34**; p. 35; p. 38; p. 40; p. 53**, p. 64; p. 65-66; p. 67; p. 
69; p. 70; p. 71 etc. 

658 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, X, 501-502, p. 

296/ Ică jr. 1, p. 337. 

 
 

The faith as living relation with God 
is an irreprehensible reality in symeonian 
theology. Neither the apology for sight is 
not at him a standard one, in which we all 
see the same thing and at the same 
intensity. 

Taking as paradigm the ecstatic 
sight of the Holy 40 Martyrs from Sebaste 
of Armenia and a affirmation of the Holy 
Martyr Eustratius from the time of his 
tormentings, Symeon makes a distinction 
of degree not only between Baptism and 
ecstatic sight as until now, but and 
between the sight of beginners and of the 
perfects. 

The sight of the light, says him, not 
received nobody before to clean and 
neither received it before to see it in 
ecstatic mode659. 

But, if for beginners, „is made to 
them at beginning a brightness and a 
divine lightenment, but which imme- 
diately passes"660, fugitive, only for the 
perfect ones will be full, quotidian. 

The distinction between the ecstasy 
of the beginners and of those perfect is an 
explanatory paradigm, we believe, of 
distinction between the receiving of the 
Ghost at Baptism and the receiving of the 
Ghost in ecstasy. 

In both cases unite us with Christ 
through the Ghost, only that the re- 

659 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 522-524, p. 

296/ Idem, p. 388. 

660 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, X, 527-528, p. 

296/ Ibidem. 

 
 

ceiving of Christ by babes is for short time 
and at a low measure, on when the 
ecstasy is an acknowledgment of Christ at 
a degree more high of ghostual under- 
standing. 

In the end of the Hymn 15, Symeon 
attacks fugitive the problem of the 
Baptism but explains us on full in what 
regard our ecclesial 
identity received 
through Baptism and reminds us and 
how quickly produces the loss of feeling 
of grace: „receiving on God through 
Baptism on when we were small or, 
better said, making us sons of God on 
when we were babies, sinning we were 
immediately thrown out of the house of 
David and happened it to us without to 
feel something and to run [back at Him] 
through repentance"661. 

We threw us out of the Kingdom, ie 
of the house of David, as long as we do 
not stay at the height of exigencies of 
faith and of interior feeling of the Holy 
Ghost. 

In the Epistle 1, our Father reiterates 
the gracious reality of the Baptism 
expressed here, naming on the Ghost 
wealth and divine inheritance, acc. Col. 1, 
12, Eph. 3, 8, II Cor. 4, 7662, and 
specifying the fact that these „are given to 
the baptized immediately by the divine 
Baptism"663. 

661 SC 156, Hymns, XV, 253-257, p. 298/ Ică jr. 3, 

p. 96-97. 

662 Epistles, I, apud Ică jr. 3, p. 306. 
663 Idem, I, apud Ibidem. 

 
 

But in the Epistle 4, he presents our 
life as on an assumed life for God, for that 
we promised us then when we were 
baptized664. 

Our returning at an evil life, sinful, 
is for Symeon a violation of our promises 
made at Baptism665. 

For him our road after Baptism is a 
road together with Christ, is a life lived in 
the Ghost and any deviation from it 
makes through a return through repen- 
tance at the union with the feeling of 
Trinity's grace. 

In conclusion, symeonian soteri- 
ology is, in the same time, sacramental - 
for that it begins once with the Baptism - 
and is, alike, and ecstatic, for that the 
sight of the light represents the explicit 
knowledge of Him who saves us. 

ecstasy 

through 

The earnest of Baptism is not than 
reconfirmed 
and 
understood on measure of our ghostual 
development. But the reaching at light 
presuposses our entry in Church through 
interior growing 
Baptism and an 
intimation, through the fulfillment of 
divine commandments, of divine grace 
received at Baptism. 

Symeon sees the Baptism as an entry 
in communion with God and as a 
quotidian actualization of it666 until the 

664 Idem, IV, apud Idem, p. 346. 
665 Idem, IV, apud Idem, p. 347. 
666 Speaking about the authenticity of theological 
experience, Father Daniel Benga said into an article 

 
 
 

full union and for eternity of each of us 
with God. 

relative recent, that „any authentic religious experience 
cannot take place than in the ecclesial space" and that 
the orthodox theology being „through excellency a 
charismatic theology and liturgical" is „always living, 
[is] a form of ierurgy or [a] holy work, something that 
changes our life", acc. Rev. Lect. D.Th. Daniel Benga, 
Attempts of Orthodox Theological Epistemology 
[Încercări de epistemologie teologică ortodoxă], in rev. 
The Orthodoxy [Ortodoxia] LVI (2005), no. 3-4, p. 91**, 
93. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2. 6. 2. The Holy Communion, 
the Feeling of Grace and the Ecstasy 

As and in the case of Baptism, Saint 
Symeon explained, from soteriological 
point of view, the divine consequences 
that arise in our being the conscious 
union, full of longing, with the Body and 
the Blood of the Lord. 

The discussion about Holy Com- 
munion has right fundament our union 
with Christ and with the Ghost, with 
entire Trinity in Baptism and the keeping 
our relation alive, incandescence with the 
God of our salvation. 

But, before all, the symeonian 
eucharistic theology characterizes our 
sacramental union with Christ right a real 
experiencing, personal of mystery of 
divine-human person of Christ. 

The impartation with eucharistic 
Christ is the personal event of deep 
personal communion of the faithful with 
Christ, through which we acquire a 
proper understanding, interior of christol- 
ogical dogma, for that we live the real 
communion with Christ, the personal 
dimension of Christ's presence in the 
Eucharist. 

The eucharistic realism of Symeon 
comes from the realism of divine-human 
person of Christ. 

For that Christ is alive, forever alive 
and He Himself gives us as eternal life, 

 
 
 

just therefore the interior reception of 
eucharistic Christ is an exciting one, 
deifying for us, for that is His indwelling 
in us and the unspeakable joy that He is 
in personal mode with us and not just 
substantial. 

For Symeon, the Eucharist is not 
understood in terms of substantiality or 
of replacement of Christ with the Holy 
Eucharist but, contrariwise, the Eucharist 
is, for Symeon, one that strengthens our 
link of communion with Christ, Who is in 
a personal mode in relation with us. 

In the ethical Discourse 4, as to 
begin with a suggestive passage, Symeon 
initiates an eucharistological discussion 
starting from the image of loving father, 
that stays at the table with his sons667. 

Then when the heavenly Father 
(Symeon moves the center of attention 
from the paradigm at the reality sug- 
gested by this) wants to sit at the table 
with His sons and to enjoy with them, He 
does not give them something different 
from Himself but He gives Himself to 
them, acording Jn. 6, 33, as Bread, that 
comes down from heaven, for to give life 
to the world668. 

Symeon does not quote at hap- 
pening on the Evangelist John with 6, 33. 
For Symeon, The Holy Eucharist is not a 
symbol or something in that is not 

667 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 280-281, p. 

28/ Ică jr. 1, p. 227. 

668 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 285-289, p. 

28/ Ibidem. 

 
 

communicated to us the life of Christ but, 
in Eucharist, Christ communicates to us 
His glory and He is with us, with those 
who are imparting with Him in eucha- 
ristic mode. 

However the Eucharist does not 
replace on Christ as person, but Himself 
Christ crucified and risen, Who ascended 
at heaven and is seated at the right hand 
of the Father, unites with us in the 
Eucharist. 

John 

As and 

the Theologian, 
Symeon the Theologian speaks about the 
impartation with eucharistic Christ in the 
terms of interior communion with Christ, 
through which Christ remains in those 
who 
impart with Himself and the 
believers remain in the deepest relation 
with Christ. Through Eucharist we unite 
and are with the Son of God incarnate, 
Who is the real food of His sons, of the 
members of the Church and Who is with 
His Church in any moment. 

Priests and bishops of the Church 
prepare the Precious Gifts and bring 
them, put them before, on altar, as these 
to be sanctified by the descent of the 
Ghost. These are the fruit of the earth 
and of our work. 

However, once with their sanctifi- 
cation, we do not speak about bread and 
wine but about eucharistic Christ, of His 
Body and Blood the ones deified, those 
filled of divine light. 

 

However never Symeon does not 
identify in substantial mode the Eucharist 
with Christ but he speaks about the 
impartation with Christ as about a im- 
partation, alike, of humanity and divinity 
of the person of Lord. 

Says Symeon here, in the trace of 
johannine citation enunciated: „and from 
Him and with Him feed unceasing until 
at satiety 
[ko,ron tre,fontai avena,wj], 
preparing through impartation for eternal 
life and sanctifying the soul and the 
body"669. The impartation is for sons, for 
the sons that stay at the table of love with 
their Father the Beloved. The impartation 
leaves real traces in our being, for that it 
sanctifies us, prepares us for eternity, for 
our continuous impartation of His sight 
and it longer has a defining role which 
surprises Symeon: Holy Communion 
in continuous on 
saturates, delights 
those who impart in repeated mode of it. 
As and in the case of Baptism, 
Symeon insists on the absolute positivity, 
on the beneficial stunning aspect, at 
personal level, of receiving of the Holy 
Mysteries, on the fact that they fill us of 
the glory of God, that they sanctify us, fill 
us of all the joy and the gratitude. 

The deprivation of the impartation 
with Christ, says Symeon, is received by 
the sons, who abuse of their freedom670, 

669 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 289-291, p. 

28/ Ibidem. 

670 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 292-293, p. 

28/ Ibidem. 

 
 

as a deprivation of good671, of the good 
which they 
lived in them being in 
enthusiastic mode, then when they sat at 
the table with their heavenly Father. 

Those who are restored through re- 
pentance, as living members, awakeners 
of the Master's table, come with more 
boldness, says Symeon, and with more 
longing to Christ and with trust in the 
glory of God672. 

Is easy of observed the fact that, in 
this passage, our Father sees the depriva- 
tion of the Holy Mysteries as a moment 
of interiorization and of conscietization 
and more of necessity of union with God, 
which lives it and the one who does not 
see the light, which is private from the 
sight of the divine light. 

With other words, the true love of 
Christ conscietizes and more then when 
we live our remoteness from Him as the 
greatest personal drama. 

When we feel how good was for us 
with Christ and how bad we feel without 
Him, then we understand, 
into an 
overwhelming mode, His direct role, of 
irreplaceable and deifying, which has 
Christ in our life. 

The ethical Discourse 

this 
1, 
theological 
panoply, 
brings us and closer of the core of sy- 

overwhelming 

671 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 297, p. 28/ 

Ibidem. 

672 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, IV, 307-309, p. 

30/ Ibidem. 

 
 

meonian eucharistic theology, 
interior feeling of grace. 

ie of 

the dead, Symeon 

Speaking about Lord's resurrection 
the 
towards our deification, 

from 
discussion 
through the impartation of Him. 

leads 

 If then when raised, Christ has 
deified first the soul and then made as 
His body to be full of glory673 and, in 
consequence, He descended in Hell and 
rose the souls of Saints from there, but 
not and their bodies, thing reserved of 
universal resurrection674, all alike, says 
Symeon, „when we take the Ghost of the 
Master and of our God, make us togethersharers [summe,tocoi] and of Godhead and 
of His being. 

For eating His Tooclean Body, ie the 
Divine Mysteries [Qei/a Musth,ria], we 
make indeed concorporal [su,sswmoi] and 
related [suggenei/j] with Him entirely 
[o`loklh,rwj], like says and the Divine Paul: 
„we are bone from His bones and meat 
from His meat" [Eph. 5, 30]; and again: 
„From the fullness of His divinity we all 
took and grace upon grace" [Jn. 1, 16 and 
Col. 2, 9]. Reaching so these, makes us, 
through grace, like Loving of people God 
and our Lord Himself, renew with the 
soul, made incorruptible and living as 
raised from the dead, ie seeing on the 

673 SC 122, The Ethical Discourses, I, 3, 69-74, p. 

200/ Idem, p. 123. 

674 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 3, 74-78, p. 

200/ Ibidem. 

 
 

One who reckoned fit to make Himself 
like us and seen being of Him, we who 
like Him 
have vouchsafed make us 
[avxiwqe,ntej o]moioi gene,sqai auvtw/|], as 
someone sees from afar the face of his 
friend, talks and speaks with him, and 
hear his voice"675. 

The receiving of the grace at Baptism 
and the sight of the light in ecstasy do not 
exclude 
the receiving of eucharistic 
Christ. The receiving of the Holy Ghost 
means the beingly union with God, from 
where the insistence of Saint Symeon in 
to name the ecstasy a beingly union, at 
the interior level of our being, with the 
glory of God. 

The union with the glory of Christ 
presuppose and the sacramental union 
with Him, the One eucharistic. 

After how tells us the text just cited, 
the union with the Holy Mysteries, with 
eucharistic Christ means our transfor- 
mation in together-relatives with Christ, 
for that we are concorporal with Christ, 
for that Christ is in us and with us. As 
and the union with the glory of Christ, 
the union with the glory of eucharistic 
Christ, which is the same eternal glory of 
the Trinity, means the union, the 
unmixed mixing with the humanity and 
the deity of Christ. Our entire body and 
soul unites with the integral humanity of 
Christ and with His divinity. 

675 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 3, 82-98, p. 

202/ Idem, p. 123-124. 

 
 

Our 

eucharistic 

concorporeality 
with Christ is plenary and not partial, ac- 
centuates Symeon. The impartation with 
Christ is the experience, at the actual 
ecclesial degree, of eternal union with 
Christ, our Bridegroom. 

Just therefore Symeon speaks of our 
full likeness with the person of Christ 
through the impartation with Him, which 
is coinhabitation and the real union with 
Him. 

Make us like Him: this is the direct 
result of conscious impartation and full of 
His person. The consequences of impart- 
ation are astounding, for that make us 
like Him, incorruptible, resurrected with 
the soul, seeing on Him as living, as the 
One living Christ, Who stands with us 
the living. 

The feeling of the deity of Christ, of 
eternal life what emanates from Christ, 
means real experience, shakable beautiful 
and deep of presence of God in us. 

His feeling in us, as the One we rise 
from the dead and our transformation 
transfiguration 
our 
through Him, 
through Him, starting from our soul and 
continuing with our whole body, means 
His undeniable evidence in our life. 

The impartation into consciousness, 
ie through the sensing of His divinity, 
united in inseparable mode with the 
Body and His Blood is the certainty of our 
faith, the reactualization of our union 
with Him and the consciousness that this 

 

union will increase all more in this life 
and in throughout eternity. 

In the expectation of eternal union 
with our Bridegroom, our longing of Him 
is saturated of the impartation with Him, 
the One eucharistic and this impartation, 
in paradoxical mode, opens us an appe- 
tite and more for the wish of His sight, of 
eternal union with Him. 

The sacramental impartation with 
Christ not means a slighting of necessity 
of His sight but, contrariwise, it is the 
abyssal ecclesial event that stimulates His 
search, the desire to see Him as He is. 

The Holy Eucharist is neither a 
closure of Christ in history or a depriva- 
tion of Him of transcendence, but the 
impartation with Him fills us of life of 
everlastingness, while we are still men of 
history and, on the other part, makes us 
to experience very deep His transcen- 
dence, just in this immanence thrilling 
and saving for us, through which we 
impart us with Him at the Holy Liturgy. 
Christ vouchsafes us, how says 
Symeon, on each of us of the likeness 
with Him, of the pnevmatization of our 
entire being, without thereby to become 
sole possessors of the Ghost or of Christ. 
Each of us filled with the glory of 
Christ and sanctify us through it and our 
source of holiness is the eternal glory of 
the Trinity. 

In the measure in that recant us of 
Fount of our life, of the glory of the 

 

Trinity and we believe that we can save 
by ourselves and we despise the ecstatic 
unions and sacramental with Christ, we 
experience the devastating vacuum of 
helplessness, of loneliness and of selfdestruction, as closing in the narrow 
circle, suffocating, of egoism. 

Therefore Symeon stresses un- 
checked, that the true union with the 
eucharistic Christ is not an egoistic act or 
a personal relation with God, which give 
us a primacy to others, but it descends us 
into a greater self-knowledge, in which 
we live intense our relation with God. 

The receiving of the Holy Mysteries 
opens us the being to love all, for that 
emphasizes us the opening of our love to 
God, through the experience of His love 
to us, which we live it in our being and 
not from outside of us. 

Little farther, all in the ethical Dis- 
course 1, Symeon prolongs the discussion 
about Matrimony with the one about the 
reality of union with Christ through the 
sacramental impartation of Him. 

Christ, says he, gives us Himself 
towards impartation „from His flesh and 
from His bones, which He showed 
Apostles after He rose from the dead, 
saying: „Touch and see that the ghost has 
not flesh and bones, how you see Me 
having"[Lk. 24, 39], and from those itself 
He gives us to eat [Jn. 6, 56], and through 
this impartation/ communion [th/j koinw- 
ni,aj] makes us one with Him. [...] 

 

[Therefore] the Church of believers, 
ie of sons of God inwritten in heavens 
[Heb. 12, 23], cannot be a full body and 
entire [du,natai ei=nai eivj sw/ma a;rtion kai. 
o`lo,klhron] for God, without its Head, 
Himself Christ God and cannot live the 
true life and incorruptible [h= zh/n th.n 
o;ntwj zwh.n kai. avnw,leqron], if it is not 
nourished by Him, in every day, with the 
Bread the one of all days [Mat. 6, 11], 
without which we have no life [into us] 
and we cannot increase until [at the 
stature] of perfect man, until at the 
measure of age of His fullness, [which is] 
of all those who love Him"676. 

Is observed how Symeon reports, on 
the one part, at the eucharistic Christ as 
at the real Body of the Lord, about which 
testifies the Evangel, without to make 
abstraction through this of the person of 
Christ or to reduce on Christ only at 
Eucharist, and how, on the other part, he 
sees the Church right the mystical Body 
of Christ, in which each believer is a 
living member, recognized and attested in 
heavens by God, who must keep the life 
into it, through the daily impartation 
with Christ, 
the 
Bridegroom of Church. 

the Head 

and 

Believers live, stresses Symeon, from 
the life of Christ, which flows through 
them, thanks to their union with Him. 
Without the life of Christ, without the 

676 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 138-144, 

166-173, p. 232-234, 234-236/ Idem, p. 135-136. 

 
 

feeling of life of Christ in us, we cannot 
be living members of Christ, for that we 
do not feel in us His life, ie His deity. 

And without the daily impartation 
with Him we cannot raise at the stature of 
perfect believer, of man in which is alive, 
in evident mode, Christ God. 

In the 10th chapter of the ethical 
Discourse 1, Symeon explains what means 
our impartation with worthiness677. 

To eat with worthiness the Body of 
the Lord, says he, means to receive and to 
have in us His body took from the Ever 
Virgin Mary and to feel in us the reality of 
deity of the Son of God, ie the deity of 
Him who sits of the right hand of the 
Father678. 

If we say that Jesus Christ, the 
Incarnate Son of God is God and man, 
then, conformable of symeonian logic 
and of truth, of reality, we must impart 
with Christ the One mostglorified, ie with 
Christ the One full of Father's glory. 

For that now, Christ „is no longer 
known after flesh [II Cor. 5, 17]...but He is 
[in Eucharist] in body in unbodily face 
[avswma,twj evn sw,mati], mixing in unspeak- 
able face with beings and our natures and 

677 About 

the 

impartation with worthiness 
Symeon longer talk and little farther, in same discourse, 
in 10, 172-174, p. 264, where reiterating the problem of 
personal worthiness at the impartation with Christ, he 
shows that the worthiness consists in the impartation of 
eternal life of Christ, of conscietization, thus, of divine 
presence of Christ in our being. 

678 SC 122, The Ethical Discourses, I, 10, 58-62, p. 

256/ Ică jr. 1, p. 144-145. 

 
 

deifying us as on some what are 
concorporal with Him and flesh from His 
flesh and bones of His bones [Eph. 5, 29]. 

This is the great thing of His un- 
speakable oikonomia [th/j avfra,stou oivko- 
nomi,aj] and of His descent more above of 
word in us, this is the mystery full of all 
frightening, which I wavered to write it 
and of which approach I trembled"679. 
intuits, 

impeccable 
mode, the personal sense of oikonomia of 
salvation made in the person of Christ. 
The work of Christ in us means just our 
full deification - alike of full deification of 
His humanity - through our impartation 
of Christ full. 

Symeon 

in 

We cannot impart only of what we 
see but and of what we feel, from enough, 
in our interior union with Him, that is 
His deity, which sanctifies us in full 
mode. 

In this sense named Symeon the 
Holy Eucharist as being the Body of the 
Lord, but not as a human body un- 
ghostual, empty of the Ghost, but full of 
the Ghost, fact for that is avswma,twj. 

If in the case of ecstatic sight is 
experienced the glory of Christ, as 
cleansing light, lightening, sanctifying, in 
eucharistic impartation with Him we 
experience His glory as being likewise: 
cleansing of passions, lightening, sancti- 
fying of the body and of our soul. 

679 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 10, 67-75, p. 

256/ Idem, p. 145. 

 
 

Imparting us with Him we receive 
„the grace of the Ghost, ie the fire of 
Godhead...[that gushes] from nature and 
from His being"680. 

The eucharistic impartation, as and 
the ecstasy, makes us close, somewhat, to 
His unapproachable person, through the 
glory that gushes from it. 

In the sight and the feeling of His 
glory we experience the unapproachable 
life of God and His transcendence, 
without as it to subsume, into something, 
to His gracious immanence, to Christ's 
descent at us, through His glory and 
trough the giving the Body and of His 
divine Blood toward our impartation. 

Through His immanence lived by us, 
we feel how great is His transcendence, 
His real misunderstanding and His un- 
comprehension by us. 

But His transcendence becomes for 
us a real one, felt interior, in personal 
mode, on measure what unite us with His 
glory or impart us with Him, the One 
eucharistic. 

Only in the Church, with other 
words, we know who is God, how shows 
our God the unapproachable, how fells 
He through the faith and the holy life 
into Him and which are the life and His 
love real. 

The ghostual experience 

is the 
crucible where melts and rebuilds the 

680 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 10, 123-125, p. 

260/ Idem, p. 146. 

 
 

being and our life and where the feeling 
and the sight of God bring us a real 
attitude and theology about the life of 
God. 

In the ethical Discourse 3, Symeon 
puts the equal sign between the content of 
ecstasy and the eucharistic impartation. 
Although one is the ecstasy and 
another is the eucharistic impartation, 
however Symeon finds them a common 
denominator: the person of Christ. 

Says he, into a grandiose mode: „The 
unspeakable words, spoken to Paul in 
Paradise, ie the itself eternal goodies 
which the eye has not seen and the ear 
has not heard and at the heart of man has 
not ascended, which God has prepared 
those who love Him [I Cor. 2, 9], is not 
find closed on a height, are not bounded 
by any place, are not hidden in any deep, 
are not kept at the head of the earth or of 
sea, but they are before you and before 
your eyes [Rom. 10, 6-8; Deut. 30, 12-14]. 
But what are these? Together with 
the goodies what are put the one part in 
heavens [tw/n avpokeime,nwn evn toi/j ouvranoi/j 
avgaqw/n], Itself the Body and the Blood of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, which we see and 
we eat and we drink in every day, are in 
recognized face those goodies. 

Because in outside thereof you will 
not find anywhere nor any a single thing 
from those said, even if you pervades 
running the whole creation. 

 

And if you want to know, that those 
said are true, make yourself Holy trough 
the work of commandments and so 
impart you by the Holy ones and you will 
know then exactly/ with the detail, the 
power [th.n du,namin] of those said to 
you"681. 

Although symeonian theology is 
preponderant ecstatic, however, as we 
see, the ecstatic does not elude at him the 
real presence of Christ in the Holy 
Eucharist. 

Symeon does not ignore the Divine 
Eucharist but identifies it with the eternal 
goodies seen by Paul in ecstasy. Through 
the impartation with eucharistic Christ 
and through the sight of the glory of 
Christ does not occur with us something 
different, but, in both cases, we fill us by 
the holiness of Christ and we become 
conformable, alike Him. 

But in both unions with Christ we 
must be proper the reception of His glory 
through a life of holiness. The terminal 
phrase from the quoted text, after how is 
seen very well, urges us to holiness, if we 
want to do a hermeneutic of interior 
presence, of eucharistic Christ, in our life. 
For to talk about the presence of 
Christ, reminds us Symeon and if we 
want to make Theology in ultimate 
instance, we must talk about the God, 
Which we feel in us but and above us, 

681 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, III, 426-441, p. 

420-422/ Idem, p. 209-210. 

 
 

Who is always together with us, but is, in 
the same time, in outside of all creation 
and not by a God lost in sidereal hori- 
zons, Who does not have touching with 
the world and is not present in the world 
through His grace682. 

The polemic of Symeon with nonexperimental theology, fixedist, we find 
at all the step in his charismatic theology. 
Responding those surprised by his 
affirmation [that the Holy Communion is 
itself the content of ecstatic sight], 
Symeon cites Jn. 6, 43-44, affirming, that 
nobody cannot recognize, to understand 
His divinity, if not will attract him the 
Father toward this divine understand- 
ing683. 

682 Into a recent interview, Father Professor 
Dumitru Popescu emphasized the capital importance, 
in actual orthodox theology, of reliefation of the 
presence of God in the world, saying: 

„If you say that God does not exist in the world, 
categorical that then the world becomes a matter which 
manipulate it how you want. Today we live into a times 
in that the deterioration of circumambient environment 
and the disequilibriums of world economy appear to 
aggravate all more. [...] 

[But, if] God created the earth from love for man, 
in consequence the earth belongs to God. We are not 
our own masters and neither of the body and neither of 
the air or of the earth. All comes from God. Just the 
perspective of presence of the Ghost of God in the world 
can glimpses an existence more viable for man and for 
creation", Rev. Prof. Acad. D.Th. Dumitru Popescu, The 
Church Must to Assume the Culture of Times, but 
Without Making Compromises [Biserica trebuie să-şi 
asume cultura vremii, dar fără a face compromisuri], 
interview realized by Ciprian Bâra, in the newspaper 
The Light [Lumina], no. 21 (2008), p. 8. 

683 SC 122, The Ethical Discourses, III, 456-468, p. 

422-424/ Ică jr. 1, p. 210. 

 
 

If only those taught by God can 
believe in the Son of God684, all likewise, 
says Symeon, only those who impart with 
the Holy Mysteries of the Lord have the 
eternal life into them and on these will 
raise them the Lord in the day of then685. 
Our Father goes and farther in his 
unbeatable syllogistical, conquering and 
he connexes the impartation with the 
Holy Mysteries with the interior under- 
standing, personal, of the interior reality 
of the Most Holy Trinity. 

Starting from Jn. 6, 56-57, Symeon 
says that „the our union/ communion 
[th/j koinwni,aj] with Him, through Eucha- 
rist, makes in evident mode [diarrh,dhn] 
[for us], as the union and the life which 
has that One with the Father. 

For as that One is united in natural 
face [fusikw/j] with God and His Father, 
all so and us...through the eating His 
Body and trough the drinking His Blood 
we will unite with Him and we will live in 
Him through grace [kata. ca,rin]. 

And that we do not reckon, that all 
keeps of bread seen, from this reason He 
said, in more rows: „I am the Bread that 
comes down from heaven" [Jn. 6, 51]. And 
He did not say: „That came down". [...] 
But He says: „That comes down", ie 
evermore comes down, and always, and 

684 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, III, 474-475, p. 

424/ Idem, p. 211. 

685 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, III, 495-498, p. 

424-426/ Ibidem. 

 
 

comes and in the clock of now at those 
worthy [evpi. tou.j avxi,ouj]"686. 

Our union through grace with the 
Son is all just as close, of indestructible, 
as and that between Him and the Father. 
Experiencing the interior link with 
the Son, reminds us Symeon, we under- 
stand from experiential point of view and 
at our level, the natural link, interior and 
personal of trinitarian persons. 

Triadology and Christology, in evi- 
dent mode, are understood at personal 
level in symeonian theology, through our 
link with Christ and in the impartation of 
Him. 

The union with eucharistic Christ is 
beingly, essential and revealing. Without 
it we cannot have true life into us, we do 
not know what means the living link with 
God and we cannot understand, in 
personal mode, nor the hypostatic union 
of natures in the person of Christ and nor 
the beingly link, of indestructible, of trini- 
tarian persons. 

The ecstatic sight confirms the over- 
whelming reality of eucharistic impar- 
tation and the eucharistic impartation 
with Christ centers our longing on the 
sight and the feeling of Christ in our life. 
Little lower, in the same discourse, 
Symeon invites on those that reduce the 
is seen, at an 
Eucharist at what 
interior contem- 
the 
understanding, 

686 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, III, 507-517, p. 

426/ Idem, p. 211-212. 

 
 

plation of eucharistic Christ: „As you do 
not surmise nothing bodily...this little 
bread [to.n mikro.n a;rton], small piece that 
was deified [th.n ovli,ghn meri,da qeopoih- 
qei/san], to see it with eyes of the mind 
made entire like the Bread which comes 
down from heaven, Who is true God and 
bread and drink of eternal life, lest, 
remaining in unbelief and only at the 
bread seen in all senses, to eat not the 
heavenly Bread, but only on the earthly 
and to be devoid of 
life, uneating 
ghostually [pneumatikw/j mh. fagw,n] the 
heavenly Bread, as says Christ Himself: 
„the Ghost is Who what makes living, the 
body does not use at nothing""687. 

As to feel on Christ in the Holy 
Eucharist we must see on Christ in it and 
in the same time, when impart us with 
Him, to fell how this union with Him is 
real and deifying. Otherwise, unbelieving 
that Christ is there and without to feel His 
divinity in us, impart us only in appear- 
ance with Him, for that we have not 
seized inward His power the life-creating, 
the glory of His divinity. 

Without the feeling of His divinity 
impart us only with bread and wine (for 
that we believe that we receive only that 
which we see that we receive), lacking us 
of the true consequences of impartation. 
Symeon attracts the attention that 
we must be, first, united with Christ 

687 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, III, 528-538, p. 

428/ Idem, p. 212. 

 
 

impart us, 

through the love and the faith in Him 
and through the fulfillment of His 
commandments, for that to feel Him in 
us eucharistically and to fell how to 
scatter in all our being His glory and 
makes us gods through grace. 
We, those who 

in 
conscious mode, of Christ entire and 
make us one with Him, are called by 
Symeon „to let us ravished in the Ghost, 
in itself His true life, in the third heaven, 
or, rather, in itself the heaven of Holy 
Trinity, for that seeing and hearing 
simultaneously those spoken and that 
remain unspoken, taste them and smell 
them and touch them beautiful with the 
hands of soul [ie with the ghostual senses 
of the soul o.n.], to exalt praise of 
thanksgiving to the God the loving of 
men"688. 

The impartation is the prelude of 
ecstasy, 
clearest 
motivation for to cleanse us of passions 
and to wish the sight of God. 

the deepest 

and 

The impartation and the sight open, 
doxological, towards the adoration of 
God or these two modes of real union 
with God 
interior 
increase us 
dimension, doxological, of our relation 
with the Creator, the Saviour, the Sancti- 
fier and our Judge. 

the 

The dramatic consequences, at 
personal and ecclesial level, of interior 

688 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, III, 558-564, p. 

430/ Idem, p. 213. 

 
 

unintimation of eucharistic Christ, reveal 
us, in their true monstrosity, in the 
ethical Discourse 10, where Symeon 
stresses the following: „And if not stay 
thus the things, if we do not make 
partakers, still being in body, of the 
eternal goodies and neither we, the 
chosen, do not receive the grace, follows 
that Christ Himself is just a Prophet and 
not God. 

And all which tells His Evangel are a 
prophecy about future things and not a 
gift of the grace. And, in similar face, the 
Apostles prophesied and have not ful- 
filled those prophesied, and did not take 
neither they [nothing] and neither have 
shared and others. [...] 

But if those who eat His body and 
drink His blood have eternal life, after His 
divine word [Jn. 6, 54], and we eating 
these not feel in us nothing more than 
the felt food, nor receive in conscious face 
another life, then impart us with a simple 
bread and not with God. 

For, if Christ is God and man, and 
His Holy Body is not only body [h` Ἁgi,a 
Sa.rx Auvtou/ ouv sa.rx mo,non], but body and 
God in inseparable face but and unmixed, 
He is seen, through body, and then 
through bread, for sensible eyes, but 
unseen, through Godhead, for sensible 
eyes, but seen by eyes of the soul. 

Therefore and says somewhere: 
„Who eats My Body and drinks My Blood 
remains in Me and I in him" [Jn. 6, 56]. 

 

And He did not say, that remains in them 
and they in Him, but „in Me", ie in My 
glory, in My light, in My deity"689. 

The eucharistic theology of Symeon 
is, as shown here, the promoter of 
ecclesiality and of the experience of 
interior union with the Son of God 
incarnate. 

If through the sacramental impart- 
ation of Christ, in Church, we fell the 
divinity of Christ in our being, then, pulls 
the conclusion Symeon, Christ is the 
Head of Church, we are living members of 
Him, into a full contiguity with Him. 

For our Father, the impartation with 
the Holy Eucharist is a propaedeutic of 
christology and of triadology, which are 
understood only by real members, au- 
thentic, conscious of the Church. 

In the ethical Discourse 14, Symeon 
rediscusses the reality of conscious feeling 
of eucharistic Christ. Speaking about the 
impartation and about the sight in the 
same time, about the ghostual under- 
standing of Holy Mysteries, our Father 
feeling and 
says: „If you do 
consciousness [evn aivsqh,sei kai. gnw,sei], 
then impart you of some as these with 
worthiness. But if do not impart you so, 
forsooth you eat and drink of them with 
unworthiness. 

in 

it 

If imparted you in clean sight [evn 
qewri,a| kaqara/|] from the ones from which 

689 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, X, 738-745, 

758-773, p. 312, 314/ Idem, p. 344-345, 345. 

 
 

imparted you, behold that made you
worthy by a meal as that. And if became 
not you worthy, will not you enclose and 
will not you unite, noway, of God. 

Thus, not to reckon those who 
impart with unworthiness of Divine Mys- 
teries, that through these they enclose 
and unite pure and simple of God the 
unseen. 

For this thing will not be done, 

noway, nor will spend with them ever. 

Because only those who, in the 
impartation [metousi,a|] of Divine Body of 
the Lord, they worthed to see and to eat, 
with the eye and the mouth of mind and 
the discovery of unseen Godhead, into a 
ghostual touching [by the glory of God 
o.n.], they know [then], that good is the 
Lord [Ps. 33, 9], as some who do not eat 
and drink only a felt bread in felt face 
but, in the same time, [they feed], in 
ghostual face, from God, they feeding 
with twofold senses, from one in seen face 
and, from other, in unseen face and they 
unite, in both of these, with Christ the 
twofold after nature, making them concorporal [Eph. 3, 6] and sharer of glory 
and of His divinity [I Pet. 5, 1]. 

Because so unite with God those 
who eat this Bread into consciousness 
and sight of Mystery and drink from this 
chalice with the feeling of soul and of 
heart. But those who make this with 
unworthiness are vain of the grace of 

 

Holy Ghost, feeding only the body, not 
and their soul"690. 

Thus Symeon attentionates us, that 
the simple consumption of the Holy 
Mysteries does not mean union with 
Christ, the true impartation of Him, but 
only if we see with the soul and with our 
mind His glory in us and if we rejoice 
divinely of the feeling of grace, which 
deifies us in conscious mode. 

The real impartation can be demon- 
strated through the direct and personal 
possibility, from interior, of narrating of 
its consequences in our being. 

Those who cannot says nothing 
about the personal soteriology, wants to 
say, in definitive, Symeon, are those 
which do not impart in conscious mode of 
eucharistic Christ, who have never seen 
His glory and who not yearn after the 
eternal union with Him. 

Therefore, Symeon converses again 
with presupposed upset and deranged one 
by his words, with the one does not 
experience, at all, the wonder of real 
impartation with the Lord and he tells to 
this one with condescension: 

„But do not be troubled, beloved, 
listening the truth shown to you by us. 
For if you confess that the Body of the 
Lord is Bread of life, who gives life and we 
know that His Blood gives life those who 
impart of it, and is done in the one drink 

690 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, XIV, 224-247, 

p. 438-440/ Idem, p. 397-398. 

 
 

it source of flowing life to eternal life [Jn. 
4, 14], how, tell me, impart you of these 
not add nothing more to the soul, but, 
even if you feel, maybe, little joy, after 
short time you remain again so how you 
were before, not having in you any 
addition of life or gushing spring or seeing 
a some light? 

For those who have not reach to 
cross beyond of the feeling [of those of 
here], this Bread is shown to them in felt 
face, alike a simple eating, while in 
ghostual face it is uncomprised light and 
unapproachable [fw/j avcw,rhto,n kai. avpro,- 
siton]. 

All so and the Wine is and it, in 
similar face, life [zwh,], fire [pu/r], living 
water [u]dwr zw/n]. 

So, if eating and drinking the divine 
Bread and the Wine of rejoicing, you will 
not know that you live the incorruptible 
life [ouvk e;sh| ginw,skwn eiv zwh.n e;zhsaj th.n 
avnw,leqron], that you received insed you 
the Bread as on a light or as on a fire and 
that you drink the Blood of Master as a 
flowing water and speaking, if do not have 
reach at the sight [qewri,a|] and the 
impartation [meqe,xei] with nothing from 
all these, how reckon that you made
partaker of life [th/j zwh/j koinwno.j]?"691. 

This passage is one of the clearest 
examples, for to exemplify the fact, that 
Symeon identifies the experiencing of 

691 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, XIV, 248-267, p. 

440/ Idem, p. 398. 

 
 

union with the Holy Eucharist with the 
sight of His everlasting glory. 

The authentic eucharistic experience 
is not than the concrete touching of 
essential of ecstatic experience: the real 
union with Christ. For those who do not 
impart mystical, mysterious and real with 
Christ, the impartation has not real 
consequences, identifiable interior. 

But for those who perceive with 
their whole being, that the union with 
eucharistic Christ is a union with the 
humanity and the deity of Christ, with 
Christ the full of glory, this is the 
generator of the greatest fulfillment and 
of interior joy and the real mode in which 
spend the salvation and our sanctifi- 
cation. 

The holiness is an interior process, 
on full conscientized by the one in which 
spends and about it you can talk, if you 
experiment it in act. 

These capital truths of personal 
soteriology are said outrightly by Saint 
Symeon. He does not leave place to any 
ambiguity in the understanding of living 
relation with God, for that the relation 
with Him 
it says and the 
significance of term which indicates it, an 
uninterrupted link with God. 

is, as 

In the Hymn 30 Symeon retakes the 
distinction between the union with 
Christ through the ecstatic sight of His 
glory and the union with Christ through 

 

the ghostual impartation of Body and His 
eucharistic Blood: 

„This thought union [noera.n e]nwsi,n], 
[the ecstatic], I already said it in different 
mode and manifold and the felt union I 
say that is one of the Mysteries. For 
cleansed 
and 
through flowings of tears, imparting me 
by a body deified as God, become 
through this unspeakable union and I 
god. [...] 

repentance 

through 

 [After how] the body and the 
soul...are one in two beings, through 
following, these which are one and two, 
imparting of Christ and drinking His 
Blood, uniting through both beings and 
natures with my God, become and they 
gods through impartation and are called 
with the same name, with the name of 
Who of which imparted in beingly face 
[ouvsiwdw/j mete,scon]"692. 

Symeon can speak with power about 
the reality of deification, for that this is a 
personal reality for his Holiness. 

It was not an abuse of daring for 
Symeon and not a grandomania, the fact 
of to talk about his relation with Christ, 
as long as this relation is real one or must 
be thus for all the baptized in Christ. 

Symeon does not put the monopoly 
on a genus of unwonted experience, to 
which can accede only some of us, but for 
our Father the union with Christ and the 

692 SC 174, Hymns, XXX, 463-472, 474-487, p. 

372-374/ Ică jr. 3, p. 188-189. 

 
 

sanctification through Him is a personal 
characteristic of any orthodox christian 
in part. 

Symeon speaks decent about things 
which should be quotidian for all and 
being quotidian, would be our true 
subject of discussion, pressing and our 
all-inclusive subject of discussion. 

But for that does not stay the things 
even so good in Church, Symeon speaks, 
through the Ghost, and reproves the 
human ambitions and the human daring 
of any member of it, but, especially, of 
clergy, saying to the bishops, which were 
not experiencing the glory of Trinity and, 
of otherwise, to the whole clergy, that 
„remain you unknown My frightening and 
divine Mysteries, 
those] who 
fancied that you hold a bread, which is, of 
fact, Fire, which despides Me as on a 
simple bread and seem you that you see 
and eat just a eating not having My 
unseen glory"693. 

[you, 

From this passage is observed, that 
Symeon not only that identifies the con- 
tent of ecstasy with the eucharistic 
impartation with worthiness, but he asks 
from those who impart to seize, to fell the 
grace and to see the light of God. 

Is evident the effort of our Father of 
conscientizing the abyss of ignorance 
from the mind of those, which, then and 
now, they believe that imparting us 

693 SC 196, Hymns, LVIII, 92-96, p. 284-286/ 

Idem, p. 292-293. 

 
 

means to eat something, on Christ, but 
does not feel any remarkable transfor- 
mation in our life. 

Symeon says unconscious and nonexperimental, that unintimation of the 
Ghost cancels all their ecclesial effort and 
shows them dead members, ruptured 
from the trunk of Christ's Church, even if 
they, from formal point of view, are inside 
of Church. 

The ecclesial eucharistic experience 
is a personal event with capital followings, 
as and the Baptism and the Chrismation, 
and any elusion of discussion about the 
feeling of grace 
frame of 
committing of Holy Mysteries means, of 
fact, an annulment of the personal soteri- 
ology. 

the 

in 

This thing he repeats in the Epistle 
4, where Symeon says to his apprentice, 
that the one „does not know in the 
feeling and the knowledge of soul, that he 
remains in God and God in him, that one, 
with safety, did not impart in worthy face 
with the Mostclean Mysteries. 

For how is with possibility as that 
one, which is united with God not to 
know this, out if he is not very callous? 
And if the one who eats the Body and 
drinks the Blood of Christ has eternal life 
and at judgment will not come, but has 
moved from death at life, [then] is 
evident, that the one who does not know 
that he has eternal life and he did not 
pass from death at life, as the one who 

 

passes from a darkish room into a 
luminous one and brilliant, one like this 
did not know the mystery of God's 
iconomy, nor was delighted of eternal 
life"694. 

in 
The eucharistic experience, 
conclusion, does not mean a scriptic 
taking at acquaintance about what 
happens then when impart you, but con- 
sists in the understanding of what is 
spend with us in the act of sacramental 
union with the Lord. 

The real union with Christ God 
means to feel His divinity in us, His glory, 
to deifying permanent and 
to be 
conscious of the gradual deification, daily 
of our being. 

the 

theology 

Saint Symeon accentuates in his eu- 
identity of 
charistic 
experience between the ecstatic sight and 
the eucharistic impartation, at which we 
are called in corpore and which repre- 
sents 
the real manifestation of the 
ecclesiality of our life. 

To be in the Church, tells us he, 
means to live through all pores of our 
being the wonder of our deification, ie our 
full raccordation at the life of the Trinity. 

694 Epistles, IV, apud Ică jr. 3, p. 352-353. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

2. 6. 3. The Holy Confession and 

the Interior Experience of Grace 

Although we have tendency to 
evaluate only the Epistles 1 and 2 for to 
find the details related of the Mystery of 
Holy Confession in symeonian opera, 
however a detailed research of his opera 
demonstrates us, that Symeon presented 
not only the repentance as Mystery but 
and the repentance as component part of 
ascesis. 

He speaks about contrition, about 
repentance as interior ghostual state both 
before, in and after the sacramental con- 
fession, antecedent to the impartation 
with the Holy Mysteries, present in us 
when impart us but and posterior of this 
real union with the Lord. 

Symeon cannot have a vague 
consciousness of proper sinfulness and 
nor cannot stipulate an emancipation 
towards the sacramental act of the 
confession of sins, as long as, for him, the 
sin was a mortal virus, which affected our 
entire being and without the cleansing of 
sins cannot reach at the sight of God. 

In the Hymn 34, he says with 
sorrow, that „those who have sinned led 
to corruption not only the body, but and 
itself their soul and...we are corruptible 
and with the body and with the soul, as 
some what are kept, in the same time, of 
the corruption of death understood with 

 
 
 

the mind [tou/ nohtou/ qana,tou], as well as 
the sin"695. 

But those who have sinned are we 
all, entire humanity, from which Symeon 
not excludes noway, but he sees as the 
most sinful among all. 

The universalism of sin reclaim the 
universalim of personal soteriology696 and 
the sight of sins is not only a re- 
memorization of our faults but and a 
charism: „the soul that has begun to be 
kindled of the divine [grace] sees first in 
himself the darkness of passions [tw/n 
paqw/n zo,fon] rising as a fume in the fire of 
the Ghost and sees as into a mirror the 
blackness produced in him by fume and 
he laments and feels that thorns of 
thoughts and the brushwoods of pre- 
judgments ignite and premake perfect in 
ash"697. 

For that the sin is entered in every 
fiber of our being, the cleansing power of 
grace is felt through repentance as that 
what regenerates us in total mode. 

695 SC 174, Hymns, XXXIV, 36-40, p. 430/ Ică jr. 3, 

p. 204. 

696 Father Duşe said, into an article about the 
sight of light at Saint Symeon, that this „surprises 
suddenly the ontological minus of the human being in 
his separation of God, [but] and his integrity through 
the conscious and loving relation with God through the 
deifying grace", acc. Rev. PhD student Călin-Ioan Duşe, 
The Sight of Divine Light after Saint Symeon the New 
Theologian [Vederea luminii dumnezeieşti după Sfântul 
Simeon Noul Teolog], in The Theology [Teologia] IV 
(2000), no. 4, p. 118. 

697 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, VII, 526-531, p. 

194/ Ică jr. 1, p. 296. 

 
 

Saint Symeon is attentive at the 
consciousness of sin that we must have. 
He knew that we cannot cleanse us from 
sins, if we do not feel in our being the sin, 
if we do not know why must cast from us 
in real mode. 

For that the feeling of grace is an 
interior presence, Symeon insists all just 
as more and on the interior feeling of sins, 
which are interior realities, palpable for 
our consciousness and not are some 
inventions of our proper fantasies or 
reminiscences of a mentality of darkish 
middle age. 

The sins are interior presences and 
therefore, our Father draws attention on 
the fact of not to be disregarded to these 
fatidical presences for the health and our 
life: „you know, that those who do not 
repent and not guard exactly and with 
much fear His commandments, they will 
not have any avail, but God will punish 
them with much worse than on the pagan 
nations and the unbaptized. 

Not deceived, my brethren, and no 
sin does not seem small and not to be 
despised by you, as and how would not 
make a such great harm for our souls. 
Because the grateful servants [of the 
Master, ie the Saints] do not know any 
difference between a small sin and a great 
sin, but, even if they fall only with the 
look or the thought or the word, they 
reckon that they fell from the love of God, 
thing that, I am convinced, is and true. 

 

Because the one what cogitates a 
small thing in outside of the will of God 
and does not repent immediately, banish- 
ing the attack of thought, but receives 
and keeps this thought, this is reckoned 
sin, even if he does not know that this is a 
bad thing [to. me.n evn avgnoi,a| tou/ kako.n 
ei=nai tou/to logi,zetai]"698. 

The scrupulousness opposite of sins 
of Saint Symeon is a divine charism, for 
that only the Holy Ghost can show you 
which are your sins with true, which is 
the interior abyss of your decadence. 

Even if we do not know which are 
the sins and what is the sin in front of 
God and we do not know that we sin, the 
sin deepens in us in continual mode. 

Our Father asks to take act, through 
repentance, about the real interior world 
of our being and there to call the Ghost of 
God, Which burns in integrality, as a 
divine fire, says Symeon, all the darkness 
of our sins. 

From the knowledge of sins and from 
the complaint for them begin our prepa- 
ration for the sacramental confession. 

In the frame of the Mystery of 
Confession, we must come with the 
complaint for our sins, with the pain for 
them and with the feeling of the immense 
longing after the forgiveness of God. 

The finale of Catechesis 3 presents 
the repentance as on a continuous victory 

698 SC 96, The Catecheses, III, 249-264, p. 300-

302/ Ică jr. 2, p. 48. 

 
 

of personal falling and as deifying state 
for us, which is at the opposite pol of 
desperation: „wound towards death is all 
unrepentant sin [avmetano,htoj] and un- 
confessed [avnexago,reutoj], as and the fact 
of to fall someone into desperation 
[avpo,gnwsin], thing that keeps of the 
choosing and our volition. 

For, if we would not be surrendered 
on ourselves to recklessness and desper- 
ation, demons could not do nothing 
against us. 

But even and after what we were 
wounded [of sin], if we want, we can make 
us more brave and more skilful through a 
kindled repentance. 

For the fact of to rise and to fight 
again after what they were wounded and 
they died is a thing proper to those very 
brave and courageous, worthy and full of 
all admiration. 

Because to preserve us unwounded 
does not keep of us, but to be immortal 
and mortal keeps of us"699. 

The repentance is, at our Father, the 
interior coordinate of our ghostual 
manhood, the continuous victory over 
the personal fallings. 

The longing after the forgiveness of 
God, whereof I was talking, is expressed 
here best, for that any victory over us 
from the part of demons is a motive in 
plus of interior mobilization, of raising 

699 Idem, The Catecheses, III, 347-358, p. 308/ 

Idem, p. 51. 

 
 

and more virulent against of proper 
passions. 

and 

But, above of this, at Symeon, the 
repentance 
sacramental 
the 
confession of sins (for that he never sepa- 
rates them), make us immortal, ie keep us 
in the glory of God. 

In the Catechesis 4, Symeon empha- 
sizes the interior presence of grace in the 
frame of repentance and the role of tears 
in personal salvation: all those of the 
cleansing of passions „works them the 
divine fire of the puncture together with 
the tears or, rather, through tears. 

But without tears...no thing from 
these has not made and nor will be made 
sometime in ourselves or in any other. 
[...] [For] without tears and without 
unceasing puncture has not cleansed ever 
any man or has made Holy or received the 
Holy Ghost or saw God or knew Him 
dwelling in him or he saw on This ever 
dwelling entire in his heart, without to be 
foreruned the contrition and the puncture 
and unceasing tears, gushing always as 
from a fountain, as to flood and to wash 
the house of soul and to bathe it in the 
dew and to cool the soul comprised and 
kindled by the unapproachable fire [I 
Tim. 6, 16]"700. The divine grace is re- 
ceived and kept in us through repentance 
and the repentance is the road towards 
the sight of God. 

700 Idem, The Catecheses, IV, 439-452, p. 350/ 

Idem, p. 65-66. 

 
 

The forgiveness is asked through 
repentance and the forgiveness means 
the receiving and more abundant of grace 
in us, without which we are not living 
members of Christ. 

At our Father, the repentance and 
the sacramental forgiveness of our sins 
and the unceasing weeping for our 
interior nakedness are alike some gates of 
the altar, which open to us towards our 
sacramental union with Christ, our God: 
„The Holy of Saints!, say, in every 
day, some and they herald the others 
crying with great voice. [...] And the 
others hear on those saying these. 

What is it, so? Who is not Saint is, 

indeed, and unworthy? No! 

But who does not herald [evxagge,- 
llwn] in every day the hidden of his heart, 
who does not show repentance worthy 
[meta,noian avxi,an] for them and for all 
made into nescience, who does not weep 
ever and do not walk grieving and not 
cross with zeal those said before, this is 
not worthy. 

And who do all these and spends his 
life in sighs and tears is very worthy to 
make sharer of these Divine Mysteries 
not only in day of holiday but in every day, 
and, even if is daring thing to say this, 
still from the beginning of repentance and 
of his return. 

Because this is forgiven, as one who 
wants to insist until end in deeds as 

 

these, walking in humbleness and in 
broken heart [Ps. 50, 10]. 

For making so and being thus, he 
lightens the soul in every day [fwti,zetai 
th.n yuch.n o`shme,rai], helped at this by the 
impartation of those Holy and he rises 
more rapid towards a cleanness and 
perfect holiness"701. 

The daily confession of sins, merged 
with the daily impartation with eucha- 
ristic Christ, is for Symeon an authentic 
experience of the state of repentance but 
and of ghostual fulfillment. 

Our worthiness in the face of im- 
partation with the Lord is not formed by 
our good deeds, but from the recognition 
of self, the recognition of our ghostual 
poverty in the face of His unspeakable 
abundance. 

The one integrates into repentance 
as in the normal flux of his life is, for 
Symeon, worthy by the daily impartation 
with the Lord, for that his forgiveness 
means the real assuming of proper 
helplessness. 

For this continuous assuming, in 
that does not slip not a bit of selfjustification, he 
lights daily through 
impartation and he rises rapid, very fast, 
towards a perfect holiness. 

Saint Symeon does not something 
else in this passage than to transmit us 
in the eucharistic 
his total dipping 

701 Idem, The Catecheses, IV, 604-622, p. 362-

364/ Idem, p. 70-71. 

 
 

communion and ecstatic with God. He 
himself was the one who practiced the 
confession of sins and the current 
impartation with the eucharistic Christ 
and, in the same time, he was filled of 
divine sights, which lead at an astounding 
increase, in short time, of his life. 

Saint Symeon 

is an authentic 
recordman of eucharistic experience and 
ecstatic, for that he proved through his 
increase, that these two paths are 
connexed and that the Church is the 
frame of experience of God's glory and of 
increase, stunning of rapid, in holiness. 
The repentance attracts and keeps 
in us the divine grace, but the interior 
feeling of grace keeps, in the same time, 
and of sacramental forgiveness. 
Through the passage 

from the 
Catechesis 33, which we will quote 
the 
immediately, we 
repentance as habitual state, effervescent 
of the orthodox christian at the problem- 
atic concerning at the confessor priest 
and at the feeling of grace, both in priest, 
what and in the one who confesses to 
him. 

from 

pass 

In the catechesis above mentioned, 
our Father sketches, in antithetic mode, 
the ghostual profile of the true priest 
confessor: „one which seems to have into 
himself - if this is with possibility - all 
virtues, but does not have in him the light 
of the Holy Ghost, neither sees well his 
deeds, neither is entrusted in perfect face, 

 

if they are on the liking of God, that one is 
not worthy to receive foreign thoughts 
[ouvde. logismou.j avllotri,ouj evsti.n avna- 
de,cesqai a;xioj], even if would be done by 
people patriarch, until he will not have 
light shining into himself. 

For says Christ: „Walk until you 
have the light, as catch not you the 
darkness. And he who walks 
into 
darkness does not know where he goes 
[Jn. 12, 35]""702. 

Cannot confess, says Saint Symeon, 
the priests and the hierarchs who do not 
feel in them on the One who forgives or 
through Which they forgive, ie on the 
Ghost. 

 The worthiness of confessor is given 
by God as a charisma, trough a virtuous 
life and through the interior entrusting, 
that God wellwishes into us. 

The relation of personal communion 
with God and the presence of grace and of 
light in our being are those which 
guarantees us, as priests confessors, the 
real clearing and cure of those who 
confess to us, for that through the Ghost 
we realize all operations of the interior 
renovation of christians. Therefore, 
Symeon urges the clergy of Church, in his 
integrality, to ask on the old and the 
archiereuses of Church, as to learn703 how 

702 SC 113, The Catecheses, XXXIII, 33-43, p. 250-

252/ Idem, p. 339. 

703 Idem, The Catecheses, XXXIII, 218-221, p. 264/ 

Idem, p. 344. 

 
 

to make us „alike with God through 
experience"704. 

For him the ghostual experience is 
the interior frame in which we must 
receive the cheirotonia and only through 
the Ghost we can see and to cleanse from 
sins on those who confess to us. 

Our Father does not contest the 
sacramental cheirotonia of the unworthy 
and their presence in Church (for that 
just against of their unstraightening he 
spoke), but he stresses the fact, that the 
worthies/ the apostolic dignities [tw/n 
avpostolikw/n avxiwma,twn]705, which we 
receive through cheirotonia, are not 
received with true in our being, if we do 
not have and the interior perfection 
which these ask from us, ie the knowledge 
of the mysteries of God [tou/ Qeou/ 
musthri,wn]706, of the road of personal 
deification. 

Exists, thus, for Symeon, members 
of the clergy which have entered through 
the cheirotonia from men, how says he, 
without receiving and the feeling of grace 
in their being, the conscious feeling, 
uninterrupted, deifying, ie and the cheiro- 
tonia of God and these serve those of the 
Master without as to feel, in active mode, 
how deify them through the grace of God 

704 Idem, The Catecheses, XXXIII, 221, p. 264/ 

Ibidem. 

705 Idem, The Catecheses, XXXIII, 223, p. 264/ 

Idem, p. 345. 

706 Idem, The Catecheses, XXXIII, 224, p. 266/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

and how deify and on those whom they 
serve. 

Our Father makes, on right, this 
fundamental distinction between the 
members of clergy legal cheirotoned, for 
that he could not stipulate [how he has 
not made it neither at Baptism or in the 
frame of discussion about the sacra- 
mental impartation] a receiving and a 
work of Mystery, without as the one who 
serves or the one who receives it not feel 
nothing in its frame. 

in 

For Symeon a Holy Mystery is 
personal experienced 
real mode, 
through it unite us with God's glory and 
all participants at it, ie both the clerics 
and the believers, 
live from full its 
deifying irradiance. 

On the base of the living reality and 
plenary of 
experience, 
sacramental 
Symeon will talk about the charisma of 
the forgiveness of sins, where merges both 
the sacramental forgiveness, de facto, but 
and the ghostual ability of to integrate on 
the one which was confessed in the pro- 
cess of his full clearing of passions. 

In the finale of the ethical Discourse 
15, putting in antithesis the interiority of 
unworthy priest confessor with of the one 
in which dwells the Ghost of God and 
Which is his priestly worthiness itself, our 
Father says: 

„If the one quiets and the firststanding of others and the teacher of 
others does not know all this [of deifica- 

 

tion] the thread of hair/ full, then nor the 
one who seems that quiets 
is not 
hesychast, but sits in nescience, closed 
only with the body and nor the one who 
seems that is first-standing is not firststanding, but, walking in the path which 
he does not know, or rather, outside of 
this path, he throws them, together with 
him, in the precipice of eternal fire. 

Nor the one who seems that he 
teaches is not a teacher of others, but he 
is a liar and a deceiver, for that he does 
not have in him the true wisdom, on our 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

sins, 

But what must be said really, about 
some as these, in which regards [the 
power] of to bind and to loose [tou/ desmei/n 
kai. lu,ein], when those who have in 
themselves on the Holy Ghost, Who 
forgives 
to do 
something against the thought of the 
One who is in them and speaks in them? 
But who is so crazy and taken of a 
boldness so great, that to say and to make 
the things of Ghost before as he to receive 
the Ghost and to serve those of God 
without the power of God?"707. 

tremble not 

Is observed very limpid the fact, that 
Symeon speaks here about the feeling of 
the Ghost, in they themselves, by clerics 
and about a real bearing of the grace of 
priesthood, into consciousness, by each 
in part. 

707 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, XV, 180-196, p. 

456-458/ Ică jr. 1, p. 405-406. 

 
 

The Cheirotonia, so after how lived it 
Symeon, means the real coming, felt 
interior, conscientious of the Holy Ghost 
in the frame of legal cheirotonia, when 
we stand in knees, under the hands of 
cheirotoner archiereus and the keeping, 
throughout our entire life, of real feeling 
of this divine fire, who descended upon 
us then. 

For that Symeon has experienced in 
real mode and he was experiencing the 
presence and the work of cheirotonia's 
grace into him and in those whom he 
shepherded them and he increases them 
into ghostuality, he knew that it is and 
should be a common experience, quotid- 
ian, for each cheirotoned cleric, by Christ, 
in Church. 

The feeling of grace, repeats invari- 
ably Symeon, is the true impartation of 
God and of Mysteries of His Church and 
without this does not exist the christian 
life, but a surrogate of life, a pseudo 
churchly life, lived in parasitical mode. 

Just therefore, Symeon asks from 
himself and from all members of the 
Church a real experience with God, which 
is made through the continue repentance: 
„For was not ever heard, nor is 
written in the Divine Scriptures to receive 
someone the sins of other and to account 
for him, without as the one who has 
sinned to be shown, first, fruits worthy of 
repentance, proportional with the kind of 

 

sin and without to have put at its basis 
his fatigues"708. 

If the profile of true priest confessor 
must be that of a bearer of the Ghost into 
consciousness, the profile of true penitent 
is that of a worker, together with the 
Ghost, at the straightening of self. 
the 
Both human members of 
Mystery of Holy Confession are, in 
symeonian theology, conscious of the 
presence of grace in their being and of 
the absolute necessity of God's forgive- 
ness, refelt as abundant filling of Holy 
Ghost. 

Their personal relations with God 
are intersecting with their relation of 
confessor - ghostual son, making from 
this latter the most expressive interhuman relation, substantiated on the 
presence of Trinity's grace in their life, 
but and on that of conscience of common 
responsibility for their salvation. 

imply 

Every detail of the relation with God 
the 
and of relations which 
ghostuality sits, in symeonian theology, 
under the seal of the presence of grace 
and of the largest and of plenary personal 
fulfillment. 
Saint 

Symeon 
experience from the confessor priest. 

ghostual 

asks 

The confessor cannot be „one 
inexperienced, lest through much cutting 
and through the cuts and the burnings 
which are not at their time throw you in 

708 Epistles, I, apud Ică jr. 3, p. 309. 

 
 

the deep of despair or through his 
compassion beyond measure leave you 
ill...and so give you to eternal damna- 
tion"709. 

He must know to give canons, in 
correct mode, to his ghostual sons, 
through the fact that he sees, through the 
Ghost, their true interiority and possi- 
bility of understanding and straightening. 
But the authentic confessor, as 
intercessor710 at God of his sons, can do it 
in real mode, ie seizing interior God's 
desire with those, just for that he is full of 
Holy Ghost and he knew into the feeling 
of soul, that he is loved as a friend of the 
Emperor of all711. 

For our Father, the confessor is the 
one who won real boldness to God 
through the sweats of his ascesis and 
which has become an authentic inter- 
cessor at God due to communion with 
This712. 

He knows and feels that is in him 
the Ghost of God and, in the same time, 
through This, he can see souls of others 
and he prays for them with the authen- 
ticity of a real intercessor. 

But the confessor-intercessor to God 
not only that he asks mercy for his sons 
but he and receives it into consciousness, 
seeing, in gracious mode, the straight- 
ening or the unstraightening of his sons. 

709 Idem, I, apud Idem, p. 310. 
710 Idem, I, apud Idem, p. 311. 
711 Idem, I, apud Idem, p. 311-312. 
712 Idem, I, apud Idem, p. 312. 

 
 

The passages from the Epistle 1, 
which discommode in large measure on 
the representatives of non-experimental 
theology, refers to the transmission of 
charisma of the forgiveness of sins in the 
Church. 

The first of these is this: „That is 
allowable to a monk, which has no 
priesthood, to confess us, this thing you 
will find making himself by all, since has 
been given by God to His inheritance the 
garment and the attire of repentance and 
were named monks, as stays written in by 
God instilled writings of the Fathers... 

But before these, only archiereuses 
have received the power to loose and to 
bind, through succession, from the Divine 
Apostles. 

Once with the crossing of time the 
archiereuses, becoming reprobates, this 
frightening undertaking passed to the 
priests, who had a taintless life and were 
made worthy by the divine grace. 

After which and they reaching 
mixed, and both archiereuses, as and 
priests likening the rest of the people and 
of those many who fall, as and now, in 
the ghost of wandering and of empty 
speaking and they perish, it passed, as 
said, at the chosen nation of God, ie at 
monks, not because it would have been 
taken from priests or archiereuses, but 
because these have alienated on them- 
selves from it"713. 

713 Ibidem, apud Ibidem. 

 
 

The passage presented, read through 
immersion in its interior logic, speaks to 
us not about a crossing, in corpore, 
sacramental, of power to forgive the sins 
from archiereuses at monks, but about a 
crossing, preponderant, identifiable his- 
torical, of feeling of grace from archi- 
ereuses, then at priests and, in the end, at 
monks and we say, today, at the people of 
the Church. 

And is not the word here about a 
transformation of sacramental priesthood 
into a popular priesthood, as in protes- 
tantism (how it would want to interpret 
this passage and those which we will 
quote in its prolongation) but about the 
keeping in Church of charisma and of 
science of authentic clearing of sins, 
which have it and know it the charismatic 
Fathers, bearers of God, which, through 
the receiving of confession of thoughts 
and through the noting of believers in the 
act of continual ascesis, under their 
advising, make them cleanse themselves, 
in real mode, of passions. 

Saint Symeon, as authentic priest of 
Church, who has felt and has saw the 
coming of priesthood's grace over him at 
his cheirotonia, he could not deny the 
cheirotonia and his cheirothesia 
into 
confessor, ie the coming of the Ghost in 
his being, when he experienced it into a 
direct mode and plenary. 

But he could neither deny the 
historical reality of the Church and 

 

neither we cannot do this, as long as it is 
more than evident, that not all those who 
are cheirotoned feel and the presence of 
the Holy Ghost in them or have life of 
Saints. 

When he speaks of the power to 
bind and to loose the sins he does not 
refer at the cheirothesic act, through 
which a priest becomes and confessor 
[felt as a pure formal sacramental act, if 
we do not feel how works the Holy Ghost 
through us] but at the charisma714 which 
the Lord has given the Apostles and 
which these have conscientized it through 
a life of deep holiness715. 

The personal holiness, wants to say 
Saint Symeon, is the one receives the 
charisma of forgiveness of sins. 

We reproduce of the second passage 
from the Epistle 1, which goes on the 
same interior line of receiving of charisma 
[nor cannot be otherwise] and which 
cannot be understood in authentic mode, 
until we do not see all symeonian 
syllogistical on this theme: 

„The Saints Apostles have trans- 
mitted, through succession, this authority 
those who held their seats...and the 
apprentices of Lord have guarded with 
exactness this authority. But, after how I 
said, once with the crossing of time, the 
worthy 
the 
unworthy...[that many showed them- 

were mixed with 

714 Idem, I, apud Idem, p. 313. 
715 Idem, I, apud Idem, p. 314. 

 
 

selves] hypocriting hypocritical the vir- 
tue. 

For, since when those who held the 
seats of Apostles showed themselves 
bodily and lovers of pleasure and of glory 
and were inclined to heresies, the divine 
grace has left them and this authority has 
been taken from them. Therefore, leaving 
they and all other which must have those 
who serve the Holy, has asked them only 
to be orthodoxies. 

But I believe that they were not 

neither any this. 

For orthodox is not only those who 
have not introduced new dogmas in the 
Church of God, but and those who have 
earned a life in accord with the right 
word [of teaching]. 

On one as this the patriarchs and 
the metropolitans from various times, or 
have searched him but they not found 
him, or finding him they preferred, in the 
place of him, on the unworthy, asking 
only to expose, in writing, the symbol of 
faith and accepting only this: as he not to 
be neither a zealous for good, neither to 
fight with someone from the cause of evil, 
pretending that thus holds the peace in 
Church - but thing that is worse than any 
enmity and cause of great unseating. 

Therefore, from this cause, the 
priests were made worthless and have 
reached as the nation...knowing and 
covering each other the passions, have 

 

reached worse than the nation, and the 
nation worse than them. 

But some of the nation showed 
themselves better even than many priests, 
lightening in that dark devoid of light as 
some charcoals. [...] 

And, because between people re- 
mained only the attire and the coat of 
priesthood, the gift of the Ghost passed at 
monks, as at some who came, through 
facts, at the life of Apostles, and [this] was 
made known through signs. 

But and here the devil has worked 
on those of him...and the monks have 
reached worthless and they have made 
with all unmonks. 

Thus, neither the monks only with 
the coat, neither those cheirotoned and 
entered in the rank of priesthood, neither 
those honest with the dignity of archieria, 
ie the patriarchs, the metropolitans and 
the bishops has not been given by God 
pure and simply, so, only from the cause 
of cheirotonia and of its dignity, and the 
power to forgive the sins - not to be! -, 
but they were permitted only to serve the 
Holy, and I reckon, that many of them 
not any this - lest, grass being, not to be 
burned! - , but only those, which between 
priests, archiereuses and monks are 
numbered through cleanness together 
with the choirs of Christ's disciples"716. 

The decadence of majority of the 
members of Church is explained by our 

716 Idem, I, apud Idem, p. 314-315. 

 
 

Father through the prism of loss of 
feeling of grace, which has been removed 
from them, for that they do not have a 
life of holiness. 

Is observed that Symeon has no 
accents of protestant avant le temps, 
through which to ask the abolition of the 
sacramental priesthood, but he shows 
that, although, in functional mode, the 
Church has sacramental hierarchy and 
respects a certain orthodox conduct and a 
certain conformity, more formal, with the 
orthodoxy of Church's faith, than person- 
al experienced, few are those which have 
a saintly life and feel what spends with 
them in the Mystery of Cheirotonia or in 
all the Mysteries and the services of 
Church. 

But, in the same time, on measure 
what Symeon ascertains the lack of 
gracious experience at the members of 
clergy contemporary himself, he not 
preaches a forsaking of Church by the 
Ghost and neither a loss with all of reality 
of holiness from Church, as long as his 
life and his mystical experiences prove a 
strong raccordation at the life of Trinity 
and at life of Church. 

He has not a ecclesiological theology 
vacuumed of holiness, after how we will 
into a subsequent section, and 
see 
neither sees a rupture of the Church, 
from his time, of the initial life of the 
Church or of the direct action of the Most 
Holy Trinity. 

 

Saint Symeon has no a vocation of 
protester, after how would want to bring 
him out a protestant hermeneutic, but 
one of mystical Theologian, of verbalizer 
of holiness of christian living in Church, 
that is proper and absolute necessary in 
any century. 

In the third passage that we will 
quote from the Epistle 1, will see and 
better the mode in that Symeon restored 
for his generation and for ours, the 
understanding of the power to forgive the 
sins, under both dimensions, ie not just 
historic and not just charismatic, but 
historico-charismatic717: the one who 
listened of his ghostual father and „he 
spat on all the glory from world... 
realizing all the virtue which we hear it 
reading in the Holy Scriptures and he 
crossed, likewise, all the work of those 
good, he has experienced in every day the 
progress, the change, the rank [on which 
he has it] and he was taken towards the 
height of divine glory...[that one can] 
know on himself that he has reached 

717 Father Duşe noted into a article about the 
Holy Confession at Saint Symeon, that „for him the 
Confession constituted an indivisible all, a charismatic 
act", for that the repentance, so how saw it Symeon, as 
„permanent state" or as on a personal reality with 
„eschatological character", „is that leads to theology, 
understood here as a contemplation of God, reached on 
the tallest steps of purity and of unpassion", acc. Rev. 
Lect. PhD student Călin-Ioan Duşe, The Mistery of Holy 
Confession at Saint Symeon the New Theologian [Taina 
Sfintei Spovedanii la Sfântul Simeon Noul Teolog], in 
Theological Horizons [Orizonturi teologice] II (2001), 
no. 1, p. 115, 107**, 108. 

 
 

partaker of God and of His charismata 
and he will be known so and by those 
who see well, nay even and by those with 
weak view. [...] 

For all those who have guarded...the 
commandments of God until at death... 
[they have found their souls] in the light 
thought with the mind and so, in this 
light, they saw the unapproachable Light, 
on the Lord Himself. [...] 

[For that Christ comes] to those who 
seek Him, how knows only He Himself... 
[and He gives them] the grace of seeing 
on He Himself. 

This means to find your soul: to see 
on God, to reach in His light taller than 
all the creature seen, and to have as 
Shepherd and Teacher on God, from 
Which he will know, if you want, and the 
power to loose and to bind and, knowing 
it exact, he will worship the One who 
gave it to him and he will communicate it 
those who need it. 

Some like them know, child, that is 
given to them the power to loose and to 
bind by God the Father and by our Lord 
Jesus, through the Holy Ghost: those who 
are His sons through adoption, Saints and 
slaves of Him. 

To a Father like this [to Saint 
Symeon the Pious] I was apprentice and I. 
He did not have the cheirotonia from 
men, but he inscribed me in appren- 
ticeship with the hand or with the Ghost 
of God and he commanded me, to which 

 

was put long ago in motion towards this, 
with strong desire, by the Holy Ghost, to 
receive beautiful the cheirotonia from 
men, after the model followed of cus- 
tom"718. 

Is observed from this last citation, 
that Symeon requires from those who 
want to enter in sacramental hierarchy of 
the Church the experience of receiving of 
the Ghost, ie of the sight of light, for to 
receive, afterwards, and the legal cheiro- 
tonia. 

The Father confessor must have, in 
the same time, the legal sacramental 
cheirotonia and, simultaneously, the legal 
cheirothesia into confessor, but and the 
interior presence, conscientized of the 
Holy Ghost, through Which he has, with 
true, the power to bind and the loose the 
sins of men. 

In the last part of the passage 
quoted is seen, how the charisma of 
forgiveness, about which speaks Symeon, 
is not the sacramental, through which the 
priest looses or binds the sins of men, 
but, instead, is the charismatic power of 
to introduce on someone, through the 
Ghost, in the true experience of the 
cleansing of passions. 

Saint Symeon the Pious was not 
priest, says Symeon, but he introduced 
him, through the Ghost, in the com- 
munion with God, Which cleanses us 
from passions. 

718 Epistles, I, apud Ică jr. 3, p. 316-317. 

 
 

The charismatic Fathers about that 
speaks Symeon here, those who have the 
power to bind and to loose, can be and 
from outside of clergy, between monks 
and laymans, but this power to bind and 
to loose is not the sacramental, on which 
we know it in the Mystery of Holy 
Confession, but the presence in them of 
the Holy Ghost, on which they can 
transmit it and to us, whence we can 
ignite and us the lamp (how said, at a 
time given, Symeon) and through this 
become our true cleaners of sins. 

They cleanse us from sins not 
through the sacramental forgiveness of 
the Holy Confession, but just through 
ghostual contagion, through the receiving 
from them of the feeling of grace, which is 
in their being and through that we can 
clean and us of sins. 

Saint Symeon is full grateful to his 
ghostual Father, after how I said, for that, 
through him, he received on the Ghost, 
has acquired the sight. 

The entrance in the communion 
with God, through the apprenticeship to 
a charismatic Father, means the entrance 
in full forgiveness of sins and in the 
deleting with all of the passions. 

Become us, we believe, very evident 
the accuracy of our commentary, in the 
light of the finale of Epistle 1: 

„To seek, so, better, with tiredness, 
such of men, who are disciples of Christ, 
and with the anguish of heart and many 

 

tears to pray Him entire days, as to get 
down the veil from the eyes of our hearts 
as to recognize them, in the case in that 
will find one like this in this evil gener- 
ation and cunning, for as, finding him, to 
receive through him the forgiveness of 
our sins, obeying us the commandments 
and his orderlinesses from all the soul, so 
how and that one listening the words of 
Christ was made partaker of the grace 
and of His gifts and received from Him 
the power to loose and to bind the sins 
ignited being by the Holy Ghost"719. 

to 

forgive 

Is observed how Symeon sees the 
power 
the 
charismatic Fathers just in the science of 
to lead, toward to clean of the passions, 
through ascesis. 

the sins of 

If in sacramental mode, wants to tell 
us Symeon, we receive the forgiveness of 
sins made by us, the charismatic Fathers 
teaches us, through the Ghost, not only 
how to cleanse us the sins, but and how 
to separate us, interior, of our passions, 
how to reach, through the Ghost, at 
unpassion and deification. 

But we cannot, in no case, to accuse 
on those two Saints remembered, on 
Symeon, the Father, and on Symeon the 
New Theologian, the Apprentice, that 
have usurped the dignity and the charis- 
matic power of cheirotonia and of legal 
cheirothesia, but, contrariwise, we must 
see in their effort of to render right, 

719 Idem, I, apud Idem, p. 317. 

 
 

measured and total understanding of 
charism of forgiveness of sins, an effort of 
restoration, extraordinary of benefic, of 
understanding of charisma of forgiveness 
in the Church, which presuppose, as the 
Father confessor to be a ghostual Father 
with legal cheirotonia, but and with the 
real experience, overwhelming of the Holy 
Ghost. 

Is not enough, reminds us our 
Father, the New Theologian, to receive 
the legal cheirotonia from the hands of a 
father bishop, but we must receive, and 
from God, the entrusting of this cheiro- 
tonia, through the sight of His light and 
through the profound communion with 
God, through which to be the speaking 
mouth of God in the Church. 

Symeon connexed the sacramental 
forgiveness with the forgiveness of sins 
through ascesis and through the sight of 
God. 

of 

the 

face 

In the Epistle 2, Symeon debuted 
with a discussion concerning at epithy- 
mias, at the practical canons given the 
penitents. 
In 

sacramental 
confession, says him, must not to despair 
from the cause of the crowd of personal 
sins, but neither to have a thoughtless 
boldness, ie on the one to expect the 
forgiveness of proper sins only for that 
have fulfilled us the canon given by 
confessor720. 

720 Idem, II, apud Idem, p. 318. 

 
 

The forgiveness does not come only 
for the formal fulfillment of canon, but 
through the entrance in the quotidian 
circuit of repentance, where repentance 
become our daily work721. 

Giving the examples of repentance of 
Saints David, Manasseh and Peter, 
Symeon concludes, that these „have 
received the forgiveness only from the 
repentance, the crush and the puncture 
of their [heart] and from the tears which 
they have shed from the deep of their 
soul and from the condemnation of their 
conscience"722. 

Therefore, says he, „the forgiveness 
of each sins does not make from his 
works, as does not boast someone [Eph. 
2, 9], but from the love of God and from 
grace"723. 

Our Father does not approach the 
confession only from the prism of the 
confession of sins and of the receiving of 
blessing and of priestly absolution, but he 
debates the ghostual fund of forgiveness, 
ie the direct action of God in the forgive- 
ness of our sins. 

If, often, the Mystery of Confession 
is looked from bottom to top, from the 
forgiveness through confessor, which 
presuppose the concomitant forgiveness 
from part of God, Symeon looked the 
forgiveness of sins from top to bottom, ie 

721 Ibidem apud Ibidem. 
722 Idem, II, apud Idem, p. 319. 
723 Ibidem apud Ibidem. 

 
 

from the presence of God's grace in the 
one that confesses, on the measure of his 
repentance, which is followed of the 
absolution of sins, sacramental, through 
confessor. 

More briefly, Symeon asks to feel the 
direct forgiveness of God through repen- 
tance and then to come to receive the 
absolution of sins in the Mystery of Holy 
Confession, refelt as a full forgiveness and 
as a union with Christ, as living member 
of the Church. 

Thus the ascesis and the repentance 
precede, accompany and continue the 
state of liberation of under the weight of 
the sins and of ghostual joy, ie the state 
initiated by the sacramental absolution of 
sins, which integrates it in the quotidian 
ghostual life. 

The repentance asks the unreturn at 
the committed sins, says Symeon, ie a 
continuous ascesis, a continuous guard- 
ing as to live in the will of God724 and the 
full forgiveness, refelt plenary in our 
being, is that, when we have arrived to 
hate in us the sin in perfect mode, ie then 
when strengthen us in those good and we 
have made strong through the different 
attempts of our life725. 

Our rupture from sins726, how says 
frequent 
Symeon, 
confession of proper mistakes and, 

target of 

the 

is 

724 Ibidem apud Ibidem. 
725 Idem, II, apud Idem, p. 321. 
726 Idem, II, apud Idem, p. 322. 

 
 

it, what and through the 
through 
frequent impartation, we come to cleanse 
us and to sanctify us in full mode our 
being. 

For Symeon, as we have seen, the 
full forgiveness has a double aspect: the 
feeling of grace and of forgiveness from 
part of God through repentance, direct 
connexed with the feeling of sacramental 
forgiveness of sins and through looking of 
epithymias as stable exercise in the 
perimeter of repentance. 

Symeon do not undermine the trust 
in the legal cheirotonia of Church and 
nor in the Mystery of Holy Confession, 
but, on the contrary, as priest of the 
Church and experiencing of the Ghost, 
who saw how is cheirotoned by the Ghost 
through the hand of bishop, Symeon asks 
from all holy life, ie the experience of the 
Ghost, for to serve and to feel the grace of 
the Holy Mysteries and services of the 
Church. 

In conclusion, Symeon is not a 
destabilizing of the hierarchical order 
from the Church, he does not instigate at 
the democratization of priesthood and at 
the elimination of hierarchical sacramen- 
tal steps, but he shows that, in the lack of 
charismatic hierarchy, which should 
serve the Mysteries of the Church and be 
lightened by the Ghost at every step, God, 
and not Symeon, has given those who live 
holy, which are or not in clergy, to 

 
 

continue to lead on men, in accurate 
mode, at the life of holiness, through 
ascesis and the receiving of the Holy 
Ghost into consciousness. 

 
 
 
 

2. 6. 4. The Holy Matrimony and 
the Holy Priesthood as Sacramental 
Paradigms of Union with God 

We wanted a synchronous discus- 
sion of the two Holy Mysteries for to 
highlight their role paradigmatic for the 
union with God727. 

If in the case of matrimony, the 
interior unity of those two grooms is 
analogous to the union between Christ 
and the Church and it presupposes as 
foundation the personal union with God 
of each of them, 
in the frame of 
cheirotonia, the man who receives the 
grace of the priesthood and unites in 
direct mode with God, from Which he 
receives the divine grace, he makes, into 
consciousness, the servant of God in the 
Church and the intercessor to God of the 
speaking flock entrusted himself. 

These two fundamental ideas are 
processed by Symeon in his sacrament- 

727 Father Alexandru Joiţa, into an article about 
the Holy Ghost, substantiating on a relevant quote, we 
believe, from the Panarion of Saint Epiphanius, affirms 
that: „The Mystery of Priesthood is equivalent, in 
spiritual plan, of the Mystery of Matrimony", acc. Rev. 
PhD student Alexandru Joiţa, The Sanctifying Work of 
the Holy Ghost 
in Church [Lucrarea sfinţitoare a 
Sfântului Duh în Biserică], in Theological Studies [Studii 
Teologice] XXXII (1980), no. 7-10, p. 646. 

For that in the frame of matrimony the couple 
beget sons and educates them, says this, in the frame of 
cheirotonia, the bishop is the one who gives birth at 
fathers and the ghostual fathers, the priests, are the 
ones who give birth at ghostual sons, acc. Ibidem. 

 
 
 
 

ological theology into a personal mode 
and very expressive. 

Thus, in the Hymn 27, Saint Symeon 
puts in relation on the monk seer of God 
with the married man, for to show the real 
mode of union between the believer and 
God: „who has made from his cell heaven 
through virtue, that one understands and 
sees Him sitting in it on the Creator of 
heaven and of earth, to Whom he 
worships and coexists always together 
light, with the 
with the unbygone 
the 
unevening 
unapproachable light, of which it does 
not separate noway [ou= ouvdamw/j cwri,ze- 
tai], of which it does not depart at all 
neither the day, nor the night, nor when 
eating, nor when drink, nor in sleep, nor 
on the road or when he changes the 
place. 

and with 

light 

But so how he lives, so and he dies 
or, still and more limpid, he coexists 
everlasting together with Him, with the 
soul. 

For, how will be disparted the bride 
to bridegroom or the husband to his wife, 
with which has harmonized [sunhrmo,sqh] 
once for always? Tell me, the Legislator 
does not guard, really, the law? 

For the One who said: „And will be 
the two one body" [Gen. 2, 24; Mat. 19, 5], 
how not will be in entirety a ghost [I Cor. 
6, 17] together with him, [with the soul]? 
For the woman is in man and the man in 
woman, and the soul is in God and God in 

 

soul and so He unites and He is known in 
all the Saints [e`nou/tai kai. gnwri,zetai evn 
toi/j Ἁgi,oij pa/sin]"728. 

The seer of light is always together 
with the light, for that it is not seen in 
outside of him, but inside of him and his 
displacement through cell or in outside of 
it does not disturb the presence of light 
from him, for that no the physical 
movement or the walk take us off from 
the living relation with God, but the sin. 
The union of the seer of God with 
the light is an interior harmonization with 
it, after how the marital relation between 
the two is a reciprocal inwardization. 

If the marital union forms a single 
body from the two, ie it makes on the two 
not to have a singular mode of life, but 
common, in which both partners assume, 
deepen and bearing interior one another, 
all the same, says Saint Symeon, is and 
the union of the seer of God with the 
divine light, in which he is seized by light 
and he carries it in himself, on measure 
what is worn of exhortations to holiness, 
to full purity, coming from the part of 
light. 

The husband carries his wife in 
himself, for that he carries in himself all 
the love, the respect and all the prayer of 
the everlasting fulfillment for his wife, ie 
her face, her relation with him, after how 
the ghostualized carries in himself the 

728 SC 174, Hymns, XXVII, 39-56, p. 282/ Ică jr. 3, 

p. 168. 

 
 

light of God, carries in himself on God 
through His glory, into a beingly union 
with himself, in which he has deepened 
step with step, through holiness. 

Through this illustrative annexation, 
Symeon does not propel the sight of God 
only in monachal life, depriving thus of it 
on laymans, but he puts in analogy the 
ghostualized monk and the married 
couple, for to show the abyssal com- 
munional dimension of the relation 
between man and God and of the relation 
of love existent in the married couple. 

Symeon ends the passage quoted 
with the underlining of real union of 
Saints with God, of rhythmation of their 
life with the glory of God, the interior 
rhythmation, which is refound and in the 
married couple and in which the couple 
can increase, fitting to the grace of 
ghostual love and of fidelity between 
them received in the Holy Mystery of 
Matrimony. 

Symeon does not speak about any 
couple and neither not presuppose, that 
can be done a real rhythmation, ghostual, 
of the two, without the grace of God. He 
envisages the ghostual marriage, the real 
orthodox marriage, in which the two are 
ghostual humans and which increase in 
conscious mode in the union with God 
and in the interior union between them 
and between them and their sons. 

In the ethical Discourse 1, Symeon 
will reset in discussion the interior union, 

 

the relation, extreme of deep, of the 
married couple, into a christological 
context and ecclesiological communio- 
nal: 

 „That one, [Christ], taught that the 
union which He has with His Father, on 
the one we have it and us in similar face 
with Him, and the disciple and His 
Apostle said that it is as the union which 
the man has with his wife and the woman 
with her husband. [...] 

And wanting to show in over- 
whelming face our union with God, he 
continues saying: „For this - ie for Christ 
- will leave the man on his father and on 
his mother, and will cleave to his wife, ie 
of Church, „and will be both one body" 
[Eph. 5, 31], ie that of Christ and God. 

And that this is the meaning of the 
word and we do not speak these starting 
from reasonings, same [Apostle] adds and 
says: 

„This mystery great is, and I speak 
about Christ and about Church" [Eph. 5, 
32]. With true, so, great and beyond than 
great is and will be the mystery this, for 
that the union and the communion, the 
intimacy, the kinship which the woman 
has it with her husband and the man with 
his wife, same, in worthy face of God and 
beyond any thought and word, has it the 
Master and the Maker of all with entire 
Church, as and with a single woman, 
uniting with her in taintless face and 
beyond unspeakable, being and conliving 

 

with her in inseparable face and indis- 
soluble, as loved one and embraced by 
Him"729. 

Thus, on the one part, Symeon 
speaks about our mystical union with 
Christ, which is analogous with the union 
between the Father and the Son and, on 
the other part, he speaks about the com- 
munion of ghostualized marital couple, 
which is analogous of the mystical union, 
extrem of deep and of perplexing, of God 
with us. 

Synthesizing the double symeonian 
analogy we arrive at the paradigm of the 
real union between God and man, which 
is possible only on the basis of creational 
conformity of man with God. 

Symeon, like Paul, does not speak 
about the relation between man and 
woman in the frame of couple married 
and about our relation with God as about 
some nonspecific realities of man but, on 
the contrary, he highlights the fulfillment 
of man in the frame of the relation of re- 
ciprocal communion. 

But Symeon is attentive to empha- 
size the difference of degree between the 
relation of spouses and the relation of the 
ghostualised with God. 

If in the frame of matrimony, the 
interior rhythcommunion keeps of 
mation of the two, which presupposes, 
mostly, and the sexual relations, as mean 

729 SC 122, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 118-121, 

144-162, p. 232, 234/ Ică jr. 1, p. 135, 136. 

 
 

of interior approach, the relation of God 
with the seers of His glory, says Symeon, 
excludes any impurity, for that He unites 
with us „în taintless face and beyond of 
unspeakableness", ie in mystical mode, 
through the sight of His light. 

The deep sense of matrimony is the 
union of the two between them under- 
lained on the union with God of each in 
part. But, 
the 
experience of matrimony gives us strong 
motivation to communion with all our 
brothers into Christ in the space of 
Church. 

the same 

time, 

in 

The Mystery of Holy Cheirotonia is, 
also, the sacramental frame of union of 
the cheirotoned with God, through which 
this becomes the active servant of God for 
his brothers, being the active receptacle 
of divine will. 

Both Holy Mysteries have the verti- 
cal dimension of union with God deep 
sticked in the horizontal dimension of 
unity, on the one part, in the frame of 
family, of small Church, where the two 
assume and bear reciprocal in their being 
and, on the other part, in Church, in the 
Church extended, where the priest, and 
the hierarch especially, represents the 
focus of active unity of members of 
Church, bearing of care to each in part. 

In the Hymn 58, Saint Symeon 
shows, into a thrilling mode, the interior 
profile of the true priest and the ecstatic 

 

experience that is asked of one who 
comes to receive the cheirotonia: 

„And the one who not received in 
him on Christ, on His Father and on the 
Holy Ghost, on the One God dwelling 
and walking [II Cor. 6, 16] in conscious 
face in his heart, how will show a sincere 
service? From who else will learn the 
humbleness [, if not from the Holy 
Trinity] or how will learn the divine will? 
Who will be intercessor for him or 
will placate him with God and will show 
him as on a worshiper, of God the single 
clean and taintless, and which not be 
ashamed, [ie to that One] to Which the 
Cherubims do not dare to fix the regards, 
for that is unapproachable for all Angels? 
Who will guarantee, that this will 
keep without sin [kratei/n avnamarth,twj] 
and will serve without doom [i`erourgei/n 
avkatakri,twj] the frightening service of 
Sacrifice the without blemish? 

Which angel, which man will can 
say this or that he can do this? For I say 
and I give testimony to all - nobody 
deceive himself and nor delude himself in 
words! - : anyone has not left first the 
world and will not hate from soul the 
ones of world [I Jn. 2, 15] and will not love 
in sincere face only on Christ and will not 
lose for Him his soul itself [Mat. 16, 25], 
not caring of nothing from the ones of 
man's life, and not is as one, which dies 
in every instant and will not complain 
and will not mourn long for Him and will 

 

not have only His appetence and will not 
vouchsafe [kataxiwqh/|], as through many 
troubles and painstakings to take the 
Divine Ghost, Whom gave the Divine 
Apostles, as through Him to banish any 
passion and to realize easy any virtue and 
to earn to himself springs of tears - 
whence come the cleanness and the 
contemplation of the soul, the knowledge 
of the divine will, the lightenment of 
divine brightness and the sight of 
unapproachable light [I Tim. 6, 16], 
whence is given the unpassion and the 
holiness all those who were vouchsafed to 
see Him and to have on God in heart 
[kataxiwqei/sin o`ra/n kai. e;cein to.n Qeo.n evn 
kardi,a|], to be guarded by Him and to 
guard His divine commandments - 
[whoever does not have these] dare not to 
receive the priesthood [i`erwsu,nhn] and 
the leading of souls [yucw/n prostasi,an] or 
to begin something in this regard! 

For so how Christ brings on Himself 
and brings He Himself sacrifice to God, 
His Father, so He Himself brings us 
sacrifice [prosfe,rei] and on us and all He 
receives us [de,cetai]. 

Because the undertaking of such 
things will be to judgment and doom, for 
that it is worse than the murder, worse 
than the adultery and the fornication and 
than all other sins. 

For all these are done now towards 
some mortal, because, without fail, we sin 
to each other. But the one who dares to 

 

sell the divine and to make trade with the 
grace of the Ghost, that one sins, without 
fail, towards of God Himself"730. 

Symeon shows, after how we can 
observe, that the ascesis, the road of 
cleaning, that makes us to see on God 
and His conscious indwelling in us are 
our entitling to approach to cheirotonia. 
Our relation with God, anterior 
cheirotonia, develops more particularly 
post factum, then when we see the 
serving God and on us, as His servants, 
through the prism of boldness which God 
instills in our heart of to bring Him the 
taintless Sacrifices and in the living word 
which He pours it in us, as to feed with 
His word on God's people, the Church. 

The ascesis and its ecstatic fruits 
make us proper to priestly ministry, for 
that through these leave us led by God, 
occupied by the Ghost of God, through 
Which we speak and we serve the divine. 
The profile of true priest, which 
Symeon paints us in words, has nothing 
to do with ghostual imposture, with the 
simony and with the priesthood under- 
stood as mean of subsistence. 

For Symeon, the priesthood means 
the separation of all for the love of Christ 
and the life in which, the Ghost of God is 
the true promoter and supporter of our 
initiatives. The Mystery of Holy Cheiro- 
tonia, after how emerges of here, puts us 

730 SC 196, Hymns, LVIII, 206-262, p. 292-298/ 

Ică jr. 3, p. 294-296. 

 
 

in the posture of servants of God and of 
leaders of Church's members to salvation, 
lived in the boldness which brings it the 
holy life, our deep communion with God. 

From this passage and from the 
following which we will quote, will 
emerge the fact, that the preparation for 
the sacramental cheirotonia and the 
cheirotonia in itself were for Symeon 
capital events in the life of those who 
receive them and which change, in funda- 
mental mode, the interiority and their 
engagement in the Church's life. 

We must observe here and the 
magistral comparison which Symeon 
makes it between His Sacrifice brought 
the Father and our bringing, by Him, at 
the Father. After how He has brought 
Himself as clean Sacrifice to the Father, 
all so, those who come at cheirotonia 
with a holy life, clean and Saints, are 
brought right clean sacrifices to the 
Father and He receives at Himself. 

Symeon accentuates the receiving of 
priesthood's grace into the cleaning of 
heart and the priest's quality of living 
intercessor, who has the audacity of love 
to God and manifests it in the prayer and 
the intercession for his believers and for 
entire world, for that he has a deep 
communion with Him. 

In 

the Catechesis 28, Symeon 
returns on the aspect of personal holiness 
of the priest: 

 

„Of some as these, [that sanctify 
their life in continuous mode o.n.], is the 
fact of to bind and of to loose [Mat. 16, 19; 
18, 18], of to serve the Holy and to teach, 
but not of those who received the vote 
and the cheirotonia only from men. 

For says the Scripture: „nobody 
takes from itself this honor, but only the 
one called of God" [Heb. 5, 4]. Not said: 
the one who received the cheirotonia 
from men, but the one who had previously 
been decided and arranged to this by God. 
For [the priests] made by men and 
through men are thieves and robbers, as 
the Lord said: „I am the door. All who 
have entered and enter not through Me, 
but they jump on elsewhere, they are 
thieves and robbers"[Jn. 10, 7, 9, 10]"731. 

If the passages from the anterior 
subchapter spoke about the power of to 
bind and to loose the sins and, on their 
base, we established, that Symeon did not 
refer at the sacramental power of forgive- 
ness of sins, but at the power of to put, 
through the Ghost, on disciples, in the 
true trajectory of cleansing of passions, in 
the passage just quoted we are dealing 
with an express reference at the priesthood and at the sacramental power of to 
forgive the sins and with a distinction 
between the priests who feel the Ghost's 
work in them and those who do not feel it. 
In the passage of face, Symeon does not 

731 SC 133, The Catecheses, XXVIII, 291-300, p. 

150-152/ Ică jr. 2, p. 300. 

 
 

contest the legal cheirotonia of those who 
do not feel the Ghost's work in them. 

He says that they received the 
cheirotonia from men, but in illegal mode 
from the point of view of mystical 
experience, which asks as the one that 
comes at cheirotonia to be hallowed vessel 
of the Ghost through ascesis and divine 
sight. 

The pauline citation and the johan- 
neic from the symeonian text reveals us 
the fact, that the cheirotonia is choice and 
calling of us by God and that, in the true 
sense of the word and in fact, feels that is 
priest and serves the Holy, the one who 
feels in him, in any time and, especially, 
then when he serves, the grace of God in 
his being. 

The lack of interior dimension of the 
priesthood manifests as lack of boldness 
to God, as blasetion, liturgical routine, 
effeminacy of 
liturgical side and of 
predicatorial of priest, as packing of him 
into a read and stiff typiconal ministry, 
without 
the conquering experiencing, 
seizing of God's glory, that descends at 
each holy service and fills all those who 
senses the His energetics presence in 
Church. 

For Symeon, the priest must be full 
of grace, to have the boldness of love in 
front of God, to know to lead in evident 
mode on men through the Ghost and to 
deify, through the ghostual irradiance of 

 

his being, on the ones who can perceive 
it. 

The priest is a charismatic Father for 
Symeon, a servant of the altar conscious 
of the holiness and the glory of God and 
not a liturgical services provider732, that 
does not know the value and the deepness 
of things which he serves. 

Therefore, on good righteousness, 
Symeon is trenchant in which regard the 
demonic boldness of those which are 
approaching of cheirotonia with un- 
believing hearts, that buy the grace on 
money or that behave indifferent, after 
what dress, into unconsciousness, with 
the priestly cassock. 

In the Catechesis 34, we have a 
passage, which we might entitle him: the 
pradigm of true priesthood. Here we find 
on Symeon in his hypostasis of servant of 
the Holy Ghost. 

Symeon recognizes that he is not at 
the height of God's Saints, but he sees in 
him the grace of priesthood, who works 
with power: 

„We, being indigent and unworthy, 
are away from any holiness and of the 
Holy men of God. But we cannot deny the 
gift given to us from God [th.n dwrea.n th.j 
doqei/san h`mi/n avpo. Qeou/], as some what are 

732 Rev. PhD Student Dorin Octavian Picioruş, 
The Priest of the Postmodern World: a Provider of 
lumii 
Services or a Charismatic Father? [Preotul 
postmoderne: un prestator de servicii sau un Părinte 
harismat?], in the newspaper The Bell [Clopotul], no. 1, 
2006, p. 13. 

 
 

constrained by His grace to serve you the 
words of God and to discover you the 
talent, which we have been given through 
tha charism [ca,risma], that we have been 
made through prophecy with the setting 
of hands [I Tim. 4, 14] of archiereus [meta. 
evpiqe,sewj tw/n ceirw/n tou/ avrciere,wj], that 
accomplished us into priesthood [tou/ ei/j 
th.n i`erwsu,nhn h`ma/j teleiw,santoj]"733. 

Emerges from here, that Symeon is 
conscious of the power of the Holy Ghost, 
which cheirotoned priest and that he is 
responsible of serving of his ghostual 
sons. 

He confesses to his audience with 
respect at the feeling of grace in his being 
and this confession of ghostual under- 
standings, that come from the charism of 
priesthood which he received it, he 
considers it his real contribution at their 
ghostual growth. 

Symeon knows that he received the 
grace of the priesthood in the frame of 
legal cheirotonia, ie through a legal 
bishop of the Church, but is conscious, in 
the same time, that God is the One who 
has cheirotoned through bishop, that He 
called him to the priesthood, that, 
through Him, he saw descending the 
Ghost over the Gifts brought by him and 
that, without His presence into him, he 
could not feel a priest, a real intercessor, 
a true liturgist of Church. 

733 SC 113, The Catecheses, XXXIV, 138-145, p. 

282/ Ică jr. 2, p. 350. 

 
 

 The interior realism of symeonian 
priesthood enroll in the full realism of any 
liturgical act of the Church, which pro- 
moted it the New Theologian. 

The conscientizing of deifying di- 
mension of the Holy Mysteries is the 
center of symeonian sacramentology. 

If in the frame of matrimony, the 
Mystery of Church develops married 
couple towards a reciprocal 
interior- 
ization the increasingly higher, in the 
frame of priesthood however, the man 
called by God to His service, for that he 
has renounced and renounces at all for 
Him, he experiences daily the road of 
interiorization with the Master of his life. 
Saint Symeon surprises, in funda- 
mental mode, the unifier character and 
communional of matrimony and of 
priesthood, that keeps of our real com- 
munion with God. 

Only in the measure in that we live 
in real mode, tells us, in essence, Symeon, 
the immense outpouring of grace which 
we receive it in the two Holy Mysteries 
and we grow, in personal mode, in 
holiness, we can feel us one body with the 
husband or our wife or feel us one ghost 
with God of our love. 

 
 
 

Ecclesiology 

2. 7. The Saints as Living Mem- 

bers of the Church 

If we talked, anterior, about the 
Mysteries of the Church and, in the same 
time, about the real feeling of grace in 
their frame734, without just and maybe, to 
live as living member of the Church 
means to be racorded at the sacrament- 
ological life of Church, but and at the 
sight of God's glory through our cleaning 
from passions. 

The authentic ghostual man does 
not separate the receiving of the Holy 
Mysteries to the hesychastic 
life, of 
personal ghostual life, as long as he is not 
one who lived restrictive to their, but one 
who integrates the whole unfolding of life 
of the Church in his person. 

The 

ecclesiological 
theology is most evident expressed in the 

symeonian 

734 Father Vasile Citirigă says, into a his article, 
that the Holy Mysteries „are acts of union between 
divine and human...[for that they] actualize always the 
saving work of Christ...and through this they sustain 
the Church. 

Through Mysteries, the believer receiving the 
fruits of redemption, lives anticipated and tastes from 
the richness of eternal life, on the measure what he 
unites with Christ", acc. Rev. Conf. D.Th. Vasile 
Citirigă, The Dogmatic Grounds of Eternal Life 
[Temeiurile dogmatice ale vieţii veşnice], in The Ortho- 
doxy [Ortodoxia] LVI (2005), no. 3-4, p. 71. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

ethical Discourse 1, but its footprint is 
subtly integrated in all his opera. 

But, as and until now, Symeon does 
not regard the Church from point of view 
canonical, administrative, organizational, 
liturgical or historical, but from the point 
of view of the interior link of each, 
through his life of holiness, with Christ, 
the Head of the Church735. 

Going on this personalist lode with 
Christ of living members of the Church, 
Saint Symeon does not approach the 
ecclesiology from the point of view of a 
certain christian, who cannot seize 
interior the colossal holiness of the 
Church, but through the prism of Saints, 
that unite, 
into consciousness, with 
Christ. 

The union with Christ must be real 
one and not imaginary. Just therefore 
Symeon refers at the Saints as at 
authentic members of the Church. For 
him, the Saints are conscious of their real 
union with Christ, which is evident in 
their whole being. 

The Saints, says Symeon, „are 
all...members of Christ, God the over 

735 His Eminence Kallistos Ware, talking about 
the unity of the Church, said: „So united is the bond of 
love between members of the Body of Christ, that 
nobody accomplishes ruptured from other. We are 
saved as a family. The Church prays not only for the 
completion of every man in the frame of his time, but 
and for the coming of Kingdom of Heavens for all and 
in all", acc. Kallistos Ware, One Body in Christ: Death 
and the Communion of Saints, en Sobornost (1981), no. 
3, p. 190. 

 
 

all...[and] they must to cleave [kekollh- 
me,noi] to Him [I Cor. 6, 7] and to unite 
[sunhmme,noi] with His body, as the One to 
be Head [I Col. 1, 18]. 

For the Saints, from age and until in 
then, are members of 
the day of 
Him...[and these] many are made one 
body of Christ, as a single man. [...] 

them...; others have 

[Thus,] some fulfill the orderliness of 
hands, working until now and making 
His tooholy will, making them again 
worthy on the unworthy and saving them 
for Him; others have the orderliness of the 
shoulders, bearing one another's burdens 
[Gal. 6, 2] or even the lost sheep and 
the 
found by 
orderliness of the chest, springing to the 
thirsty and hungry the righteousness of 
God, the abyss the too limpid of the word 
of wisdom and of knowledge 
the 
unspeakable...; others have the orderliness 
of womb, receiving on all in the inwardly 
of them, through love conceiving the 
Ghost of saving and having in them the 
disposition, which comprises His mys- 
teries the unspeakable and hidden; others 
have the role of the thighs, bearing in 
them the fruitfulness of the meanings 
worthy of God of mystical theology and 
nascent on earth the Ghost of saving, ie 
the fruit and the seed of the Ghost in the 
hearts of men through their word; and 
others have the role of the feet and of the 
soles, showing manhood and patience in 
trials that Job, noway tottering or weak- 

 

ening in their steadfastness for the good 
ones, but bearing the burden of His 
gifts"736. 

From the symeonian passage results, 
that God is the promoter of personal 
diversity of Saints and that the diversity 
of charisms received by them not affect 
the unity of the mystical body of the 
Church, but, on the contrary, this 
charismatic diversity is the factor of 
interior cohesion of its. 

Each Saint is a living member (me,lhn) 
of Christ, a member with certain 
charisms received from God and these 
are active, just due to the interior unity 
between Saints and God. 

If the Lord used in Jn. 15, 1-7 the 
paradigm of the vineyard, which supports 
the branches and Saint Paul the pradigm 
of the body in Eph. 4, 12; 5, 23-32, for to 
emphasize the inextricable interior link 
between Saints and God, Saint Symeon 
develops here, after our opinion, the 
pauline paradigm and he exemplifies the 
real mode in which must be understood 
Eph. 4, 11-13. When Symeon talks about 
the totality of Saints, which must be 
contemplated as a single man and 
designates the personal role, distinct, of 
each in the mystical construction of 
Church, he regards the Church as on a 
charismatic institution737, formed from 

736 SC 122, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 1-30, p. 

224-226/ Ică jr. 1, p. 132. 

737 In the introduction at a study dedicated to 
symeonian ecclesiology, Father Alexander Golitzin said: 

 
 

people full of the Holy Ghost and who 
feel 
living members of Christ and 
manifest this interior life of them through 
those which they say and do. 

The charisms were not received an 
unconscious mode, wants to tell us 
Symeon, or without the cleaning of 
passions of every Saint in part and their 
union with Christ is a continuous willed 
annexation of Him, a continuous effort 
and a continuous desire of to be with 
Him. 

Saint Symeon describes here a real 
state of personal unity with Christ and 
not an ideal of mystical communion. 

If some of the Saints have the role of 
hands of Christ, that clean on men, if 
some bear, through their prayers, the 
infirmities of the many and convert to the 
faith on the unbelievers ones, if some feed 
the Church through their word and 
others born mystic on the future Saints, 
through their mystical life and others 
carry the wickedness burden of men and 

„the great trust of Saint Symeon stays just into a 
thinking of charismatic type and - because I have not a 
better word - into a christian subjective experience on 
the other part, from which is in objective mode 
constituted the Church, both as a historical and 
eschatological reality, existing under the institutional 
form received from the Apostles, which has never been 
far from the mind and his heart, for which I find no 
indication in his operas, through which he would be 
dreamed, ever, to contest it", acc. Alexander Golitzin, 
The Body of Christ: Saint Symeon the New Theologian on 
Spiritual Life and Hierarchical Church, a conference 
exposed at Bose, september, 2002, conf. 

http://www.marquette.edu/maqom/symeon. 

 
 

devils, says in subtext Symeon, each one 
received the gift after the personal ascetic 
effort and after the qualities and the 
personal interior dispositions. 

Without the annexation with all of 
Him, the Saints cannot stand and cannot 
living 
function 
interior 
members of Christ and any 
detachment from Christ means ruin, 
death, eternal loss of ours. 

in Church as some 

The Church is the body of Christ [to. 
sw/ma th/j Cristou/], says Symeon, and it is 
the place which takes into a togetherharmony [sunarmologou,menon] on all the 
Saints of God and it is entire [a;rtion] and 
harmonious [o`lo,klhron]738. 

With other words, the holiness of 
the Church is due to the holiness of the 
Head of Church, of Christ and of interior 
racordation of those Saints at Christ and 
the unity of the Church is given by the 
charismatic unity of relation between 
Christ and the Saints and of Saints among 
them. 

The personal charisms of the Saints 
build the unity of the Church in active 
mode and the divine breath, which every 
Saint brings in the Church, is a following 
of personal relation, direct, living with 
Christ God. 

The manifestation of Saints as living 
members of Christ, as members in which 
Christ is living and active, is seized by the 

738 SC 122, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 31-33, p. 

226/ Ică jr. 1, p. 133. 

 
 

faithful, both during their live and after 
their repose, when they come to their 
Holy Relics as to worship and to receive 
divine power in their ghostual life739. 

As to argue the affirmation, how 
that „all the Saints, being members of 
Christ, make themselves a body of Him 
and they will make still and in future"740, 
Symeon brings in its support on Jn. 14, 20; 
17, 20, 21, 22, 26741. 

From the johanneic places cited, 
results that Christ is in active mode 
present in Saints, that Christ wants the 
unity of the Church and He realizes it 
through those who are stuck of Him in 
interior mode and that He gives those 
Saints the eternal glory of the Holy 
Trinity, for that they to be perfect into all. 
Is observable how Symeon cites 
accurate the Scripture, without to force 
the texts and understands them in their 
full scriptural sense. 

739 Into an article dedicated to the veneration of 
Holy Relics, Father Professor Constantin Galeriu said, 
that the Saints bear, „yet from this life an earnest of 
immortality" in their being and that the veneration 
which we give it to the Holy Relics comes from the fact, 
that „exists a continuity between the life from here and 
the life after death, on the other plane of existence. Is a 
continuity of dynamic existence, active, not dimin- 
ished, but always enriched", conf. Rev. Prof. Constantin 
Galeriu, The Veneration of the Holy Relics [Cinstirea 
in The Metropolia of Banat 
Sfintelor Moaşte], 
[Mitropolia Banatului] XXX (1980), no. 10-12, p. 643, 
648. 

740 SC 122, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 38-39, p. 

226/ Ică jr. 1, p. 133. 

741 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 44-57, p. 

226-228/ Ibidem. 

 
 

He extracts his theology from the 
depths of Scripture and from the personal 
revelations which God provokes in his 
being. 

The symeonian conclusion behind 
of those texts cited is identifiable in two 
lapidary affirmations and namely: „the 
mode of union [e]nw,sewj tro,pon] [between 
God and Saints] is beyond of mind and of 
all understanding"742, for that „the union 
[e]nwsin] which [Christ] has it, in natural 
[fusikw/j] face, with His Father, on this 
He promises that we have it in grace [evn 
ca,riti], if we want"743. 
tropos of 

interior union, 
whereof speaks John and Symeon here, is 
a real one for Saints, but both for 
themselves, and for those who venerate 
them, is incomprehensible due to its 
depth unutterable. 

The 

Symeon not only that guarantees us 
the existence of this real union with 
Christ, citing the Scripture, but he 
guarantees us and through his proper 
charismatic link with God, the reality of 
personal link of Saints with Christ. 

If we are attentive at scriptural 
citations of Symeon and at the interior 
logic of his discourse, we observe that he 
has not taken on Saints as paradigm of 
real union with Christ from the cause of a 

742 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 59-60, p. 

228/ Ibidem. 

743 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 62-64, p. 

228/ Ibidem. 

 
 

ghostual elitism or from teologal snob- 
bism, but for that, in thereof being, this 
union is real and conscientized into a 
continuous interior rhythm. 

But through this, we believe, he did 
not create a dangerous fissure between 
members of the Church, dividing on 
from the regular believers of 
Saints 
Church, for that in his soteriological 
vision and ecclesial cannot exist true 
believers without having a certain degree 
of interior holiness. 

And, after how we have seen, for 
Symeon the conscientization of presence 
of grace in us from Baptism and the full 
union with God, through the fulfillment 
of commandments and ascesis, repre- 
sents the true ethos of orthodox life. 

Symeon show us here, in the frame 
of I, 6, that the triadology and the 
christology are those which explains the 
divine-human reality of the Church. 

Without the real coupling at the 
grace of Trinity and without to feel us 
living members, active of Christ, we do 
not feel the real parts of the body of 
Christ, of Church and we cannot experi- 
ence, in personal mode, the relation of 
great deepness with the Most Holy 
Trinity, through which we live „the love 
with which God and the Father loved on 
His Son, the Only Begotten and [into 

 

in us and 
which], our God...will be 
Himself the Son of God will be in us"744. 
Symeon reports at the experience of 
Saints for that they live the real union 
with Christ but they can and to narrate it 
to those who want to listen. Our relation 
with Christ does not make from outside of 
us, ie this is not an exterior relation with 
Him, but from our interior, for He unites, 
in real mode, with us. 

We feel the love of the Father for the 
Son from the depths of our being, for that 
the Son of the Father is in us from 
Baptism and He teaches us the love of the 
Father to Him and of Him to His Father 
and to the Holy Ghost. Due to assume of 
human nature in His hypostasis, He was 
„akin with us through body...and made 
us, with true, partakers [of His deity]... 
[being] one body together with Christ 
into the Ghost"745. Each member of the 
Church is member of Christ and each one 
is given the showing of the Ghost toward 
his personal benefit746. 

Symeon insists on the impartation 
all of Christ, on the multiple existence of 
personal relations with Christ, which are 
on the measure of the personal char- 
isms747. 

744 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 73-76, p. 

228/ Idem, p. 134. 

745 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 76-77, 81-

82, p. 228/ Ibidem. 

746 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 88-90, p. 

230/ Ibidem. 

747 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 104-106, p. 

230/ Idem, p. 135. 

 
 

His insistence on the fact of to 
comment and of the process the scriptural 
vision about Church, quoting and com- 
menting pauline ecclesiological texts, 
shows us on Symeon as on one, which 
integrates, in creative mode, in the 
Tradition of the Church. 

Symeon appropriates and presents 
in personal mode and personalist the 
human-divine principle of unity of the 
Church, ie the interior link of each one in 
part with God, through the Ghost. 

Our entry 

in Church, through 
Baptism, as real annexation of the Lord, 
the reconscientization and its daily deep- 
ening in our life, forms the personalistic 
coordinate of symeonian ecclesiology and 
of the personal soteriology which he 
propagated it in Church. 

Citing Eph. 5, 28-29, in connexion 
with the Jn. 6, 56748, Symeon shows that 
the Holy Eucharist is the factor of the real 
unity with Christ of the members of 
Church749, naturally alongside the real 
faith, clean, in Him. For that to have life, 
we must stand in direct link with the 
Head of the Church, eating daily on 
eucharistic Christ750. 

The feeding with the Body and the 
Blood of Lord, which presuppose our 

748 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 130-143, p. 

232/ Idem, p. 135-136 

749 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 143-144, p. 

232-234/ Idem, p. 136. 

750 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 6, 165-171, p. 

234-236/ Ibidem. 

 
 

continuous sanctification through grace, 
is that which makes us to feel in us the 
sap of the life-creating of the Body of 
Christ. 

in 
To be members of Christ, 
paradoxical mode, means to have on 
Christ in us and to eat on eucharistic 
Christ for to unite, in beingly mode, with 
us. 

Changing the ecclesiological para- 
digm of the body with that of beingly 
union with Christ, Symeon speaks about 
Church as about a beautified world 
[ko,smon w`rai?sme,non]751, but he names it 
and Empress [h` Basi,lissa] of Sover- 
eign752, followed by the virgins [parqe,noi] 
from Ps. 44, 16, ie by each of us, which 
sanctify us the life753. 

Symeon has in view, in all these 
images of the union with Christ, the 
mystical union, ecstatic with Christ, not 
only the sacramental union with Christ. 
Even if he does not present us, of 
each date, the substrate of an affirmation, 
the fund of reality as such, he has of each 
date in view the full content, totalizer of 
ghostual life, which presuppose both the 
sacramental union with Christ but and 
the mystical union with Him. In I, 7, the 
real space of the Church does not looked 

751 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 7, 4, p. 236/ 

Idem, p. 137. 

752 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 7, 11, p. 236/ 

Ibidem. 

753 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 7, 16, p. 238/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

only in the dimension of personal frame, 
where is highlighted the aspect of our 
interior link with Christ, but Symeon tries 
to present and a realistic-integrative 
vision of the whole pleroma of the 
Church: „For as Christ God is Head of the 
Church, all so He makes for it temple 
[nao.j], after how and the Church itself 
was made a temple of Him and a beau- 
tiful cosmos [ko,smoj w`rai/oj]"754. 

The interior process of sanctification 
produces per-total an impressive ghost- 
ual vision of the Church. The Church 
appears at a its ghostual contemplation 
as a beautiful world, as a world full of 
holiness and divine wisdom. 

The personal relation of each of us 
with God creates a thrilling image of 
Church, the image of a living community, 
total engaged, which produces conquer- 
ing beauty, both at personal level, but 
and in its outside. 

The image of Church as temple of 
God is used by Symeon as a direct 
evaluation of I Cor. 3, 16, showing that we 
are, with true, living temples of God, for 
that the Holy Ghost dwells into us755. 

The Church is the temple, the citadel 
and the cosmos of the Emperor God, in 
which speaks God756, but is, in the same 

754 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 7, 22-24, p. 

238/ Ibidem. 

755 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 7, 41-42, p. 

238-240/ Idem, p. 138. 

756 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 7, 44-47, p. 

240/ Ibidem. 

 
 

time, body of Christ, His bride and His 
upper world757. 

But the members of the mystical 
body of Christ, of the Church, are the 
Saints and not just those baptized in the 
Church, which not actualise daily their 
relation with God, on which God Himself 
had initiated with them and in them from 
their Baptism. 

From the perspective of personal 
union with Christ, the Church is formed 
from Saints and it widens continuous and 
it will comprise, in definitive, on all the 
Saints from all ages, fact for which, „until 
will not come at existence [all the Saints] 
or until will not arise all well-pleasing [of 
God], nor the body of Christ is whole, nor 
the upper world is fill - and this I say that 
is the Church of God - but many are 
[between future Saints] today, in world, 
unbelievers and between those who 
believe in Christ many are sinners and 
fornicators, which must to change their 
life through repentance, many are disobe- 
dient and will have to make listeners, 
many are which must to be born and they 
to be well-pleasing of God until at the last 
trumpet. 

For must to be born and to be 
brought at existence all those pre-known 
and to fill the world above the world of 
the Church of those first-born, the 
Jerusalem from the heavenly [Heb. 12, 22-

757 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 8, 1-2, p. 240/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

23]. And then will be and the fullness of 
Christ's body by the God of the predecided, [of those who have] to make 
alike the image of His Son [Rom. 8, 29]. 
For these are the sons of light and of His 
day [I Thes. 5, 5]"758. 

In the passage from here, the 
Church is presents by Symeon as the 
number of those Saints pre-known by 
God, who will sanctify the life and will 
enter in the upper world of the Kingdom 
of God. 

Conformable to the parable of the 
tares found in the cornfield of wheat or of 
the fishes from seine, the formation of 
Saints does not know, in absolute mode, 
a linearity of christian life from one end 
at other of their life, but the Saints are 
born through the conversion of notorious 
sinners, while many of the faithful will 
prove, unfortunately, improper the entry 
in the bridal chamber. 

The intensity and the sincerity of the 
living of interior relation with God is that 
which forms the Saints and their exis- 
tence is not prescribed by a mundane 
forum but by God Himself. 

God is the One who shows His 
friends, Which glorifies on the Saints, 
Which makes 
them known to the 
believers, and the hierarchy of Church 
affiliates the divine evidence, shown in 
different modes in the Church. 

758 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 8, 3-18, p. 

240-242/ Idem, p. 138-139. 

 
 

But we must not confuse the 
predecision of the Saints by God, whereof 
speaks Symeon here, which is all one 
with the divine prescience, with the pre- 
destination or with the pagan fatalism, in 
which does not exist real human liberty, 
men are damned or absolved in dictatorial 
mode and the whole divine oikonomia of 
Christ is superfluous. 

Symeon does not introduce in the 
orthodox faith the heresy of predes- 
tination, but he emphasizes the aghio- 
logical theology of Paul, in which the 
Saints are presented as the prescients of 
God and as the sons of the Kingdom of 
God, how show the three places pauline 
cited by Symeon, from the passage on 
which we comment it. 

The historical dimension of the 
Church has its decisive role in the 
creation of the Church of the top, as long 
as here are formed the Saints, on earth, 
and the historic time precursory of the 
Parousia keeps just of the formation of 
this number of prescient Saints by God. 
In this perspective of the formation 
of Saints, the history, the time and the 
space appear as some forming frames of 
the members of Church, as some frames 
which presuppose the sanctification of 
the members of Church and not as a 
major inconvenient, which would excuse 
of our lack of personal inghostualization. 
The weights of history, the historical 
pressure of any kind exercised upon us is 

 

not a wall in front of personal holiness, 
but this is realized, with the grace of God, 
even and when all things seem to be with 
all against of the ghostual development 
of the living members of the Church. 

The Church is not and cannot be 
swallowed by history, as long as the 
reality of real personal union with God 
proves that the secularization or the 
devalorization of church 
in the 
postmodern world and in any other 
historical paradigm, are not then some 
presuppositions, 
tasteless 
made at writing table and which have 
nothing to do with the living longing after 
the union with God of believers and with 
the unchecked aspiration to holiness. 

intellectual 

life 

The Church is the people of God in 
which lives, in conscious mode, the grace 
of God and which witnesses, without any 
censorship, the saving truth of the Holy 
Tradition of Church. 

The courage of Saints, the monu- 
mentality of their life and their visible 
role or subterranean in the sanctification 
of world are ghostually seizable finger- 
prints of deep mystery of the Church. 

The mystery of the Church consists 
precisely in the greatness of personal 
relations of God with the Saints and of 
the Saints between them and of the 
Saints with all members of the world. 

The perfection of the body of 
Church through Saints does not make 
from Church an entity which has nothing 

 

to do with the damned, with the common 
sinners. 

The growth in holiness of each 
believer in part comprises the assuming 
of whole world once with it and does not 
mean, any moment, a desolidarization of 
brothers who did not want to believe in 
God. 

The holiness presupposes the solida- 
rization, the assuming all in our life and 
in our prayers, and a painful prayer for 
the whole existence. 

Talking about the descent of God the 
Word to us, Symeon presents the entire 
humanity as on the daughter of the 
mutinous against Him, as on a sinful 
woman, guilty of 
fornication and 
killing759. 
And 

is 
indicated very expressive by him through 
the fact, that He preferred a bride fallen, 
depraved, for that has staked on the 
justification and its sanctification. 

the goodness of God 

In conclusion, the Saints are not for 
Symeon some privileged, which have 
primacy towards others, for that they 
have certain personal trumps. Through 
Baptism we are with all privileged, for 
that God puts us into a living relation, 
direct with Himself, from which we 
cannot fall, only if we want to mock us. 

759 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 9, 22-25, p. 

248/ Idem, p. 141. 

 
 
 
 

The Church is just this complex 
number of personal relations with Christ 
and our source of ghostual life means the 
union with Christ through ecstasy and 
the impartation with Christ through the 
Holy Mysteries. And the holiness is the 
principal characteristic of the members of 
Church and it creates the unity of the 
Church. 

As everyone to be a living member of 
Christ's body, he must stand in the 
interior unity with Christ and with the 
Saints from all ages and from everywhere 
on earth, ie to stand, through holiness, in 
link to both with the Head of the Church, 
with Christ, but and with the other 
members of the Church, ie with the 
Saints before him but and with the con- 
temporary of himself. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Eschatology 

2. 8. The Sight of Light and the 

Eschatology 

The last theme of symeonian the- 
ology which we discuss here and namely 
the universal eschatology proves, once 
again, the eternal validity of personalist 
theology, as long as the holiness is the 
interior reality which reveals in perfect 
mode in the stage of plenary trans- 
figuration of whole creation. 

If now, our interior relation with 
God can be put under the sign of question 
by those who have not the ghostual 
perception of God's presence in believers, 
then, in the day the one of then, our 
interior becomes explicit for all, the 
reality of union with Christ will be 
incontestable and the living relation with 
God will prove our source of joy and 
eternal fulfillment. 

We will begin our discussion all 
with the ethical Discourse 1, in which 
Symeon speaks, very concentrated, about 
the transfiguration of the world through 
the Ghost. 

Symeon, starting from what has 
done Christ God for us, through His 
incarnation as man, speaks about the 
growth in holiness and he says that, after 
the dormition of Saints, their bodies do 

 
 
 
 
 

not remain „altogether incorruptible, nor 
again altogether corruptible, but, keeping 
in them both the signs of incorruptibility 
[th/j avfqarsi,aj ta. gnwri,smata], but and 
[on those] of corruptibility, are kept 
in 
towards being made 
perfect face [telei,wj] and renewed [avna- 
kainisqh/nai] at the resurrection from lat- 
ter"760. 

incorruptible 

The reality of the Holy Relics 
indicates, on the one part, that has not 
come the time of renewal, of total 
transfiguration of creation but that it has 
begun still of now. 

The personal holiness 

is a full 
rallying, assumed, at the process of the 
transfiguration of creation. 

resurrected 

The transfiguration of bodies is 
reserved, says Symeon, of eschatology, for 
that „it ought not as the bodies of men to 
to be made 
and 
be 
incorruptible before of the renewing of 
creatures [tw/n ktisma,twn avnakaini,sewj], 
but so how this [the creation] has been 
brought first at existence incorruptible, 
and after it the man, all so again, first, the 
creation must to premade and so to 
change from corruptibility at incorrupt- 
ibility, and so, together with it and 
suddenly with it [su.n auvth/| kai. a]ma auvth/|], 
will renew and the corruptible bodies of 
men, for as the man, making again 
ghostual [pneumatiko.j] and immortal [avqa,- 

760 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 3, 115-119, p. 

204/ Idem, p. 124. 

 
 

natoj], to dwell into a place incorruptible 
[avfqa,rtw| cwri,w|], eternal [avi?di,w|] and 
ghostual [pneumatikw|/]"761. 

The sight of divine light has direct 
link with the transfiguration of creation, 
for that this will renew through the 
divine light and the sight of light leads to 
the incorruptibility of soul still of now 
and of body in partial mode but, in full 
mode, in the next age. 

Symeon speaks about a concom- 
itance of the transfiguration of creation 
and of the man and about a habitation of 
men, which will have a ghostual body, 
into a transfigured creation, transformed 
into a place of incorruptibility and of 
eternal joy, of eternal communion with 
their Creator. 

The renewal of creation is at our 
Father a its restoration in the beauty 
which it had it from the beginning, at the 
initial beauty [to. avrcai/on ka,lloj]762. 

Paraphrasing on the Apostle John, 
Symeon invites us to believe on full, that 
will be new heavens and new earth763 and 
that will exist a general resurrection of 
the people764 and that „the heaven and 
the earth and all ones from it, ie all crea- 

761 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 3, 120-129, p. 

204/ Idem, p. 124-125. 

762 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 3, 148-149, p. 

206/ Idem, p. 125. 

763 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 4, 1, p. 206/ 

Ibidem. 

764 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 4, 3-5, p. 206/ 

Ibidem. 

 
 

tion will be renewed and freed from the 
bondage of corruption [Rom. 8, 21], and 
the things will share together with us of 
the brightness [lampro,thtoj] from there, 
and in the face in which on all of us will 
fire [to. pu/r dokima,sei], 
attempt the 
according to the Divine Apostle [I Cor. 3, 
13], all so and the whole creation will be 
renewed through fire [dia. puro.j avnakainis- 
qh,setai]"765. 

But this fire, which transfigures the 
world, which transforms it, is none other 
than the divine light, which will cleanse 
and will prechange all creation, after how 
prechanges and deifies on the one who 
sees it in ecstasy. 

From this we deduce, that Symeon 
in his theology the personal 
unites 
soteriology with the transfiguration of all 
creation and he considers the trans- 
figuration of the world an extension, from 
part of God, of personal transfiguration, 
which takes place in the believers. 

The determined role of the sight of 
light is understand on full only from 
eschatological perspective, for that the 
eternal life presupposes a permanent 
remaining in the divine light, a ours 
eternalization in the joy of communion 
with God. 

The world will not have part of an 
end, of a its destruction in hollywoodian 
style, where all creation dissolves into a 

765 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 4, 5-11, p. 

206/ Idem, p. 125-126. 

 
 

total chaos, but, according to symeonian 
theology, the world will be prechanged 
through the divine light, having part of a 
new beginning, of its reestablishment in 
the beauty, into which God had created 
from the beginning, ie being full of the 
divine light. 

But the new beginning of the world 
will be everlasting, the eschatology not 
dealing with the final, in the sense of the 
last things which can be said about God's 
creation, for that it would put point at a 
moment given, but of the last things 
which will initiate an eternal perspective, 
non-temporal of creation and of man. 

The eschatology, from dogmatic 
point of view, in paradoxical mode, 
comprises under its cupola, as we know, 
both the realities of the second coming of 
the Lord, the prechanged of world and 
the resurrection of the dead, together of 
the last Judgment, but and the two kinds 
of eternity assumed: the eternal joy with 
God or the eternal misery in the company 
of demons. 

But at Saint Symeon, the escha- 
tology is not a problem just of those from 
future but is a reality on which you live it 
yet of now, in ecstatic mode, if you see 
the glory of God, which is just the real 
ambience and deifying of everlasting life. 
Now, we will continue to present the 
variant of future of symeonian escha- 
tology, for to return us, in the finale of 
this section, at the actual variant, 

 

ecstatic, through which we live already 
the eschatological reality of creation. 

The actual creation, continues our 
Father, being as an obsolete vessel and 
speckled by our sins766, „will be remelted 
and remodeled, and will be made shining 
[lampra.] and unlike newer [kainote.ra 
avsugkri,twj] than the one that is seen 
now"767. The divine light will produce the 
transfiguration of creation and of men 
instantaneous. The renewed creation, says 
Simeon, will not be identical with the one 
before of the falling of man in sin, but 
with much more beautiful and divine on 
full, for that „all creation will be made, at 
a sign of God, not as it was brought at 
existence, material and sensible, but will 
be remade through a birth from new [th/| 
paliggenesi,a|], into a immaterial dwelling 
and ghostual, above all feeling"768. 

The palingenesis about which speaks 
Symeon will be an instantaneous divine 
work and it will consist in the transfor- 
mation of world and of man in trans- 
figured existences, ghostual. 

The pauline place from I Cor. 15, 5152 supports the instantaneity of trans- 
figuration of creation769, without as this 

766 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 4, 20-25, p. 

208/ Idem, p. 126. 

767 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 4, 25-27, p. 

208/ Ibidem. 

768 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 5, 10-13, p. 

212/ Idem, p. 128. 

769 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 5, 14-16, p. 

212/ Ibidem. 

 
 

to mean a decorporalization of men or an 
abolition, aneantization of matter. 

The transfiguration of the world and 
of men means just the transfiguration of 
matter, of entire existence, in so kind that 
we will inherit „the whole earth spiritual 
and ghostual...[as some which will 
acquire] incorporeal bodies [oi` avsw,mata ta. 
sw,mata]...[and we will get to have] a 
feeling beyond of feeling [u`pe.r ai;sqhsin evn 
aivsqh,sei]"770. 

The ghostual print of future world, 
transfigurated, is refound in the life of 
every Saint in part yet of now. 

In the anterior sections we have 
called this state of living of the eternal 
life a quotidian life, a continuous living in 
the divine light. 

The 

incorporeal bodies of trans- 
figured world and the feeling above of 
feeling about which speaks Symeon are 
ecstatic prints of ghostual man, are the 
consequences of the cleansing of passions 
and of the sight of light, of continuous 
sanctification of our life. 

And Symeon speaks here not about 
of eternal existence in light of all, but 
only of those which, still of now, have 
sanctified the life. 

He does not elude the existence of 
contrary will to the one of God and the 
reality of Hell, but he sees in happy 
eternity a ghostual reality, of which will 

770 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 5, 20-22, p. 

214/ Ibidem. 

 
 

impart whoever have begun to impart of 
it, still on when they were in the flesh. 

And the entrance in the eternity of 
communion with God presupposes the 
orthodox Baptism and living in the 
Church, through cleaning of passions, of 
the sight of God, of His eternal light. 

The resurrection means for Symeon 
the achievement of the real state of to be 
alike to the Holy Angels771. 

The whole creation renewed be- 
comes an 
immense reliefation and 
presence of God's glory, for that it, the 
creation, 
„reached whole ghostual, 
together with the Paradise itself [su.n 
auvtw/ Paradei,sw||], is premade into an 
immaterial dwelling and incorruptible, 
unchangeable, eternal and intelligible. 

And will be 

[and] a heaven 
unparalleled more shining [as this of 
now], as another new heaven, more 
luminous than the seen. 

its 
And the earth will resume 
unspeakable beauty and new and a face 
of unsear verdure, beautified by bright 
flowers and by a spiritual diversity, in 
which, according to the pious word, 
dwells the righteousness [II Pet. 3, 13]. 

The Sun of righteousness will shine 
of seven times more [Mal. 4, 2; Is. 30, 26], 
and the moon will spark of twice times 
more than the sun which shines now; the 
stars will be like our sun, whatsoever will 

771 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 5, 77, p. 218/ 

Idem, p. 130. 

 
 

be they and however are they now looked 
by the words of those with high thinking. 
All will be above of word, as some 
what will surpass all thinking, and being 
spiritual and divine, they will unite with 
the intelligible [e`nou/ntai toi/j nohtoi/j] and 
will make another intelligible Paradise 
and a heavenly Jerusalem [Heb. 12, 22], 
likened and united with the heavenly 
[evxomoiwqei/sa toi/j evpourani,oij kai. e`nwqei/-
sa], and an unwavering inheritance of the 
sons of God, [for] nobody from those on 
earth will not be, nowise, heirs of it"772, 
but only the Saints. 

After how is observed, the trans- 
figuration of the world does not mean a 
hallowed world, ghostualised, parallel 
with the Kingdom of God or with the 
Paradise of Saints, but means just a union 
of the transfigured world with the 
Paradise or an extension of the divine life 
from Paradise in the whole creation of 
God. 

If now the Saints impart of the life of 
Paradise, of the divine light of Paradise, 
but they are surrounded by the created 
world, unghostualised in overwhelming 
mode, from around them, in the world of 
eschaton the Saints will live the light in 
them, this will squirt from them, but it 
will be and in the whole of creation, for 
that both they, but and the world from 
around them will be, in its completeness, 

772 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 5, 84-101, p. 

218-220/ Ibidem. 

 
 

the dwelling of glory of God, another 
temple full of glory, a world in which the 
interior communion with God is of-allpresent and where is not found any 
infirmity or decadence. 

Symeon speaks with accuracy about 
eschaton 
its real 
for that he had 
experience. All terms of comparison 
which he uses in the description of the 
renewable world keep of history, but the 
reality of the images used are ghostual 
contemplations of eternal realities. 

for 

that 

The Saints, 

says our Father, 
according to Mat. 5, 5, will inherit this 
renewed earth773. But they will inherit the 
their souls, 
future world, 
„through the gift and the union of the 
Holy Ghost, stick to God, still being they 
in bodies and, renewed, they will change, 
will rise from death and will be restored 
after dormition, in the unevening light 
and in glory. 

But their bodies not yet, for they will 
be left in graves and in corruption, 
following to be made and them so at the 
universal resurrection, as well as and all 
this earthly creation, seen and sensible, 
will be changed and will unite with the 
heavenly, ie with the unseen and above of 
feeling"774. 

The ecstatic union with God, about 
which speaks Symeon, is the one who 

773 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 5, 107-108, p. 

220/ Idem, p. 131. 

774 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 5, 110-119, p. 

220/ Ibidem. 

 
 

brings from the death of sin the souls of 
Saints and it restores them in the divine 
light, but their bodies receive the full 
pnevmatization once with the resur- 
rection of all. 

The union between body and soul, 
made through the sight of light and the 
living in grace, is followed in eschaton by 
the real union, explicit, overwhelming of 
the heavenly and of the earthly, ie the 
transformation of the Heavenly Powers 
and of the Saints into a single choir, into 
a single world, in which dwells the 
righteousness and which glorifies on the 
Most Holy Trinity, the Source of the 
whole life and of the entire joy. 

The angelo-human unity of the 
Church or the overwhelming reality of 
the icon of the Proskomedia, in which the 
Lamb is in the midst of the transfigured 
creation, experienced now only in part, 
then will be an ecumenical evidence of the 
entire uncontainable stretching of the 
world of God. 

All members of God's world will see 
then on their Emperor, „how will come 
with glory and more power our Emperor 
the desired and too-sweet, Jesus Christ 
God, to judge the world and to give each 
after his works. [...] 

[And], as into a big house or in the 
imperial palaces are many places of rest 
and abodes, and in both these kinds of 
too-divine places is a great otherness, all 
so and in the new creation He will make 

 

divisions, attributing each the legacy after 
his worthiness and the brightness and the 
glory which it is entitled from virtues and 
his deeds. 

But whereas they will be ghostual 
[pneumatikw/n] and transparent [diafanw/n] 
and united with those abodes and divine 
resting places, the Kingdom of Heaven 
will be, in general, as a single hearth, as 
and it is, and this will be shown to all the 
Righteous, of over all, unseeing in it than 
the Emperor of all, co-present [sumpa- 
ro,nta] with each and each coexisting 
[suno,nta] together with Him, shining in 
each and each shining in Him [evn e`ka,stw| 
evkla,mponta kai. e]kaston la,mponta evn 
Auvtw|/]"775. 

The eschatological explanations of 
our Father have an overwhelming 
realism, after how can be observed. 

The final judgment will represent 
the entry of each believer in part, after his 
level of personal inghostualization, in the 
Kingdom of God; the eternal life means 
the union and the living together with 
the Heavenly Powers and this mode of 
existence of eternity not means some- 
thing else than the continuing of interior 
relation with Christ, the Emperor and our 
God. 

The living in eternity means the 
brightness of Christ God in each of us and 
ours in Him, as a without end progres- 

775 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 5, 120-137, p. 

222/ Idem, p. 131. 

 
 

sion in the understanding and the com- 
munion with Him. 

Symeon accents very much this 
detail of our communion with Christ, for 
that the ghostual life is an interior reality, 
the single legal reality of man and will be 
the true constitution of the new world. 

The reality of the transfigured world 
has as foundation the life in the glory of 
God, ie just the content of this theology of 
glory, on which we debate it in the pages 
of this book. 

Is from self understood the impor- 
tance of the eschatological transfigu- 
ration of the world in the symeonian 
theology, if all the energy of this theology 
was filed in to show the capital impor- 
tance of the mystical life of the Church. 

The mystical life proves its full 
relevance for history and for eternity and 
the absolute primacy in the orthodox life, 
when we inherit, in personal mode, in 
eternity, its soteriological consequences. 
In I, 12, Symeon talks about the 
Ascension of the Lord and about the 
ecstatic report with us through the prism 
of His glory: „God descended on earth 
and ascended again at heaven and He has 
put the darkness right His hiding [avpokru- 
bh.n]. 

For it ought not to show us with the 
glory of His Father before of Judgment. 
But this will be made at the time on 
which His Father has put it into His 
possession [A. Ap. 1, 7]. [...] 

 

[Because] 

thus are 

the hidden 
mysteries [ta. musth,ria kekrumme,na] of the 
Kingdom of Heaven and is not given to 
everyone to know them, after the word of 
the Lord [Mt. 13, 10]"776. 

The hiding in which has hidden 
Christ God is His light. But He did not 
hide for all, for those what see His light, 
they know His mysteries 
too 
mysterious, hidden those who do not 
have the clean heart through the fulfill- 
ment of His commandments. 

the 

The glory of Christ will be seen by 
all at His second coming and at 
Judgment, but each will perceive it at his 
level of ghostual growth or will be an 
insupportable fire, for those who does not 
love on Him, on the God of the whole 
world. 

Is very evident from the following 
passage, how that the interior intimation 
of His glory is real for those who rebuild 
through faith and the fulfillment of com- 
mandments: „before ascending at heaven 
and to put the darkness His hiding, He 
has given us His holy commandments, as 
on some implements...and the faith in 
Him as on a master. [...] 

[And we being] vessels, the faith 
master, and the commandments the 
implements, through which the master 
Word remakes and renews on the workers 
of His commandments, [we can], as 

776 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 12, 137-144, p. 

282/ Idem, p. 154-155. 

 
 

through their work, cleanse us and to be 
enlightened us by the Ghost, advancing 
in the knowledge of the mysteries of the 
Kingdom of Heaven"777. 

The 

faith and 

the ascesis, as 
fulfillment of commandments, create in 
us the cleanness, where descends God's 
light. 

The ghostual experience or the 
knowledge of the mysteries of God has 
nothing to do with the occultism, with 
the secretomania of caste or with the 
in perverse mysteries and 
initiation 
intellectualist. 

The knowledge of the mysteries of 
God means the sight of the divine light, of 
what shown us by God in the divine light, 
the light on which we see it only if 
sanctify us the life. 

the 
Any attempt of dodge of 
sacramental entry in Church, through 
Baptism or any misunderstanding of the 
ghostual life, unresolved at time with 
Fathers, which already have tasted from 
the sight of light, with men which know 
and the joy but and the dangers of 
ghostual life, it does not lead at the sight 
of divine 
light, but at the blackest 
ghostual deception, at the falling in the 
net of demons, which show us a pseudolight, what throws us into a lamentable 
extremism. The divine sight has signs and 
clear manifestations from ghostual point 

777 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 12, 150-158, p. 

282-284/ Idem, p. 155. 

 
 

of view and the differentiation between 
the true sight and the sight brought by 
demons is reserved those with deep 
mystical experience and with a great 
ghostual discernment. 

Saint Symeon does not refer in his 
opera and at what is not authentic sight, 
but other Holy Fathers did it into a 
magistral mode. 

His Holiness was comprised with all 
of desire of to highlight the reality and 
the divine splendor of the mystical 
experience, for as each of us can compare 
our experience with the truth of an over- 
whelming experience. 

Returning us at the eschatology for 
today, after how I promised, Saint 
Symeon speaks in the ethical Discourse 10 
about the link between eschatology and 
the ecstatic sight, saying: „the coming of 
the Lord [parousi,a tou/ Kuri,ou] at the 
believers was made and is made always 
[ge,gone kai. avei. gi,netai] and was made by 
all those who will it. 

And if He is the Light of the world 
and He told His Apostles that will be with 
them until at the end of the world [Mt. 
28, 20], how, being already with us, He 
will come? Nowise. For we are not sons of 
darkness and sons of night [I Thes. 5, 5], 
as the light to take us by surprise 
[katala,bh] [Jn. 12, 35], but sons of light 
and of the day of the Lord"778. 

778 SC 129, The Ethical Discourses, X, 679-686, p. 

308/ Idem, p. 343. 

 
 

is a 
The coming of the Lord 
cotidianity for those who see the light in 
their being and for they His second 
coming 
longer expected but 
glorified in their whole being. 

is no 

The Lord showed into light all His 
Saints, ie to all those who were thirsty 
and were hungry for His glory. Just 
therefore, the Saints are not sons of the 
night, of unseeing light, but of the day, of 
communion, in light, with their Master. 
For those who live in light yet of 
now, the history has ended already. They 
live longer in eternity than in history and 
the changing of world means the sight of 
light and in the matter around them not 
only in their being. 

But the prechanging of world brings 
an immense plus of holiness and of 
gladness thereof, for that means the ever- 
lastingness them in light, their stead- 
fastness, for eternity, in the sight of the 
glory of the Most Holy Trinity. 

Do not understand of here, that the 
Saints do not want the coming of the 
Lord, His parousia for all. Contrariwise, 
their daily communion with Christ, His 
sight provokes them an even greater love 
and waiting of His coming on the clouds 
of light of His glory, as to judge the 
world. 

The second coming is an immense 
mystery, for that it is not known by 
anyone except God: „The ones what will 
to be then do not know any the Angels of 

 

God. For given being, that they did not 
know any of His coming on earth, in 
what kind and how [it will be], or when 
He would come down and make Himself 
man, all the more they must not know 
His coming from behind with glory. [...] 
[For this] showed even and the Lord 
speaking about His coming, „that the 
Powers of the heavens will be shaken" 
[Mt. 24, 29], in the sense that they will be 
amazing and they will marvel seeing, all 
at once, [on] those which until then they 
have not seen at all"779. 

The waiting is intense for the entire 
Church and the surprise of His coming 
will be overwhelming. Any scenario of 
His coming we could imagine it will be 
extreme of fade, of inexpressive and of 
corporal in that day. 

Saint Symeon surprises extraordi- 
narily well the idea of the surprise of His 
coming and of His transfiguring presence 
for the entire creation. 

The coming of the Lord will not be, 
rather, a spectacular event, which will not 
engage us in no way, but, contrariwise, 
will be a capital event for us and for the 
entire creation, on which we will feel it 
the deepest in our being. 

At His coming, He will be 
recognized by His Saints, for that and the 
Lord recognizes His Saints780. But and the 

779 SC 122, The Ethical Discourses, I, 12, 226-231, 

235-238, p. 288, 290/ Idem, p. 157. 

780 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 12, 267-268, 

p. 292/ Idem, p. 158. 

 
 

Saints will recognize one another, for that 
Christ will dwell in all the Saints781. 

The books of conscience [ai` bi,bloi 
tou/ suneido,toj] will open782 and from the 
being those who will be found with a holy 
life „will shine Christ God, the hidden 
now in them, as has shone, before of 
ages, from the Father, and the Saints will 
be like of the Most High. [...] 

[For] if the Saints are like of God 
and they will know on God as much as 
God knew on them, and as the Father 
knows on the Son and the Son on the 
Father, all so must to see and to know 
each other and the Saints, nay even and 
those who have not ever seen in this 
world. [...] 

For as the Father will never be 
deprived of the knowledge of the Son or 
the Son of the Father, all so nor the 
Saints, made gods through adoption...will 
never be deprived of the knowledge 
among themselves, but among them- 
selves they will see their glory and of 
themselves, as the Son sees it on of the 
Father and the Father on of the Son"783. 

 The eschatological symeonian per- 
spective is, according as one can see, one 
of ghostual knowledge, of profound 

781 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 12, 268-269, 

271-272, p. 292/ Ibidem. 

782 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 12, 273, p. 

292/ Idem, p. 158. 

783 Idem, The Ethical Discourses, I, 12, 285-287, 

299-304, 307-312, p. 292, 294/ Idem, p. 159. 

 
 
 

communion between Saints and God and 
among themselves. 

The consciousness of relation with 
God sees here the true value, for that only 
those who have a real communion, yet of 
here, of on earth, with God, will have part 
of His recognition, of the communion 
with all the Saints and of His glory 
forever. The ghostual life is our adapta- 
tion at the conditions of eternal life, our 
preparation for to be proper of eternal 
communion with God. 

Saint Symeon leads us, through his 
theology, at the abyssal understanding of 
the fact, that just the ghostual experience 
can give us a real and total gladness and 
fulfillment, which will not be 
lost 
through death, but will be potentiated 
overwhelming of much. 

The postmodern world, which seeks 
totalising experiences and fulminant, 
which seeks a rapid knowledge and 
intensive of our existence, it can find in 
the symeonian theology the profound 
sense of human fulfillment: the ghostual 
experience of eternal life, the eternal 
communion with our God, of all. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

the 
3. The Receptation of 
Theology of Glory in the Orthodox 
Space and the Importance of its 
Assuming in the Postmodern World 

3. 1. The Sight of God in the The- 
ology of Father Professor Dumitru 
Stăniloae 

As to understand the contribution of 
Father Professor Dumitru Stăniloae at the 
theology of glory of God we must leave 
from „the ontological aspect and person- 
alist of grace" 784 in his theololgy, to the 
deep creases of his theological episte- 
mology, which „is both holistic and 
relational. It includes both the logical 
dimension of reason 
implicit to the 
cataphatism, but and the existential 
dimension (experiential or participative) 
inherent to the apophatism"785. In the 
the 
following we will concentrate 

of Dumitru 

784 Emil Bartoş, The Concept of Deification in the 
[Conceptul de 
Theology 
îndumnezeire 
lui Dumitru Stăniloae], 
doctoral thesis, Pub. The Christian Book, Oradea, 2002, 
p. 414. 

Stăniloae 

teologia 

în 

785 Silviu Eugen Rogobete, An Ontology of Love. 
Subject and Supreme Personal Reality in the Theological 
Thought of Father Dumitru Stăniloae [O ontologie a 
iubirii. Subiect şi Realitate Personală supremă 
în 
gândirea teologică a părintelui Dumitru Stăniloae], 
doctoral thesis, trans. by Anca Dumitraşcu and Adrian 
Guiu, coll. Plural Religion, Pub. Polirom, Iaşi, 2001, p. 
86. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

attention only toward the last step of 
mystical apophatism and namely toward 
the sight of divine light, although in his 
theology blends harmonious the cata- 
phatism and the apophatism and only 
uniting them on these two, we can speak 
of an articulated theology of glory. 

In OSAM II, 5, Father Professor 
Dumitru Stăniloae, highlighting the steps 
of the apophatism speaks about the divine 
darkness described by Saint Dionysius 
the Areopagite, as about „a too great 
abundance of light"786. 

Meditating at a text of Saint Gregory 
Palamas, Father Stăniloae finds that „the 
sight of the divine light is not a negative 
theology"787 and that „of the sight of this 
light is vouchsafed only those like Moses, 
on when of the negative theology, any 
worshiper of God"788. 

We have here a prime distinction 
between the theology of glory and the 
negative theology. 

The theology of glory presupposes 
the experience of the light and its articu- 
lation in cataphatic concepts, anthropo- 
morphic or perceived as such, on when 
the rational negative theology is a con- 
ceptualization of the ecstatic confessions 
or a commentary at the ecstatic descrip- 
tions of the Saints. 

786 OSAM [The Orthodox Spirituality. Ascetica 
and Mystica] [Spiritualitatea ortodoxă. Ascetica şi 
Mistica], ed. 1992, p. 196. 

787 Idem, p. 197. 
788 Idem, p. 199. 

 
 

If in the frame of the theology of 
glory the source texts are created by 
those who have experienced them and are 
commented by those who are congenial 
with these, in the frame of negative 
theology do not exist the source texts 
its promoters, but 
created by 
the 
from this branch make 
theologians 
conjectures on the margin of the source 
texts created by Saints or by the 
theologians, which share, in reverent 
mode, the details of ecstatic theology and 
they are positioned critical or indifferent 
across from them. 

The negative theology, says our 
author, is not sight789, but „an anticipative 
icon of the sight of divine light"790. Only 
when the mind is „ravished by God, 
passes beyond, at the sight of light"791. 

He who sees the light does not enter 
into an experiential vacuum792, but he 
sees the uncreated light of God, having 
the conscience „that 
it cannot be 
contained in concepts and expressed in 
words"793, this in the first row and, in the 
second row, that the light comes from the 
being of God, „which remains with all 
inaccessible [to us], and that itself the 
accessible light remains an infinite reserve 
[of experienced]"794. 

789 Ibidem. 
790 Ibidem. 
791 Idem, p. 201. 
792 Ibidem. 
793 Ibidem. 
794 Ibidem. 

 
 

The 

in us an 
light produces 
„apophatic knowledge"795 - for that the 
Holy Ghost „is the head of the trinitarian 
work turned towards the world"796 - 
however, in the same time, „the divine 
light, seen in unintelligible face, remains 
and for hesychasm a mystery, which do 
not exclude, but implies the apophatism, 
without to let it only on this in vigor. 

What distinguishes this apophatism 
of sight beyond sight of the light is the 
fact, that this apophatism is not a 
vacuum, but an overwhelming divine 
presence; and 
is not an intellectual 
negation and a feeling on darkness of the 
presence of God, but an overwhelming 
experience of this presence"797. 

Father Professor Stăniloae highlights 
thus the fact, that the sight is a presence 
of light in us, that it brings a divine 
knowledge the one which sees it and a 
profound communion with God798. 

With other words, Father Professor 
Dumitru Stăniloae assumes the theology 

795 Ibidem. 
796 Rev. Prof. Acad. D.Th. Dumitru Popescu, 
Jesus Christ Pantocrator [Iisus Hristos Pantocrator], op. 
cit., p. 137. 

797 OSAM, ed. 1992, p 201. 
798 Father Professor Ştefan Buchiu, commenting 
the apophatic knowledge at Father Stăniloae, wrote: 
„The divine infinite knowledge at which accedes the 
mind in ecstasy, give birth in the human subject at the 
sentiment of plenitude, of plenary joy, of an unending 
love", acc. Rev. Doc. D. Th. Ştefan Buchiu, The 
Apophatic Knowledge 
the Thinking of Father 
Stăniloae [Cunoaşterea apofatică în gândirea Părintelui 
Stăniloae], Pub. Libra, Bucharest, 2002, p. 194. 

in 

 
 

of glory and considers it an unique 
personal event and savior. 

The knowledge of light „is an eternal 
progress"799, continues his Holiness, and 
the experiencing of the light gives us the 
understanding „of absolute unknow- 
ability of divine being" 800. 

The experiencing of the light is an 
understanding through communion of the 
trinitarian God and the one who is full of 
light „becomes to himself and more full 
of mysteries, as a deified being, beyond 
nature, inspiring he himself a continuing 
self-amazement"801. 

The sight of light deifies us on 
measure what fills us of a theological 
experiential understanding of the dogmas 
of faith. 

is, 

The deification is the foundation of 
charismatic theology, of theology of sight, 
in the same time, an 
for that 
ontological reality, interior. The light 
penetrates in us and it remains in us and 
it is the one which personalizes us 
continuous, because disinfests us of the 
irrationality of passions802. 

799 OSAM, ed. 1992, p. 210-202. 
800 Idem, p. 202. 
801 Ibidem. 
802 Father Professor Dumitru Popescu said, into a 
critical evaluation of Olivier Clément, that „the the- 
ology, 
eastern 
ascetica...[considers the passions] irrational beingly 
motions, which alters not only the existence, but and 
the human ontology", acc. Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru 
Popescu, Christ, Church, Society [Hristos, Biserică, 
Societate], Pub. IBMBOR, Bucharest, 1998, p. 131. 

spirituality 

and 

the 

the 

 
 

In OSAM III, 2, Father Professor 
develops the discussion about ecstasy, 
describing the ecstatic sight right the 
event, which occurs in the link full of love 
between man and God803. 

„God sends His energy in man"804, 
says Father Professor Dumitru Stăniloae, 
and this divine energy, „once com- 
municated to man...it turns towards God, 
and in this its return, it dresses the form 
of the affection of human subject, 
awakened by the divine energy"805. 

The sight takes place in the frame of 
personal relation between man and God 
and it provokes on man at a love and a 
greater communion with God. 

The communion and the reciprocal 
love between man and God is the frame 
in which produces the event of ecstasy, 
for that the divine sight is „just the 
smiling irradiation of divine love"806 in 
our being. 

The evaluation of sight, on which 
it Father Professor Dumitru 
makes 
Stăniloae, is extreme of positive: „The 
light is simultaneously knowledge, and 
the light of knowledge is the fruit of love. 
But a light or a knowledge, which springs 
from love, which is not than an expres- 
sion of the state of love, is, in the same 
time, life"807. 

803 OSAM, ed. 1992, p. 260. 
804 Idem, p. 261. 
805 Ibidem. 
806 Idem, p. 280. 
807 Ibidem. 

 
 

Discussing about the role of mind 
during of ecstasy, Father Professor says, 
that the mind no longer sees, in this 
moment, on himself, but it works only 
through the divine work808. The sight is 
the moment when we live „the love with 
which God loves us and we love Him"809. 
an 
ephemeral love, bodily, possessive, but 
„an uncreated love, springing from the 
being of God"810. 

experience not 

Then we 

The central role of ecstasy in our life 
is shown by Father Professor Dumitru 
Stăniloae in that, that in the frame of 
sight of light, God gives us His work811 for 
as to deify us. 

The exist of mind from itself, which 
takes place in the frame of divine sight, is 
not ontological, he specifies, but is a 
union of the mind with the divine light812, 
on which he sees it in himself but and 
beyond himself 813. 

The sight of the divine light means 
„the supreme step of self-conscious- 
ness"814 and the light of God „is spreading 
from soul in outside, on the face and on 
the body the one who has it inwards"815, 
deifying the entire being of its seer and 
luminating and on those who see him 

808 Idem, p. 281. 
809 Idem, p. 283. 
810 Ibidem. 
811 Ibidem. 
812 Idem, p. 284. 
813 Idem, p. 285. 
814 Idem, p. 286. 
815 Idem, p. 289. 

 
 

and maintain themselves at discussion 
with this. 

The Saints Dionysius, Maximus, 
Gregory Palamas and Gregory of Nyssa 
appear in recurrent mode in the pages of 
the theology of glory of Father Professor 
Dumitru Stăniloae. 

Is observed over all the personalist 
mode of the theology of glory, on which 
his Holiness has developed it and the 
heat of communion and of beingly 
confession, plenary, on which educes it 
his theology to the one who reads it. 

Is observable therefore, that Father 
Professor Dumitru Stăniloae speaks from 
within of the theology of glory and not 
from outside it. This does not put under 
the sign of question 
the mystical 
experiences but he explains them on 
measure what he assimilates them. 

In the introduction and in the 
commentaries which accompany the 
translation of the symeonian Hymns, 
Father Professor returns at the theme of 
ecstatic knowledge as and personal 
communion, through love, of the man 
with God. 
the 
Speaking 
impossibility of transmission of proper 
through words816, Father 
experience 

about 

816 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, The 
Personal Relation with Christ in the Light of Divine 
Infinity, after Saint Symeon the New Theologian 
[Legătura personală cu Hristos în lumina infinităţii 
dumnezeieşti, după Sfântul Simeon Noul Teolog], in 
Orthodox Dogmatic Theology Studies [Studii de teologie 
dogmatică ortodoxă], op. cit, p. 310. 

 
 

Professor prepares the ground for the 
presentation of our capital union with 
Christ, with the One who „has the 
supreme sense or the richness of all senses 
toward which tends the man"817 and 
through Whom and into Whom „become 
and us the possessors of all senses, [ie] 
become gods after grace"818. 

Therefore he identifies right the 
central theme of the symeonian Hymns 
light, which irradiates from the 
the 
person of the risen Christ819, saying that 
„the sight of the divine light does not 
depend...only of its spread through the 
body of Christ, but and of the voluntary 
opening for/ toward it of the human 
persons"820. The opening towards the 
light of Christ means ascesis and breaking 
of the crust of the proper egoism821. The 
absolute positivity of sight in our life is 
seen and from the distinction on which 
our author makes it between the one 
which only theorizes and the one which 
the 
it at proper: 
experiences 
theoretician theologian sees the divine 
light and unites in love whit Christ, but 
the ghostual man or the Saint, which was 
purified of passions, who has left the 
egoism and opens with the will toward 
the love of God and of fellowmen"822. 

„No 

817 Idem, p. 312. 
818 Ibidem. 
819 Idem, p. 315. 
820 Ibidem. 
821 Ibidem. 
822 Ibidem. 

 
 

Through this Father Professor shows 
that the ascesis is the integrant part from 
theology and that the ascesis, the 
cleaning of passions, is the road toward 
sight, toward the mystical experiences, 
mysterious, divine. 

The sight of Christ's glory is, in the 
same time, knowledge and an endless 
invitation of deepening in knowledge, in 
the knowledge as personal relation with 
God: „In union with Christ, the man has 
the perspective of an eternal advancement 
in the divine light and in his spiritual 
enrichment. 

For the light what is communicated 
to him from Christ is the irradiation of 
God's infinite being, which is unbounded. 
The man, as hypostasis of the human 
being, increases in its knowledge through 
the energies potential contained in it. 

But when he unites with Christ 
comes from Him and the works or the 
energies of God's being, which is infinite. 
He feeds thus from all the divine content, 
from the infinity itself, from all what is 
created and uncreated"823. 

The ecstatic sight is an anticipation 
of the Kingdom of God, where, „united 
with Him, we will be filled with all of 
light and all the universe will be in the 
Kingdom of Heavens a Kingdom of light, 
a Kingdom of light spread between the 
persons of the Holy Trinity and from Her 

823 Idem, p. 316. 

 
 

between the human persons united with 
Christ"824. 

The divine darkness, repeats Father 
Professor, is the too much light which 
comes from God's being825. At Saint 
Symeon the New Theologian does not 
exist „the obscure nights" of John of the 
Cross826, but only the joy of „the size of 
divine light"827, which overwhelmed on 
this. 

His commentaries at Hymns show 
how much he was familiarized with the 
flame of theology of Saint Symeon. Over 
all Father Professor Dumitru Stăniloae 
gives righteousness of Saint Symeon, 
enthuses of his words and sees in them an 
accurate interpretation of our faith. 

In n. 239 at the Hymn 18, as to give a 
single example of correct evocation and 
enthusiastic of symeonian 
theology, 
Father Professor Dumitru Stăniloae 
wrote: 

„Into a time, when in Occident 
appeared the beginnings of Scholastica, 
which will pretend to define rational on 
God, in Orient was affirmed, through 
Symeon, in accentuated mode, the union 
of knowledge with the conscience of the 
mystery of God and, in general, of reality. 
It 
testimony of a spiritual 
maturity"828. And the theological maturity 

the 

is 

824 Ibidem. 
825 Idem, p. 317. 
826 Hymns, the edition Stăniloae, n. 117, p. 366. 
827 Idem, n. 144, p. 375. 
828 Idem, n. 239, p. 413. 

 
 

of Symeon, on which observed it Father 
Professor Dumitru Stăniloae, consists just 
in that, that he does not attempt at the 
mystery of God's life and of living relation 
with Him, but he presents it right the 
target and the fulfillment of the entire 
humanity. 

The sight of God is the foundation of 
salvation and of true joy, for that the 
eternal life is a continuous deepening in 
the sight and the understanding of the 
divine light. 

In conclusion, we observed how our 
great theologian has appropriated, with 
much fidelity, the scriptural ecstatic 
terminology and on that of the Fathers, 
and he spoke in the perimeter of sources, 
without as to try to contradict them, but 
showing himself as one who has learned 
from them. 

The theology of glory at Father 
Professor Dumitru Stăniloae is person- 
alist and communional, for that the sight 
means the knowledge and the love of 
God, through our cleaning of passions 
and through the wish of Him with all our 
being. 

The centrality of Christ in our life 
means our filling of light, which flows 
from His person and the sight is the 
preamble of eternal life, where all will be 
one in the light of glory of the Most Holy 
Trinity. 

 
 
 
 

3. 2. The Mystical Theology and 
its Receptation by the Orthodox 
Professor Vladimir Lossky 

In 

the 

introductive 

study at 
romanian edition of archiknown book of 
Professor Vladimir Lossky, Essai sur la 
Théologie Mystique de l'Eglise d'Orient, 
Father Professor Vasile Răducă notes the 
fact, that Vladimir Lossky has demon- 
strated through this book, „that Theology 
cannot be separated of Mystica. 
the 
theology 

rational 
representation of mystical experience, of 
the intimate living of the truth and of the 
divine mystery"829. 

The 

is 

Appeared in 1944, this little mystical 
orthodox dogmatic wanted to restore the 
truth, how that the theology, in the 
measure in which „makes the showing of 
the divine mystery, so the data of 
Revelation, is a mystical theology"830. 

Professor Vladimir Lossky observes 
very correct, that the Church, naming its 
Theologians the triad of the Saints John 
the Theologian, Gregory of Nazianzus 
and Symeon 
the New Theologian, 
showed that cannot do theology without 
mystica831 and that the mystica is „the 

829 Rev. Vasile Răducă, Introductive study, in 
MTEC [The Mystical Theology of the Eastern Church], p. 
25. 

830 MTEC, p. 35. 
831 Idem, p. 37. 

 
 
 
 

peak of all theology...[or] the theology 
through excellency"832. 

Therefore, the scope of theology is 
the deification833, which does not mean 
the stopping at a certain stage of knowl- 
edge, but the continuous advancement 
towards God, towards the One who „is 
beyond of [all] what exists"834. 

Emphasizing the role of mystical 
experience, our theologian shows, that 
Saint Dionysius the Areopagite has 
presented the ascension towards sight as 
on a road made through the cleansing of 
passions835. 

Putting the equal sign between 
apophatism and mystical experience836, 
Professor Lossky speaks about a personal 
experiencing of God, Which is not living 
as an object837. 

is 
But our author, we believe, 
situated outside of the truth of experience 
as such, 
then when conceives the 
mystical sight right a union with God, 
which does not mean and His knowledge 
in the same time838. As we have seen 
anterior, the union with the light, the 
sight of light, means of fact the filling of 
divine knowledge, of mystical theology. 

832 Ibidem. 
833 Ibidem. 
834 Idem, p. 54. 
835 Idem, p. 56. 
836 Idem, p. 57. 
837 Ibidem. 
838 Ibidem. He says, literal: „God no longer 
appears as object [in ecstasy], whereas is no longer the 
word about knowledge, but of union". 

 
 

Evaluating the reality of ecstasy at 
Saint Dionysius, he says that this divine 
experience presupposes „an exit from the 
being as such"839 and that Dionysius, in 
comparison with Plotinus, has a kindred 
theology with the scriptural840. 

The theological cataphatism of the 
names of God speaks us about His 
energies, which descends to us841 but 
„they do not approach us to His 
inaccessible being"842. 

„The conscience of the inability of to 
touch on God"843, says Professor Vladimir 
Lossky, evaluating a fragment from the 
Stromata of Saint Clement of Alexandria, 
would not be an appanage of our mind, if 
we would not be comforted by grace844. 
The conscience of the uncognos- 
cibility of being of God means a real 
meeting, he says, with „the personal God 
of Revelation"845. 

But the uncognoscibility of divine 
being does not temper the fervent seeking 
of believers to see God, of to see His 
glory. The sight of His glory means the 
abyssal conscientization of the uncognos- 
cibility of His being, but and of the 
infinity of knowledge, on which presup- 
poses it the sight of divine light. 

839 Idem, p. 60. 
840 Ibidem. 
841 Idem, p. 62. 
842 Ibidem. 
843 Idem, p. 63. 
844 Ibidem. 
845 Ibidem. 

 
 

Wondering, if not perchance the 
radical apophatism of the Fathers refers 
only at a theology of ecstasy846, Professor 
Lossky reaches, again, at a conclusion 
outside of mystical experience, speaking 
about apophatism as about „a disposition 
of mind, who refuses to form concepts 
about God"847. 

Is observed that Vladimir Lossky 
wanted to remove the theology from the 
sphere of a rationalist understanding and 
fractional of academic approach, however 
not on the base of personal experience 
eminently mystical, but, more, through 
the intermedium of the theological con- 
cepts pretaken orthodox. 

is 
But the concepts about God 
shattered through the ecstatic experience, 
for that the mind which has not seen the 
light does not know that thinks absolute 
hilarious, fanciful about God. 

The killing of the idols of the mind is 
made through the sight of divine light. 
But our author gives priority of negative 
theology in the detriment of sight, for 
that, he says: „the negative theology is 
not just a theory [theorizing] of ecstasy 
itself, but is the expression of that funda- 
from 
mental attitude, which makes 
theology, in general, a contemplation of 
Revelation"848. 
of 
the mysteries 
Remaining in large part the prisoner of 

846 Idem, p. 65-66. 
847 Idem, p. 67. 
848 Idem, p. 70. 

 
 

of 

corrective 

in which 

the occidental approach of mystical 
experience, 
the negative 
theology does not mean sight but an 
utopian 
imagination, 
Professor Vladimir Lossky gives us the 
impression that replaces, sometimes, the 
ghostual experience in the theological 
approach with the rationalist approach, 
sentimental at the life and the dogmas of 
the Church. 

fairly 
We understand, however, 
trenchant from his pleading, that our 
author wishes to see in apophatism an 
expression of ghostual knowledge and that 
„the apophatic principle of theology"849 is 
for this a limitation of the rationalization 
of God, of the impetus of to replace „on 
God through the idols about God"850. 

The 2nd chapter from book ends 
with the glorious affirmation and correct 
of the fact that our God is the Holy 
Trinity and not „the impersonal God of 
the philosophers"851. 

The triadology on which our author 
highlights it in evidence has the declared 
scope, of to specify the relation between 
the trinitarian God and the faithful man: 
„the happiness of 
the Kingdom of 
Heavens is not a sight of being [of God], 
but, first of all, is the participation at the 
divine life of the Holy Trinity"852. On the 
idea of participation at God will focus and 

849 Ibidem. 
850 Ibidem. 
851 Idem, p. 72. 
852 Idem, p. 93. 

 
 

the 4th chapter, which treats the reality 
of divine uncreated energies. 

Starting from the affirmation, that 
the trinitarian theology asks „a impart- 
ation from what in what more intimate of 
human person with the God-Trinity"853, 
the author speaks about the paradox „of 
accessibility at [the divine] nature, which 
is inaccessible"854. 

just 

The participation at 

the divine 
1, 4, 
II Pet. 
nature, stipulated by 
represents 
foundation of 
the 
deification, for that „the being of God or 
His nature proper-said...is inaccessible, 
uncognoscible, 
uncommunicable...[on 
when, through] the energies or the divine 
works, ie those natural powers and 
inseparable of being, in [through] which 
God proceeds outside, He shows, com- 
municates, gives"855 on Himself. 

Our 

attracts 

theologian 

the 
attention of its readers, that in the 
Orthodox Church „the presence of God in 
His energies...[is] understood in realistic 
sense"856. The energies that come from 
God are not created, but „are the 
overflows of divine nature"857. They come 
out from the nature of God, „without to 
separate of it in this procession, which 
makes it known"858. 

853 Idem, p. 97. 
854 Idem, p. 98-99. 
855 Idem, p. 100. 
856 Idem, p. 102. 
857 Ibidem. 
858 Idem, p. 103. 

 
 

To make the experience of uncreated 
energies of God means to see the light, for 
„He is fully present in every ray of His 
deity"859. 

From this motive, in the chapter 
dedicated to the deification (chap. 10), 
our theologian sees the scope of the 
entire christian life and of virtues, as 
being the interior acquirement of grace860, 
that „fixation in good"861 of our interior- 
ity. 

The grace is not a recompense for 
merits862, says he, but „o presence of God 
in us, which asks, fom our part, steadfast 
endeavors. [But]...these endeavors does 
not determine, not in the least, the grace, 
nor the grace does not move our freedom 
as a power what would be foreign"863. 

All the preparation for to speak 
about sight at Professor Vladimir Lossky 
begins with the discussion about prayer, 
which is seen as the interior space, in 
which occurs the union with God864. 

The role of prayer is that of interior 
passage towards the sight of God, for that, 
„on a certain stage, when leaves the soul 
sphere, in which the mind is in motion, 
all motion ceases, the prayer ceases and 

859 Ibidem. 
860 Idem, p. 228. 
861 Rev. Marc-Antoine Costa de Beauregard, Pray 
Without Ceasing! [Rugaţi-vă neîncetat!], trans. from 
french language by Rodica Buga and Rev. Prof. Nicolai 
Buga, Pub. IBMBOR, Bucharest, 1998, p. 271. 

862 MTEC, p. 228. 
863 Idem, p. 229. 
864 Idem, p. 236. 

 
 

it"865 and takes place the rapture of 
mind866. 

In ecstasy, the man no 

longer 
belongs, but he is led by the Holy 
Ghost867. Appealing at the symeonian 
theology, our author speaks and him 
about ecstasies as about the personal 
events on which live the beginners and 
not the perfect868. 

He appeals, both, at the paradigm of 
Tabor, for to speak about sight, but and 
at that of Lord's tomb in the Resurrection 
the Holy Fathers of 
day, as and 
Church869. 

Our inghostualization gives us the 
capacity of to see the light of God870. And 
the sight does not occur into a state of 
unconsciousness and of 
interior 
elusiveness, for that „the callousness in 
the inlying life is an abnormal state"871. 

its 

The sight is a plenary state, refelt in 
fundamental mode by us, for that „the 
divine light appears here, in world, in 
time"872, but is „the beginning of Parusia 
in the holy souls, the beginning of 
discoveries from end, when God will 
show all in His unapproachable light"873. 
Professor Vladimir Lossky catches very 

865 Idem, p. 237. 
866 Ibidem. 
867 Ibidem. 
868 Idem, p. 238. 
869 Idem, p. 252. 
870 Idem, p. 253. 
871 Idem, p. 254. 
872 Idem, p. 261. 
873 Ibidem. 

 
 

well in his theology the eschatological 
dimension of ecstasy, but and 
the 
eschatological dimension of transfigu- 
ration of the world through the divine 
light: „The bodies of the Saints will make 
the same with the glorified body of the 
Lord, as shown to the Apostles in the day 
of the Change at face. God will be all in 
all and the divine grace, the light of the 
Holy Trinity will shine in the crowd of 
the human hypostases, in all those who 
have acquired it and which will be make 
as some new suns in the Kingdom of the 
Father, like the Son, transformed by the 
Holy Ghost, the Giver of light"874. 

The acquirement of grace, as its 
interior feeling and the sight of God, are 

874 Idem, p. 263-264. Father Professor Dumitru 
Popescu, into an article dedicated of the centrality of 
Christ in theology and in the life of all creation, put a 
pressed accent on the reality of interior rationality of 
creation and on its interior dynamism. 

Therefore, said this: „The most efficient path for 
the undermining of the centrality of Christ consists in 
the negation of the interior rationality of creation. [...] 
The orthodox theology, influenced by scholasticism 
and aristotelianism, commits a grave error then, when 
identifies the shape of things and of beings with their 
exterior appearance, as and how God would be a 
Sculptor, which is concerned only of the exterior form 
and unchangeable of the statue on which he forms it", 
and not and of its interiority, acc. Rev. Prof. D.Th. 
Dumitru Popescu, The Centrality of Christ in the 
Contemporaneous Orthodox Theology [Centralitatea lui 
Hristos în teologia ortodoxă contemporană], in The 
Orthodoxy [Ortodoxia] LIII (2002), no. 3-4, p. 14, 15. 

In the measure in which is denied the interiority 
of relation of God with the man and with the entire 
creation, through the divine grace, the deification of 
man and of creation is not possible. 

 
 

at our theologian itself the content of 
personal holiness. 

from 

Only 

the perspective of 
experience, he says, can be understand 
the dogmas875, and „the measure of 
personal exaltation of each"876 is that, 
which determines the theology on which 
we write it. The theology, for that is, first 
of all, experimental understanding of the 
life of God, is the personal dynamism of 
our life and represents the level of real 
communion of us with God. 

In conclusion, with his small 
sideslips from the sphere of under- 
standing of ecstatic experience, the 
theology of Professor Vladimir Lossky 
reactualises the need of a theological 
writing based on personal experience and 
reminds us that the theology cannot be 
otherwise than mystical, than personal. 
Our author shows faithful of the 
triadology of the Scripture and of the 
Fathers and tells us that the living God of 
the Church is the God, Which comes 
down, through His energies, until at us, 
as to deify us and lift us up to Him. 

The sight of God is a ghostual reality 
in his theology, a reality which appears in 
people's lives which cleanse of sins and 
represents the experience in advance, 
before of time, of the glory of the eighth 
day. 

875 Idem, p. 267. 
876 Idem, p. 277. 

 
 
 

3. 3. The Interior Dissolution of 
the Man in Postmodernity and the 
Consequences of Personal Assuming 
of the Theology of Glory 

In our entire theological pleading of 
until now, we showed, in essence, that 
the ghostual man and the seer of the glory 
of the Trinity is the man, which person- 
alizes continuous in his relation of great 
communion with God and that the 
interior life is unitary one at the orthodox 
christian, which 
in 
Church. 

inghostualises, 

The one who assumes the theology 
of glory, the one who goes towards the 
knowledge what more personal with God, 
through his cleaning of passions, cannot 
be than a man, which has eradicated in 
his being „the opposition between the 
sensible world and 
intelligible 
world"877, this presupposes opposition 
between body and soul or between man 
and the glory of Trinity, on which the 
postmodern ideology recognizes it as on 
de facto existence. 

the 

the elimination 

For Father Professor Dumitru 
from our 
Popescu 
thinking of this opposition between 
intelligible means an 
sensible and 
abolition of the shaky foundation of the 

877 Rev. Prof. Acad. D.Th. Dumitru Popescu, 
Jesus Christ Pantocrator [Iisus Hristos Pantocrator], op. 
cit., p. 30. 

 
 
 
 

phenomenon of secularization878, which 
is the anti-theology of postmodernity, for 
that „estranges the man increasingly of 
God and transforms him in the prisoner 
of autonomous material world"879. 

His Holiness, seeing the current 
situation of the postmodern world right a 
consequence of the dehumanizing divorce 
between God and man in modernity, 
speaks of three major mutations880, on 
which the postmodernity has inherited 
and has continued from the sphere of 
thinking of modernity. 

The 

first mutation which 

this 
emphasizes it is that of transferring of the 
center of gravity of the world from God at 
man881, fact for which the man is centered 
on its proper interests and closes in 
himself, is seen as an autonomous being 
in his reports with God, eliminates from 
his life any recurrence at eternity and 
considers „the will of God, as a kind of 
attempt against of his proper freedom"882. 
The second major mutation is the 
artificial separation between the public 
life and the private883, where the ghostual 

878 Ibidem. 
879 Ibidem. 
880 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Popescu, The Man 

Without Roots [Omul fără rădăcini], op. cit, p. 11. 

881 Ibidem. 
882 Ibidem. 
883 Idem, p. 12. 
To see and Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Popescu, 
The Orthodoxy and Europe [Ortodoxia şi Europa], in 
The Orthodoxy [Ortodoxia] LVI (2005), no. 3-4, p. 3: 
„the secularized culture 
is based on the radical 
separation between the public domain and the private". 

 
 

life is pushed and closed in the sphere of 
private life and is not permitted to 
penetrate the social life, as personal mode 
of thinking, what follows of our com- 
munion with God. Preponderancing the 
political interests, economical, financial 
and of advertising in the public sphere, 
the interests of mondaine life into a word, 
the religious life is always disturbed as 
long as it reaches, in positive mode, in 
the forefront of the mass-media. 

A third mutation on which Father 
Popescu highlights it is that, that the 
man becames the discretionary master of 
the world884, which exploits chaotic his 
internal resources and external, being, on 
the one part, the one who provokes and 
deepens his proper profound crises of 
personality and, on the other part, being 
the one who spoils the equilibrium of 
creation through stunning economical 
and technological performances, but 
which provokes, from sins, climatological 
disorders of planetary proportions. 

The closing of God in heaven, into a 
transcendence which does not interest 
us885 or 
the abolition of God as 
dynamising factor of human life, makes as 
the man, which is tributary of post- 
modern ideology, to be into a continuous 
deparasitation of self and sinking of him 
in the life more or less illusory of the 
moment. 

884 Idem, p. 13. 
885 Idem, p. 15. 

 
 

lived 

sensualist 

The moment of now, the trice, its 
ephemerality 
and 
egoistical in the same time is preferred to 
a life conscientized as relation with God 
and as personal assuming of history, for 
to be transfigured in our person. 
The conceitedness of 

the post- 
modern, concretized in that, that we are 
the biggest manipulators of information 
of until now, for that we are the most 
advanced technological, is manifests, in 
parallel, with a humanism of nihilistic 
essence and atheistic, which does not see 
in man than a tool of work, which is 
beneficial to society only in the measure 
in which is exhausted in the benefit of a 
new technological discovery or of the 
growth of economic profitability and 
which is remunerated only for his motric 
force or for the special efficiency of his 
neuronal capacities. 

The man is seen as a complex 
structure just from anatomic point of 
view, which is in course of complete 
knowledge from scientific point of view, 
as a summum of diseases, of psychoses, of 
necessities, which will be satisfied, is a 
patibulaire being, proscribed, when exits 
from the rigid system of the humanism 
without man and an insignificant number 
as long as is not a factor of decision in the 
actual society. 

The depths of the man are censored 
from the 
and methodical extirpated 
secular discourse or they are stolen to the 

 

ghostual life and appear right constitutive 
elements for the foils of novel, for the 
area of a piece of theater or for an 
advertising generating of a guaranteed 
profit. 

However in culture and art the 
bottomless depths of man are populated 
only by subliminal monsters, on when, in 
philosophy and science, the soul is an 
enigma preferable at 
level of 
intellection, but not and at that of 
personal racordation at the life of God. 

the 

For that does not give two coins on 
the ghostual necessities of the soul and of 
the man in his totality, because the 
interior life is despised in postmodernity, 
the postmodern overplayings the educa- 
tion and the professional preparation, as 
biographical landmarks of self-standing 
and he prefers, in the exchange of these, 
the retardation or the ghostual back- 
wardness and emotional, staking on the 
accumulation of disparate dates, against 
of his growth in wisdom, of obtaining of 
the interior equilibrium and of deepening 
in holiness. 

Is preferred, 

into a word, the 
identitary discourse based on a minimal 
anthropology, of spontaneous origin, is 
eulogized, into an exasperating mode, a 
man who comes from nowhere and is 
drived chaotic and extremist in life, but, 
of most of the time, is not found 
in paradoxical 
something 
mode, into a maximal anthropology, 

interesting, 

 

which sees in man a creation made by 
God, from love and for to be fulfilled in 
love, into a responsible life and full of 
transfiguration, into a holy life. 

The concept of life as a jungle 
masters the frivolity and the incoherence 
of deepness of the autonomous post- 
modern, makes him to be, in false mode, 
a dynamic man and good-willing, with 
charisma and projects of life, but which 
do not have nor the seal of the grace and 
nor the dimension of eternal fulfillment. 

Into a schizophrenic mode, the 
postmodern without roots lives an active 
life, which empties him of enthusiasm 
and removes him, of most of the time, of 
the natal places and of his proper family 
or a life of the experiment, extremist of 
most of the time, in which the violence 
and the lubricity sends him, always, 
towards underground zones, occult. 

Having in its substance the nihilism, 
as method of 
intellection and the 
deconstruction as primordial stake, on 
which is founded always the new concep- 
tion about man, world and existence, the 
postmodernity refuses to receive lessons 
from history, considers that it can unravel 
by itself and prefers to be indifferent or 
false traumatized, panicky traumatized of 
future into much that to fantasize about 
him into a depersonalized mode. 

If the postmodernity and could 
translate until end the conception about 
man and existence, from its gnoseologic 

 

mythology in fact, in reality, the future 
would not have neither any alternative 
gods, the man would transformed into a 
performant robot of a post-human epoch, 
which would no longer have no christian 
impress and no identitary conscience. 

The 

futurological milenarism of 
postmodernity, the myth of perennial 
happiness on the 
face of an earth 
untransfigurated by grace, but full of an 
and ultra- 
architechnologised 
performant, beats head in head with a 
future imagined as unchaining of ener- 
gies, as a maladive territory of the 
anarchism and as a negation of any 
gnoseology or of personal praxeology. 

life 

The black future, horror, of post- 
humanity of after postmodernity is the 
final vision of this world, a secular 
eschatology, which has nothing to do 
with the perpetuation of life and nor with 
its everlastingness. 

But turning us back in the present, 
where we recant of communism and we 
opt, more or 
for a 
capitalist era in Romania, we are put in 
the face of the fact to analyze lucid the 
two ethoses of social life from orthodox 
perspective. 

less energetic, 

Thus, the communist ethos of life, 
which „tends to sink the man in the 
anonymous mass of nature and to speak 

 

of equality"886, of a equality which 
depreciates the personal choice and the 
human dignity, is an ethos of that we 
want to rid, although it went deep under 
skin, and we live the pathetic fervor of a 
future capitalist, on which we do not 
critical review and „which tends to raise 
the individual above nature and to speak 
of liberty"887, understood into a discre- 
tionary mode and egocentric. 

But, says Father Professor Dumitru 
Popescu, both ideologies, and the one 
that we want to separate and the one that 
we want to appropriate, are impersonal 
ideologies888, which do not unify interior 
on man, for that „puts both the freedom 
but and the equality, above the man and 
of society, as to dominate and to orient 
the society towards the earthly world, 
into a total indifference to the heavenly 
one"889. The orthodox perspective upon 
the world and of man transpires from the 
Holy Scripture and from the Holy and the 
uninterrupted charismatic Tradition of 
the Church and makes us to constate, 
„that are not important for us nor the 
equality and nor the liberty, but the 
communion or the personal relations 
between men"890. 

886 Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Popescu, Christ, 
Church, Society [Hristos, Biserică, Societate], op. cit, p. 
90. 

887 Ibidem. 
888 Ibidem. 
889 Ibidem. 
890 Ibidem. 

 
 

The impersonalism of the political 
ideologies cannot integrate in the com- 
munional dimension of the Church, where 
the experimental knowledge of the life of 
God, the impartation of the glory of God 
makes us to be proper of some relations 
of real communion between us. 

The authentic relation with God is 
the foundation of real perception of the 
human condition, of existence in its 
ensemble and is the mode through which 
we obtain an interior clarification over 
the blessed future of humanity, of the 
future from the perspective of its Creator. 
The false dilemma between the 
preeminence of equality or of liberty is 
seen in that, that in the measure in which 
we dissolve the reality of communion 
inter-human, ridding us of the ecclesial 
communion and of interior relations and 
direct of the Church with the Holy 
Trinity, „both the liberty, but and the 
equality...[cannot approach us], as long as 
they are thought in themselves. 

[For that] the true liberty cannot be 
achieved through the unlimited devel- 
opment of proper powers and wealth, 
because the human being is not made for 
the individualistic autonomy and for the 
frantic course for material goods, which 
leads at soulish vacuum and grave social 
inequalities, but for communion and love. 
And nor the simple searching of 
equality cannot create the social righ- 
teousness, because this is not accom- 

 

just 

plished through terror and deprivation of 
liberty, but 
reciprocal 
communion, in which each gives the 
other listening and love, for to become 
thus man of humanity"891. 

the 

in 

In the face of the postmodern 
ideology, the Orthodox Church is not at 
all in failure of ideas and nor it feels that 
is made to it a serious competition to its 
ontological project from always, that of 
the deification of the man. 

the 
The sight of God, being 
foundation of deification of the man, 
gives us to understand the fact, that the 
theology of glory, on which we analyzed 
in this book, is the personal solution of 
the orthodox christian, through which 
does not live in his life the danger of 
that of 
secularization and nor on 
relativization of ghostual life. 

The orthodox christian, which 
makes from his life an ontological project 
of the continuous depassioning, which 
cleanses and lives the personal revelation 
of Trinity's glory in his life and deepens 
in the life of holiness of the Church of 
God, he lives the communion with the 
Trinity, with those of a being with 
himself and with the entire cosmos in 
Church 
into a personal mode and 
enthusiastic, as a son of resurrection and 
of eternity, which lives on earth and in 
heaven in the same time and not as a man 
submerged in the quagmire of history, 

891 Idem, p. 91. 

 
 

which is led of the fashion of the time 
and is exhausted by projects of life, which 
splits you up interior and does not unify 
you. 

The mystical life or the theology of 
glory, the savior deep of orthodox 
churchly life, is the reach of any orthodox 
christian in Church, for that each of us 
can understand and to love on the 
trinitarian God in personal mode, at our 
the direct 
ghostual 
experiencing of Trinity's glory, both 
through the personal prayer, through the 
receiving of the Holy Mysteries, but and 
through our entire life of communion 
and of loving facts of faith. 

through 

level, 

The orthodox triadology cannot be 
understood in accurate mode without the 
uncreated grace of which we impart in 
different modes in Church and nor can 
we understand personal the interior unity 
of the persons of Trinity and nor the 
relation of communion with the Trinity, 
without the personal revelation of His 
glory, received as a gift of His love for us. 
Nor the christology and nor the 
pnevmatology of Church do not have an 
interior reality for us, as long as we do not 
live together with Christ and with the 
Ghost in our being, as we do not see the 
oikonomia of Christ and of the Ghost as a 
reality on which we live it effective and 
nor the Holy Mysteries of Church, the 
Holy Liturgy, the prayer, the works of 
almsgiving, the services of Church, the 

 

books of Scripture and of the Fathers 
cannot be seised interior, without as the 
glory of Trinity to flood us on full. 

The personal soteriology 

is an 
interesting philosophy, on which we can 
accumulate it, from notional point of 
view, very easy, but it has no link with us, 
no interior link with our life, as long as 
we do not understand from ourselves 
that, without the grace of God, the the 
faith and our acts have no transforming 
sense, transfiguring and if we do not feel, 
that our premaking of day with day is a 
reality shattering of beautiful and of 
perplexing, which makes us ceaseless 
praise on God, for His mercy with us. 

The dynamism of angelology, of 
sanctology, of mariology and of the 
for us the 
orthodox culte becomes 
personal dynamism in the frame of the 
theology of glory, in the measure in 
which our life is a communion with the 
Saints, lived plenary and, in the same 
is an assuming of the entire 
time, 
existence in prayer, for which we come to 
shed tears for any human drama and 
even for adjudicated unhappiness of the 
demons, but and to rejoice for any 
repentance, wonder and beauty of God. 

The orthodox eschatology, as entry 
of creation in eternity, through its full 
pnevmatization, refinds its beginning in 
the theology of glory, where the sight of 
divine light, yet from this life, means the 

 

actualised living of eschatology, of eternal 
life. 

The deification of the man, as 
ontological road, ascetical and ecclesial, 
as and the sight of God, an integrated 
interior divine-human 
part of 
process, gains the capital importance for 
our life, if we look to them from future 
towards present or, better said, from 
eternity towards our present life. 

this 

the 
The existential project of 
Church, being one of eternal advance- 
ment in good, in the communion with 
God and with the entire existence, being 
the project of absolute fulfillment of man, 
cannot be devanced by any other project 
of life and nor can it be subsumed to 
other. 

Therefore, 

conclusion, 

the 
in 
consequences of personal assuming of the 
theology of glory are the interior human 
fulfillment, manifested as interior unity of 
soul and of body, as integral deification of 
the man and the living of a state of 
continuous divine enthusiasm, which 
does not end once with the death, but he 
enters, once with it, into a process of 
eternal acceleration of personal perfec- 
tion. 

The theology of glory is the experi- 
mental knowledge of the dogmas of the 
Church, of the culte, of the entire traject 
of the Church, of the man and of the 
cosmos in its integrality. 

 
 

Without the personal experience of 
the sight and of the glory of God, all what 
we call churchly life has a static character, 
distant, impersonal. 

 
 
 
 

Final Conclusions 

Our doctoral thesis, bearing the 
title: The Sight of God in the Theology of 
Saint Symeon the New Theologian, has 
debated, in three distinct chapters, from 
dogmatic point of view and, in synthetic 
mode, the problem of the sight of God in 
orthodox theology and, with precedence, 
in the theology of Saint Symeon the New 
Theologian. 

In the first chapter, entitled The 
Biblical and Patristic Premises of the 
Deification of the Man and of the Sight of 
God in the Orthodox Theology [p. 10-45], 
we have presented the role of the divine 
Logos, as Pantocrator of the entire 
creation. 

For that the Logos of the Father is 
the Creator of the world and for that He 
is present from beginning in world and 
He sustains and He comprises all things 
through His uncreated energies, there- 
fore the creation has a rational founda- 
tion and spiritual. 

We can talk about a real relation 
with God and about the sight of the glory 
of God, only starting from the three 
fundamental 
biblical 
premises, which are fundamental in the 
experience and the orthodox theology: 1. 
the divine Logos [p. 12-25]: 2. the rational 
and spiritual foundation of the world [p. 

and patristic 

 
 
 
 

26-35] and 3. the uncreated energies [p. 
36-45]. 

These three premises have been 
debated in distinct mode in our work, but 
they have been seen, in continuous 
mode, as interdependent and as funda- 
mental starting point towards the debate 
of experience and of theology of Saint 
Symeon the New Theologian. 

Because, only when we see the 
entire creation as work of the divine 
Logos, entirely rational and filled of the 
source of life of the uncreated energies of 
the Most Holy Trinity, we 
can 
understand, that the scope of our life is 
the deification through grace and the 
sight of God is the direct experiencing 
and real of His everlasting light. 

the 

outside 

The second chapter of thesis - the 
one that has been the subject, as such, of 
our doctoral research - bears the title: 
The Sight of God at Saint Symeon the New 
Theologian and its Implications in the 
Personal Salvation [p. 46-419] and is 
introductive 
formed, 
subchapter, concerning the symeonian 
ecstatic terminology [p. 46-76], on the 
levels of an Orthodox 
fundamental 
Dogmatic: 1. Triadology [p. 77-107]; 2. 
Christology [p. 108-133]; 3. Pnevmatology 
[p. 134-194]; 4. Soteriology [p. 195-279]; 5. 
Sacramentology [p. 280-380]; 6. Ecclesi- 
ology [381-399] and 7. Eschatology [400419]. 

 
 

For that Saint Symeon is not a 
systematic author 
in all theological 
problems discussed here, our personal 
effort has consisted in the systema- 
tization and the synthesising of theolo- 
gical problematic discussed. 

We have systematized and compres- 
sed greatly theological material, for to 
reproduce, as we could of clear, the 
experience and his mystical theology. 

In our research made at the level of 
the ecstatic terminology we have con- 
cluded the fact, that Saint Symeon uses 
scriptural and patristic expressions, for to 
describe his ecstasies, but and some 
personal, staking on percussive images. 

In triadology, Saint Symeon speaks 
about the relations of love and of com- 
munion between the persons of the Holy 
Trinity, he defendes the unknowability of 
being of the Holy Trinity, but he teaches, 
that we can impart, in the ecstatic sight, 
of His glory, on our personal measure. 

The triadology is not the produce of 
human cogitation, but the Son discovered 
to us, in the frame of the oikonomia of 
salvation, that God is Trinity of persons: 
Father, Son and Holy Ghost. 

The Son is born of the Father and 
the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, 
without to exist any anteriority between 
the persons of Trinity or rapports of 
subordination of the divine persons 
between Them. 

 

The one who sees on Christ in 
ecstasy, he sees, along with He, and on 
the Holy Ghost, and Both bring him at 
the Father, the ecstasy not being some- 
thing else, than the lift and our inclusion 
in the frame of the eternal communion of 
the Most Holy Trinity. 

In 

Saint 

christology, 

Symeon 
emphasizes the centrality of Christ's 
presence in the mystical experience, but 
and the interior link between the Son and 
the Holy Ghost in the ghostual experi- 
ence. 

For as we know on Christ, says us 
Symeon, we must live the birth, the death, 
the ressurection and His ascension at 
heaven, in real mode, through the sight of 
His glory, the thing which escapes us of a 
pietist perspective and of the exterior 
imitation of His life. 

Christ is made known to us on the 
measure of our ghostual growth and, 
through the sight of His glory, He reveals 
to us and teaches us the ones about 
Himself. 

The christological realism of the 
symeonian theology consists in that, that 
we see, in real mode, in the divine sight, 
on Christ, on the Pantocrator of the 
entire creation and not in idealistic 
mode, as a desideratum, which is not 
fulfilled ever. 

Our real relation with Christ does 
not make Him to be captive of our 
subjectivity but, contrariwise, He escapes 

 

us of loneliness and of unloving, for that 
He introduces and us, through the Holy 
Ghost, in the too-divine mystery of His 
life. 

In pnevmatology, Symeon puts at 
the foundation of the ortodox life the 
conscious feeling of the divine grace and 
he considers the sight of God right a 
sight, through the Holy Ghost, of the 
glory of the Most Holy Trinity. 

From the ecstatic descriptions of 
Saint Symeon and of his apprentice is 
observed, that the ecstasy is, at Symeon, a 
descend of the divine light in our being, 
for as to ascend us at God and to open us 
to the continuous relation with the 
trinitarian God. 

Without this initiative from the part 
of God, which is the divine ecstasy, we do 
not have the exact knowledge of which 
may be experienced from the glory of 
God. 

Through the Holy Ghost, we come 
to see something from the glory of God's 
glory, as says Symeon, on our personal 
measure and the ecstasy is seen as 
conscious beginning/ conscientized of the 
process of personal deification. 

In soteriology, our Father orders the 
discussion about the personal salvation, 
under the form of these three classic 
stairs of salvation and of our sanctifi- 
cation: the depassioning, the unpassion 
and the deification. 

 

The point of departure on the path of 
personal deification is the first ecstasy on 
which we have it. The depassioning or the 
cleaning of passions means, in the same 
time, the fulfilment of all divine com- 
mandments and the acquirement of the 
holy virtues. 

Saint Symeon speaks about a 
unpassion of the soul and of other of the 
body, the unpassion of the soul being 
assured by the sight of Trinity's glory. 

Our deification is, for Symeon, the 
state in which we see the glory of God in 
continuous mode, it living not only in our 
soul but and in the entire body, through 
the Holy Ghost, each member of our 
becoming the hallowed member of Christ. 
Therefore he speaks, in maximal mode, 
about salvation, putting the equal sign 
between salvation and holiness. 

In sacramentology, Saint Symeon 
reportes at the Holy Mysteries of the 
Church as at the sacramental channels, 
instituted by Christ, through which flows 
into us the life of the Trinity. 

The Baptism is seen by Symeon as 
the sacramental gate through which we 
enter in Church and which stays at the 
base of ulterior divine sight. 
Holy Eucharist 

the beingly 
impartation of the humanity and of the 
divinity of Christ, Symeon showing, in 
the extensive mode, that this union with 
the eucharistic Christ must lived in 
plenary mode by us and that it has 

is 

 

overwhelming consequences 
divine-human process 
deification. 

the 
in 
of personal 

The Confession restores our link 
with Christ, ruptured by sin and it must 
give us the feeling of the forgiveness of our 
sins. 

The Priesthood and the Matrimony 
are seen as sacramental unions with 
Christ God, the Church and the family 
being the environments in which God 
works in mystic mode. 

In ecclesiology, Saint Symeon pres- 
ents the Church from the perspective of 
the life of those Saints, which form the 
mystical body of Christ. 

He approaches the ecclesiological 
problematic from eschatological perspec- 
tive, seeing the Church in full forming, 
untill when will be fulfilled the number of 
Saints preknown by God and God will 
reveal it, to all, in eternity. 

The Saints is formed here, in the 
frame of Church and they will inherit the 
Kingdom of God, which will be the 
Church of all His Saints. 

From symeonian perspective, if each 
believer of the Church would be racorded 
at the life of Trinity, in real mode, and he 
would want to deify himself, then would 
not exist the danger of secularization and 
nor the one of the relativization of 
ghostual life. 
In 

eschatology, Saint Symeon 
presents, as happening in concomitant 

 

mode, the coming of the Lord and the 
transfiguration of the entire creation, 
through the glory what irradiates from 
His body, and, after the final Judgment, 
the chorus of the Saints will form a single 
chorus with the one of the heavenly 
Powers, praising and seeing forever the 
Trinity's glory. 

The sight of God is presented in this 
frame as an experiencing of the coming of 
Christ to us and as a preparation for the 
existential mode which we will have it, as 
transfigurated beings, in His Kingdom. 

The eternal life will highlight, in 
pregnant mode, the importance on which 
has it the sight of God in the life of the 
believers, for that the eternal life happy 
means the continuous sight of the 
unspeakable glory of the Most Holy 
Trinity. 

the 

and 

Synthesizing the themes of the 
third 
theology, of 
symeonian 
Theologian, through excellency, of the 
John The 
Church, alongside Saint 
Evangelist 
Saint Gregory of 
Nazianzus, we can say that they are fully 
scriptural and patristic, he accentuating 
the presence of God in creation, through 
His uncreated energies and the divinehuman trajectory of man's deification and 
of the transfiguration of the entire 
creation, which has rational foundation 
and spiritual. 

 
 
 

The theology of Saint Symeon is 
constructed, in fundamental mode, on 
the centrality of the person of Christ in 
the ghostual life, seen in the frame of the 
interior link between Christ and the Holy 
Ghost and it has in prime-plan the 
thorough discussion about the sight of 
God, on the base of personal experience. 
as 
foundation of the orthodox spirituality 
and the spiritualiy as experience of the 
theology, Saint Symeon talked about the 
sight of God as relation and conscious 
communion with the trinitarian God. 

Considering 

theology 

the 

But his mystical 

experiences, 
Symeon expressed them in paradoxical 
terms, the sight of Trinity's light being 
confessed, in concomitant mode, right a 
descent of uncreated divine light to us for 
to ascend us at the eternal communion 
with the Most Holy Trinity. 

Reiterating often the reality of the 
divine sight in his books, Saint Symeon 
has specified, in continuous mode, that 
the ecstasy is not a closing of the man in 
his proper subjectivity and nor an escape 
from self into an impersonal reality, 
through the uncreated light, in the com- 
munion with the trinitarian God. 

Putting accent on the voluntary 
opening of the believer towards God, 
through our cleaning of passions and 
through a fervent ecclesial life, lived in 
the rhythm of the Saint Liturgy and of 
obedience to a ghostual Father, Saint 

 

Symeon was for his century an authentic 
apologist against the devastating tenden- 
cies of secularization in the life of Church 
and of society. 

the 

Accentuating 

importance of 
ecclesial ghostual experience in our life, 
Saint Symeon defended the relation of 
love and of deep communion of the 
faithful with the trinitarian God, but and 
the true reporting of us, filled of love and 
of brotherhood, as real membres of the 
same mystical body of Christ. 

But all his apology, for the cleaning 
of passions and for the sight of God, had 
eschatological orientation, for that not 
only the man but the entire creation will 
be transfigured, through the glory which 
will irradiate from the person of Christ, 
then when He will come to judge the 
world with righteousness. 

Symeon does not see a separation 
between history and eternity, nor an 
antagonism between the body and the 
soul of man, he does not consider the 
matter as being opaque the grace but 
to 
transparent 
transfiguration, his theology being a 
maximalist one and full of optimism and 
escatological dynamism. 

it and destined 

to 

that 

Therefore we believe 

the 
importance of symeonian theology for 
the contemporary world is considerable 
of great, for that he puts at the founda- 
tion of the orthodox life the ghostual 
experience and the real communion with 

 

the trinitarian God through His grace, 
which escapes us of the secularization 
and of the moral relativism, of the 
dualism between sensible and intelligible, 
of the closing in our subjectivity and of 
pantheism. 

For that we cannot get out from the 
closed circle of the proper passions and 
nor can we to find the real rationality, 
than through the person of Christ, the 
Creator Logos and Saviour of the entire 
creation. 

The third chapter of our thesis, 
which bears the title: The Receptation of 
the Theology of Glory in the Orthodox 
Space and the Importance of its Assuming 
in the Postmodern World [p. 420-455] has 
three subchapters. 

The 

first two presents [1] the 
theology of the sight of God at Father 
Professor Dumitru Stăniloae [p. 420-431] 
and respective [2] the receptation of the 
mystical theology by the professor and 
the russian theologian Vladimir Lossky 
[p. 432-441]. 

The third subchapter discusses, on 
the base of theological synthesis of Father 
Professor Dumitru Popescu, the sideslips 
of postmodernity and the ideologies 
which undervalue on man and decreed 
the absence of God from creation [p. 442455]. 

Father Professor Dumitru Stăniloae 
has reactualised, like none other in the 

 
 

orthodox space, a theology of glory or of 
the mystical sight, on biblical line and 
patristic, with the specific and in the 
traditional ecstatic terminology. 

He considered on Saint Symeon the 
New Theologian right the third Theolo- 
gian of the Church and the one who 
saved the ortodox life, for his century, 
from secularization and theological rela- 
tivism. 

His ecstatic theology is entirely 
personalist and communional, for that all 
our efforts of depassioning and of filling 
by the glory of God have right scope the 
eternal advancement in the relation of 
love and of knowledge of the glory of the 
Most Holy Trinity. 

His Holiness spoke, with prece- 
dence, about the centrality of Christ in 
our ghostual life and about the interior 
relation between Christ and the Ghost in 
the frame of the oikonomia of salvation 
and of the ghostual life. 

The sight of the glory of Christ, yet 
of now, means our filling of light, which 
flows from Christ's person and which will 
transfigurate the entire creation at His 
coming intro glory. 

The professor and the theologian 
Vladimir Lossky tried, also, a reactuali- 
zation of the mystical theology in the life 
of the Church, during of his exile in 
Occident. 

He spoke, in trenchant mode, about 
the fact, that the teology cannot be than 

 

mystical and personal, that it means 
direct experience and that the ecstatic 
sight is a meeting with the Living God, 
Who revelead Himself to us and Who is 
preached in the Orthodox Church. 

He stressed in constant mode, that 
God descended to us, through His 
uncreated energies, for as to deify us and 
to ascend us to Him. 

But exists and some sideslips from 
the understanding of ecstatic experience 
in his theology, for that he saw the 
ecstasy as a union with God which does 
not produce and knowledge in the same 
time and he did not reveal, in pregnant 
mode, the interior link between Christ 
and Holy Ghost. 

Father Professor Dumitru Popescu 
sees the essence of secularization in the 
desire of discretionary autonomy of the 
actual society towards the natural re- 
sources and of environment, based on the 
antique dualism between spirit and 
matter. 

For that the transcendence of God 
was preached, in the occidental hetero- 
dox theology, as an absence of Him from 
creation, the matter as a medium which 
opposes the grace and the grace as 
antagonistic or which encroachs the 
freewill, therefore, concludes his Holi- 
ness, we assist at a accentuated 
depersonalization in postmodernity and 
at the haughty singularization of the man. 

 

the 

from 

On the base of these considerations 
of Father Professor Dumitru Popescu but, 
first of all, on the base of the dates 
disseminated 
symeonian 
theology, we concluded, that cannot 
produce a salvation of the man from the 
claws of secularization and of the 
nihilism, than through his integration in 
the divine-human project of deification. 
For the deification of man is the 
project of personal perfection, on which 
the Orthodox Church preached it from 
always and on which Saint Symeon has 
explained it in paradoxical terms, into an 
exemplary mode. 

Because we cannot speak of the 
feeling and of the sight of God, as real 
means of the deification of the man in 
Christ, in his integrality, both inseparable 
from cosmos and beyond of cosmos, if we 
do not see them in paradoxical terms, as 
it described them, untold of well, Saint 
Symeon the New Theologian. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Index of Abbreviations 

I. Sources 

1. BW = BibleWorks. The com- 

puterized biblical library, v. 07. 

2. FR = Romanian Philokalia, 

Stăniloae edition. 

3. Ică jr. 1 = Sfântul Simeon Noul 
Teolog, Discursuri teologice şi etice, 
Scrieri I, studiu introductiv şi traducere 
de Diac. Ioan I. Ică jr. și un studiu de 
Ierom. Alexander Golitzin, Ed. Deisis, 
Sibiu, 1998. 

[Saint Symeon the New Theologian, 
Theological and Ethical Discourses, 
introductive study and 
Writings 
translation by Deac. Ioan I. Ică jr. and a 
study by Hierom. Alexander Golitzin, 
Pub. Deisis, Sibiu, 1998] 

I, 

4. Ică jr. 2 = Sfântul Simeon Noul 
Teolog, Cateheze, Scrieri 
II, studiu 
introductiv şi traducere de Diac. Ioan I. 
Ică jr., Ed. Deisis, Sibiu, 1999. 

[Saint Symeon the New Theologian, 
introductive 
Catecheses, Writings II, 
study and translation by Deac. Ioan I. Ică 
jr., Pub. Deisis, Sibiu, 1999] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5. Ică jr. 3 = Sfântul Simeon Noul 
Teolog, Imne, epistole şi capitole, Scrieri 
III, introducere şi traducere de Diac. Ioan 
I. Ică jr., Ed. Deisis, Sibiu, 2001. 

[Saint Symeon the New Theologian, 
Hymns, Epistles and Chapters, Writings 
III, introduction and translation by Deac. 
Ioan I. Ică jr., Pub. Deisis, Sibiu, 2001] 

6. Ică jr. 4 = Sfântul Simeon Noul 
IV, 
Teolog, Viaţa şi opera, Scrieri 
introducere şi traducere de Diac. Ioan I. 
Ică jr., Ed. Deisis, Sibiu, 2006. 

[Saint Symeon the New Theologian, 
The Life and the Opera, Writings IV, 
introduction and translation by Deac. 
Ioan I. Ică jr., Pub. Deisis, Sibiu, 2006] 

7. Hymns, Stăniloae edition = 
Sfântul Simeon Noul Teolog, Imnele 
iubirii dumnezeieşti, p. 329-705, în Pr. 
Prof. Dr. Dumitru Stăniloae, Studii de 
teologie dogmatică ortodoxă, Ed. Mitro- 
poliei Olteniei, Craiova, 1990. 

[Saint Symeon the New Theologian, 
The Hymns of Divine Love, p. 329-705, in 
Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, 
Studies of Orthodox Dogmatic Theology, 
Pub. Metropolitan of Oltenia, Craiova, 
1990] 

8. LXX = The Septuagint, Alfred 

Rahlfs edition, acc. BW. 

 
 
 
 
 

9. OC 12 = Un grand mistique 
byzantin. Vie de Syméon le Nouveau 
Théologien (949-1022), par Nicétas Stétha- 
tos, texte grec inédit, introduction et 
notes critiques par le Irénée Hausherr, et 
traduction française et collaboration avec 
le Gabriel Horn, en col. „Orientalia 
Christiana", vol. XII, Ed. Pont. Institutum 
Orientalium Studiorum, Roma, 1928. 

10. PG = coll. Patrologiae Cursus 
Completus, Seria Graeca, Jacques Paul 
Migne edition. 

11. PSB = coll. Părinţi şi Scriitori 
[Fathers and Ecclesiastical 

bisericeşti 
Writers], Pub. IBMBOR, Bucharest. 

12. SC = coll. Sources Chrétiennes, 

Pub. Du Cerf, Paris. 

13. SC 51 = Syméon le Nouveau 
Théologien, Chapitres Théologiques, 
Gnostiques et Pratiques, introduction, 
texte critique et notes par J. Darrouzès, 
en SC 51, Paris, 1957. 

14. SC 113 = Syméon le Nouveau 
introduction, 
Théologien, Catéchèses, 
texte critique et notes par B. Krivochéine, 
traduction par J. Paramelle, en SC 113, 
Paris, 1965. 

15. SC 122 = Syméon le Nouveau 
Théologien, Traités théologiques et éthi- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ques, introduction, texte critique et notes 
par J. Darrouzès, en SC 122, Paris, 1966. 

16. SC 129 = Syméon le Nouveau 
Théologien, Traités théologiques et éthi- 
ques, introduction, texte critique et notes 
par J. Darrouzès, en SC 129, Paris, 1967. 

17. SC 156 = Syméon le Nouveau 
Théologien, Hymnes, no's 1-15, intro- 
duction, texte critique et notes par J. 
Koder, traduction par J. Paramelle, en SC 
156, Paris, 1969. 

18. SC 174 = Syméon le Nouveau 
Théologien, Hymnes, no's 16-40, texte 
critique par J. Koder, traduction et notes 
par L. Neyrand, en SC 174, Paris, 1971. 

19. SC 196 = Syméon le Nouveau 
Théologien, Hymnes, no's 41-58, texte 
critique par J. Koder, traduction et notes 
par L. Neyrand et J. Paramelle, en SC 196, 
Paris, 1973. 

20. OSAM = Pr. Prof. Dr. Dumitru 
Stăniloae, Spiritualitatea ortodoxă. Asce- 
tica şi mistica, Ed. IBMBOR, București, 
1992. 

[Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, 
The Orthodox Spirituality. Ascetica and 
Mystica, Pub. IBMBOR, Bucharest, 1992] 

21. TLG = Thesaurus Linguae 
Graecae, computerized library, compo- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

nent of the program Musaios 2002 A. It 
contains inscriptions and books written 
in greek by Holy Fathers, philosophers, 
scientists, 
letters, etc. The patristic 
citations we have written with their 
initials established by us and the paginal 
references contains the chapter, the 
paragraph and the page of cited edition. 
When we transcribed, in the subsoil of 
page, the text in original, the patristic 
citations contain and the citations from 
TLG. 

22. MTEC = Vladimir Lossky, 
Teologia Mistică a Bisericii de Răsărit, 
traducere, studiu introductiv şi note de 
Pr. Vasile Răducă, Ed. Anastasia, Bucu- 
reşti, f. a. 

of 

[Vladimir Lossky, The Mystical 
Theology 
the Eastern Church, 
translation, introductive study and notes 
by Rev. Vasile Răducă, Pub. Anastasia, 
Bucharest, without year of publication on 
cover] 

23. Viaţa, ed. Iliescu = Sfântul 
Nichita Stithatul, Viaţa Sfântului Simeon 
Noul Teolog, traducere de Ilie Iliescu, Ed. 
Herald, Bucureşti, 2003. Reproduce OC 
12. 

[The Life, Iliescu edition = Saint 
Niketas Stethatos, The Life of Saint 
Symeon the New Theologian, translation 
by Ilie Iliescu, Pub. Herald, Bucharest, 
2003. It reproduces OC 12] 

 
 
 
 

II. Auxiliary Citations 

/ = what 

sign 
represents identical textual variants or 
approximate of the place anterior cited. 

follows after 

 ( ), [ ], { } = these have been used 
selective, 
the 
reproducing of the verses or of the parts 
of text, but and of the scriptural citations. 

circumscribe 

for 

to 

# 001 = the number of the volume 

conformable to the citation from TLG. 

10** = in the 10th verse, appears 
twice the expression or the searched 
word. 

chap. = chapter 

Chapters = The 225 of Practical 

Chapters, Gnostic and Theological 

acc. = according with 

conf. = conformable with 

The citations of Scripture: 

OT) Gen. = Genesis; Exod. = Exodus; 
Numb. =Numbers; Deut. = Deuteronomy; 
I Kings = The First Book of Kings; Ps. = 
Psalms; Is. = Isaiah; Eze. = Ezekiel; Hos. = 
Hosea; Habak. = Habakkuk; Mal. = 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Malachi; Bar. = Baruch; III Maccab. = The 
Third Book of Maccabees. 

NT) Mt. = The Evangel after 
Matthew; Mk. = The Evangel after Mark; 
Lk. = The Evangel after Luke; Jn. = The 
Evangel after John; Acts = The Acts of the 
Apostles; Rom. = The Epistle to the 
Romans; I Cor. = The First Epistle to the 
Corinthians; II Cor. = The Second Epistle 
to the Corinthians; Gal. = The Epistle to 
the Galatians; Eph. = The Epistle to the 
Ephesians; Philip. = The Epistle to the 
Philippians; Col. = The Epistle to the 
Colossians; I Thess. = The First Epistle to 
the Thessalonians; I Tim. = The First 
Epistle to Timothy; Heb. = The Epistle to 
the Hebrews; Jam. = The Catholic Epistle 
of James; I Pet. = The First Catholic 
Epistle of Peter; II Pet. = The Second 
Catholic Epistle of Peter; I Jn. = The First 
Catholic Epistle of John; Rev. = The 
Apocalypse of Saint Apostle John. 

coll. = the cited collection 

etc = exists several verses or known 

texts but unquoted 

ed. = the cited edition 

Pub. = the publishing house who 

printed the book 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Epistles = The 
Symeon the New Theologian 

letters of Saint 

Ibidem = same place cited 

Idem = same source cited 

Hymns = The Hymns of Divine Love 

o. n. = our note 

op. = the cited opera 

p. = page. 

v. = the computerized version of a 

program 

The Life = The life of Saint Symeon 
the New Theologian written by Saint 
Niketas Stethatos. 

vol. = the volume from which is 

cited 

vs. = versus 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

General Bibliography 

I. Primary Sources 

A. 

1. Friberg NT, acc. BW. [GNT] 

2. Greek Orthodox Church NT, acc. 

BW. [GOC] 

3. The Septuagint, Alfred Rahlfs 

edition, acc. BW. [LXX] 

B. 

4. Athanasius Theologus, S., Kata 
Ἑllh,nwn, 
in Contra gentes and de 
incarnatione, edited by R. W. Thomson, 
Pub. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1971. [TLG] 

5. Idem, Cuvânt împotriva elinilor 
[Word Against the Greeks], in coll. PSB 15, 
translation from greek, introduction and 
notes by Rev. Prof. Dumitru Stăniloae, 
Pub. IBMBOR, Bucharest, 1987. 

6. Irenaeus, Against Heresies, St., in 
coll. The Ante-Nicene Fathers. The Writ- 
ings of the Fathers down to A.D. 325, 
edited by Rev. Alexander Roberts and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

James Donaldson, volume 1, Oregon, 
1996. 

7. Maximus Confessor Theologus, S., 
Quaestiones ad Thalassium, in Maximi 
confessoris quaestiones ad Thalassium, 
col. Corpus Christianorum, Series Graeca 
7/ 22, vol. 2, edited by C. Steel, Pub. 
Brepols, Turnhout, 1990. [TLG] 

8. Idem, Despre diverse locuri grele 
din Dumnezeiasca Scriptură sau Răspun- 
suri către Talasie [About Various Heavy 
Places from Divine Scripture or Answers 
to Thalassius], 60, in coll. FR, vol. 3, ed. a 
II-a, translation, introduction and notes 
by Rev. Prof. Acad. D.Th. Dumitru 
Stăniloae, Pub. Harisma, Bucharest, 1994. 

9. Idem, Ambigua. Tâlcuiri cu multe 
şi adânci înţelesuri din Sfinţii Dionisie 
Areopagitul şi Grigorie Teologul [Ambi- 
gua. Interpretations with Many and Deep 
from Saints Dionysius the 
Meanings 
Areopagite and Gregory the Theologian], 
translation from greek, introduction and 
notes by Rev. Prof. Dumitru Stăniloae, in 
coll. PSB, vol. 80, Pub. IBMBOR, Bucha- 
rest, 1983. 

10. Nicétas Stéthatos, St., Un grand 
mistique byzantin. Vie de Syméon le 
Nouveau Théologien (949-1022), texte grec 
inédit, introduction et notes critiques par 
le Irénée Hausherr, et traduction fran- 

 
 
 
 
 

çaise et collaboration avec le Gabriel 
Horn, en col. „Orientalia Christiana", vol. 
XII, Ed. Pont. Institutum Orientalium 
Studiorum, Roma, 1928. [OC 12] 

11. Idem, Viaţa Sfântului Simeon 
Noul Teolog, [The Life of Saint Symeon the 
New Theologian], translation by Ilie 
Iliescu, Pub. Herald, Bucharest, 2003. It 
reproduces OC 12. [The Life, Iliescu 
edition] 

12. Syméon le Nouveau Théologien, 
St., Chapitres Théologiques, Gnostiques et 
Pratiques, introduction, texte critique et 
notes par J. Darrouzès, en SC 51, Paris, 
1957. [SC 51] 

13. Idem, Catéchèses, introduction, 
texte critique et notes par B. Krivochéine, 
traduction par J. Paramelle, en SC 113, 
Paris, 1965. [SC 113] 

14. Idem, Traités théologiques et 
éthiques, introduction, texte critique et 
notes par J. Darrouzès, en SC 122, Paris, 
1966. [SC 122] 

15. Idem, Traités théologiques et 
éthiques, introduction, texte critique et 
notes par J. Darrouzès, en SC 129, Paris, 
1967. [SC 129] 

16. 

1-15, 
introduction, texte critique et notes par J. 

Idem, Hymnes, no's 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Koder, traduction par J. Paramelle, en SC 
156, Paris, 1969. [SC 156] 

17. Idem, Hymnes, no's 16-40, texte 
critique par J. Koder, traduction et notes 
par L. Neyrand, en SC 174, Paris, 1971. [SC 
174] 

18. Idem, Hymnes, no's 41-58, texte 
critique par J. Koder, traduction et notes 
par L. Neyrand et J. Paramelle, en SC 196, 
Paris, 1973. [SC 196] 

19. Idem, Discursuri teologice şi 
etice, Scrieri I [Theological and Ethical 
introductive 
Discourses], Writings 
study and translation by Deac. Ioan I. Ică 
jr. and a study by Hierom. Alexander 
Golitzin, Pub. Deisis, Sibiu, 1998. [Ică jr. 
1] 

I, 

20. 

Idem, Cateheze, Scrieri 

[Catecheses], Writings II, introductive 
study and translation by Deac. Ioan I. Ică 
jr., Pub. Deisis, Sibiu, 1999. [Ică jr. 2] 

21. Idem, Imne, epistole şi capitole, 
Scrieri III [Hymns, Epistles and Chapters], 
Writings III, introduction and translation 
by Deac. Ioan I. Ică jr., Pub. Deisis, Sibiu, 
2001. [Ică jr. 3] 

22. Idem, Viaţa şi opera, Scrieri IV 
[The Life and the Opera], Writings IV, 
introduction and translation by Deac. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Ioan I. Ică jr., Pub. Deisis, Sibiu, 2006. 
[Ică jr. 4] 

23. Idem, Imnele iubirii dumnezeieşti 
[The Hymns of Divine Love], p. 329-705, 
in Rev. Prof. D.Th. Dumitru Stăniloae, 
Studies of Orthodox Dogmatic Theology, 
Pub. Metropolitan of Oltenia, Craiova, 
1990. [Hymns, Stăniloae edition] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

II. Auxiliary Sources 

1. Alfeyev, Hilarion, The Patristic 
Background of St. Symeon the New 
Theologian's Doctrine of the Divine Light, 
in „Studia Patristica", vol. XXXII, edited 
by Elizabeth A. Livingstone, Pub. Peeters 
Publishers, Louvain, 1997, p. 229-238. 

2. 

Idem, St. Symeon the New 
Theologian and Orthodox Tradition, 
doctoral thesis, Pub. Oxford University 
Press, Oxford and New York, 2000, XIV + 
338 p. 

3. Bartoş, Emil, Conceptul de 
îndumnezeire 
lui Dumitru 
în teologia 
Stăniloae [The Concept of Deification in 
the Theology of Dumitru Stăniloae], 
doctoral thesis, Pub. The Christian Book, 
Oradea, 2002, 414 p. 

4. Benga, Rev. Lect. D.Th. Daniel, 
Încercări de epistemologie teologică orto- 
doxă, [Attempts of Orthodox Theological 
Epistemology], in The Orthodoxy [Or- 
todoxia] LVI (2005), no. 3-4, p. 89-108. 

5. Buchiu, Rev. Doc. D. Th. Ştefan, 
Cunoaşterea apofatică în gândirea Părin- 
telui Stăniloae [The Apophatic Knowledge 
in the Thinking of Father Stăniloae], Pub. 
Libra, Bucharest, 2002. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6. Citirigă, Rev. Conf. D. Th. Vasile, 
Temeiurile dogmatice ale vieţii veşnice 
[The Dogmatic Grounds of Eternal Life], 
in The Orthodoxy [Ortodoxia] LVI (2005), 
nr. 3-4, p. 56-77. 

7. Coman, Rev. Prof. D.Th. 
Constantin, Despre recursul studiilor 
sistematice la Sfânta Scriptură [About the 
Recourse of the Systematic Studies at Holy 
Scripture], in rev. Theological Studies 
[Studii Teologice], series III, II (2006), no. 
2, p. 181-193. 

8. Costa de Beauregard, Rev. Marc-
[Pray 
Antoine, Rugaţi-vă neîncetat! 
Without Ceasing!], 
from 
translation 
french language by Rodica Buga and Rev. 
Prof. Nicolai Buga, Pub. IBMBOR, Bucha- 
rest, 1998. 

9. Duşe, Rev. Lect. PhD student 
Călin-Ioan Duşe, Îndumnezeirea după 
Sfântul Simeon Noul Teolog 
[The 
Deification after Saint Symeon the New 
Theologian], in rev. Theological Horizons 
[Orizonturi teologice], I (2000), no. 2, p. 
108-129. 

10. Idem, Taina Sfântului Botez la 
Sfântul Simeon Noul Teolog [The Mystery 
of Holy Baptism at Saint Symeon the New 
in Theological Horizons 
Theologian], 

 
 
 
 
 
 

[Orizonturi Teologice] I (2000), no. 3, p. 
164-172. 

11. Idem, Vederea luminii dumne- 
zeieşti după Sfântul Simeon Noul Teolog 
[The Sight of Divine Light after Saint 
Symeon the New Theologian], in The 
Theology [Teologia] IV (2000), no. 4, p. 
102-121. 

12. Idem, Taina Sfintei Spovedanii la 
Sfântul Simeon Noul Teolog [The Mistery 
of Holy Confession at Saint Symeon the 
New Theologian], in Theological Horizons 
[Orizonturi teologice] II (2001), no. 1, p. 
104-115. 

13. 

Idem, 

Integrarea 

Sfântului 
Simeon Noul Teolog în spiritualitatea 
răsăriteană [The Integration of Saint 
in the 
Symeon the New Theologian 
Eastern 
rev. The 
Spirituality, 
Theological Horizons [Orizonturi teolo- 
gice], Oradea, 2001, p. 140-145. 

in 

14. Galeriu, Rev. Prof. Constantin, 
Cinstirea 
[The 
Sfintelor Moaşte 
Veneration of the Holy Relics], in The 
Metropolia of Banat [Mitropolia Banatu- 
lui] XXX (1980), no. 10-12, p. 635-651. 

15. Golitzin, Hierom. Alexander, 
Simeon Noul Teolog: viaţa, epoca, 
gândirea [Symeon the New Theologian: 

 
 
 
 
 
 

The Life, the Epoch, the Thinking] in Ică 
jr. 1, p. 407-549. 

16. Idem, The Body of Christ: Saint 
Symeon the New Theologian on Spiritual 
Life and Hierarchical Church, a confer- 
ence exposed at Bose, september, 2002, 
conf. 

http://www.marquette.edu/maqom/

symeon. 

17. Ică jr., Deac. Ioan I., Sfântul 
Simeon Noul Teolog şi provocarea mistică 
în teologia bizantină şi contemporană 
[Saint Symeon the New Theologian and 
the Mystical Challenge in the Byzantine 
and the Contemporary Theology], in Ică jr. 
1, p. 9-50. 

18. Ielciu, Dorin, Sfântul Simeon 
Noul Teolog- Mistic bizantin [The Saint 
Symeon the New Theologian - Byzantine 
Mystic], 
in rev. The Orthodox Faith 
[Credinţa Ortodoxă] III (1998), no. 1-2, p. 
133-154. 

Lucrarea 

Joiţa, Rev. PhD 

student 
19. 
Alexandru, 
a 
Sfântului Duh în Biserică [The Sanctifying 
Work of the Holy Ghost in Church], in 
Theological Studies [Studii Teologice] 
XXXII (1980), no. 7-10, p. 638-648. 

sfinţitoare 

20. Lossky, Vladimir, Teologia 
[The 

Mistică a Bisericii de Răsărit 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Mystical Theology of the Eastern Church], 
translation, introductive study and notes 
by Rev. Vasile Răducă, Pub. Anastasia, 
Bucharest, without year. [MTEC] 

21. McGuckin, Rev. Prof. John A., 
Paradigmele biblice şi teologice ale vederii 
Luminii dumnezeieşti la Sfântul Simeon 
Noul Teolog [The Biblical and Theological 
Paradigms of the Sight of the Divine Light 
to Saint Symeon the New Theologian], in 
Ică jr. 4, p. 357-422. 

22. Miguel, P., La conscience de la 
grâce selon Siméon le nouveau Théologien, 
en „Irénikon" XLII (1969), nr. 3, p. 314342. 

23. Picioruş, Rev. PhD Student Dorin 
Octavian, Preotul lumii postmoderne: un 
prestator de servicii sau un părinte 
harismat? [The Priest of the Postmodern 
World: a Provider of Services or a 
Charismatic Father?], in the newspaper 
The Bell [Clopotul], no. 1, 2006, p. 13. 

24. Pop, Rev. Lect. D.Th. Vasile, 
Omul şi Dumnezeu. Imnele Sfântului 
Simeon Noul Teolog în scrierile părintelui 
Dumitru Stăniloae [The Man and God. 
the New 
Hymns of Saint Symeon 
Theologian in the Writings of Father 
Dumitru 
rev. The 
Theological Horizons [Orizonturi teolo- 
gice] II (2001), nr. 1, p. 69-73. 

Stăniloae], 

in 

 
 
 
 
 

25. Popescu, Rev. Prof. Acad. D.Th. 
Dumitru, Faptele bune după Sfântul 
Simeon Noul Teolog [The Good Works 
after Saint Symeon the New Theologian], 
in rev. The Orthodoxy [Ortodoxia] XIV 
(1962), no. 4, p. 540-555. 

26. 

şi 
Idem, 
contemporaneitate 
and 
Contemporaneousness], Pub. Diogene, 
Bucharest, 1996. 

Ortodoxie 
[Orthodoxy 

27. Idem, Hristos, Biserică, Societate 
[Christ, Church, Society], Pub. IBMBOR, 
Bucharest, 1998. 

28. Idem, Omul fără rădăcini [The 
Man Without Roots], Pub. Nemira, 
Bucharest, 2001. 

29. Idem, Centralitatea lui Hristos în 
teologia ortodoxă contemporană [The 
Centrality of Christ in the Contempo- 
in The 
raneous Orthodox Theology], 
Orthodoxy [Ortodoxia] LIII (2002), no. 34, p. 11-20. 

30. Idem, Iisus Hristos Pantocrator 
[Jesus Christ Pantocrator], Pub. IBMBOR, 
Bucharest, 2005. 

31. Idem, Ortodoxia şi Europa [The 
Orthodoxy and Europe], in The Orthodoxy 
[Ortodoxia] LVI (2005), no. 3-4, p. 3-6. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

32. 

Idem, Biserica 

[The Church Must 

trebuie să-şi 
asume cultura vremii, dar fără a face 
to 
compromisuri 
Assume the Culture of Times, but Without 
Making Compromises], interview realized 
by Ciprian Bâra, in the newspaper The 
Light [Lumina], no. 21 (2008), p. 8-9. 

33. Popovich, [Saint] Archim. Justin, 
Omul şi Dumnezeul-Om. Abisurile şi 
culmile filozofiei [The Man and the GodMan. The Abysses and the Acmes of 
Philosophy], with introductive study and 
translation by Rev. Prof. Ioan Ică and 
Deac. Ioan I. Ică jr., preface by Prof. 
Ioannis N. Karmiris, postface by 
Panayotis Nellas, Pub. Deisis, Sibiu, 1997. 

34. Rogobete, Silviu Eugen, O 
ontologie a iubirii. Subiect şi Realitate 
Personală supremă în gândirea teologică a 
părintelui Dumitru 
[An 
Ontology of Love. Subject and Supreme 
the Theological 
in 
Personal Reality 
Thought of Father Dumitru Stăniloae], 
doctoral thesis, translation by Anca 
Dumitraşcu and Adrian Guiu, coll. Plural 
Religion, Pub. Polirom, Iaşi, 2001. 

Stăniloae 

35. Sima, PhD Student Gheorghe, 
Lucrarea Sfântului Duh în Taina Pocăinţei 
la Sfântul Simeon Noul Teolog [The Work 
of the Holy Ghost in the Mystery of 
Repentance at Saint Symeon the New 
Theologian], in rev. Theological Studies 

 
 
 
 

[Studii Teologice], XLII (1990), no. 3, p. 
46-61. 

36. Stăniloae, Rev. Prof. Acad. D.Th. 
Dumitru, Legătura personală cu Hristos 
în lumina infinităţii dumnezeieşti, după 
Sfântul Simeon Noul Teolog [The Personal 
Relation with Christ in the Light of Divine 
Infinity, after Saint Symeon the New 
Theologian], 
in Studies of Orthodox 
Dogmatic Theology [Studii de teologie 
dogmatică ortodoxă], Pub. Metropolitan 
of Oltenia, Craiova, 1990, p. 307-317. 

37. Idem, Spiritualitatea ortodoxă. 
[The Orthodox 
Ascetica 
Spirituality. Ascetica and Mystica, Pub. 
IBMBOR, Bucharest, 1992. [OSAM] 

şi mistica 

şi 

38. 

Idem, Viaţa 

învăţătura 
Sfântului Grigorie Palama, cu patru 
tratate traduse [The Life and the Teaching 
of Saint Gregory Palamas, with four 
treates translated], second edition, with a 
preface reviewed by the author, Pub. 
Scripta, Bucharest, 1993. 

39. Idem, Iisus Hristos: lumina lumii 
şi îndumnezeitorul omului [Jesus Christ: 
the Light of the World and the Deifying of 
the Man], edition tended by Monica 
Dumitrescu, Pub. Anastasia, Bucharest, 
1993. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Idem, Teologia dogmatică 
40. 
ortodoxă 
[The Orthodox Dogmatic 
Theology], vol. 1, ed. a II-a, Pub. IBMBOR, 
Bucharest, 1996. 

41. 

dogmatică 
Idem, Teologia 
ortodoxă 
[The Orthodox Dogmatic 
Theology], vol. 2, ed. a II-a, Pub. 
IBMBOR, Bucharest, 1997. 

42. Ware, Kallistos, One Body in 
Christ: Death and the Communion of 
Saints, in „Sobornost" (1981), no. 3, p. 179191. 

 
 
 
 
 

III. Collections, Dictionaries, 
Computerized Libraries and Data- 
bases Web Used 

1. A Patristic Greek Lexicon, edited 
by G. W. H. Lampe, Pub. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, 1961. 

2. BibleWorks, v. 07 [BW] 

3. Romanian Philokalia, Stăniloae 

edition [FR] 

4. Gingrich Lexicon, apud BW 07 

5. http://www.marquette.edu 

6. Liddell-Scott Lexicon, apud BW 07 

7. Patrologiae Cursus Completus, 

Seria Graeca, Migne edition [PG] 

8. Fathers and Ecclesiastical Writers, 

IBMBOR edition, Bucharest [PSB] 

9. Sources Chrétiennes, Du Cerf 

edition, Paris [SC] 

10. The Ante-Nicene Fathers, col- 
lection edited by A. Roberts and J. 
Donaldson [ANF] 

11. Thesaurus Linguae Graecae, v. 

Musaios 2002A [TLG] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Content 

Introduction (4-9) 

1. The Biblical and Patristic Premises 
of the Deification of the Man and of the 
Sight of God in the Orthodox Theology 
(10-45) 

1. 1. The Person of the Divine Logos 
and His Relation with the Creation and 
with the Man (12-25) 

1. 2. The Rational and Ghostual 
Foundation of the Seen World and its 
Interior Relation with the Salvation of 
Man and the Transfiguration of Creation 
(26-35) 

1. 3. The Uncreated Divine Energies 
and Their Presence in the Synergistic 
Acts of the Deification and of the Sight of 
God (36-45) 

2. The Sight of God at Saint Symeon 
the New Theologian and its Implications 
in the Personal Salvation (46-419) 

The Ecstatic Terminology 

2. 

1. The Symeonian Ecstatic 

Terminology (46-76) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Triadology 

2. 2. The Most Holy Trinity in the 

Personal Ghostual Experience (77-107) 

2. 2. 1. The Apologetic Dimension 

(78-92) 

2. 2. 2. The Personalistic Dimension 

(93-107) 

Christology 

2. 3. The Sight of the Christ's Glory 

and the Path of Deification (108-133) 

2. 3. 1. The Birth of Christ in the 

Personal Experience (110-119) 

the 
2. 3. 2. The Death and 
Resurrection of Christ in the Personal 
Experience (120-128) 

 2. 3. 3. The Ascension of Christ in 

the Personal Experience (129-133) 

Pnevmatology 

2. 4. The Holy Ghost and the Sight 

of the Divine Glory (134-194) 

2. 4. 1. The Holy Ghost, the True 
Faith and the Experience of the Grace 
(135-144) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2. 4. 2. The Personal Ecstatic 
Testimonies and Their Validation (145172) 

2. 4. 2. 1. The First Ecstasy of Saint 

Symeon (147-156) 

2. 4. 2. 2. The Ecstasy During His 

Noviciate (157-162) 

2. 4. 2. 3. The Ecstatic Confession 

and the Validator Comment (163-172) 

2. 4. 3. The Symeonian Ecstasies 
from the Life Written by Saint Niketas 
(173-194) 

Soteriology 

2. 5. The Path of Deification and the 

Sight of God (195-279) 

2. 5. 1. The Emergence of Light in 
Those Who are Cleansed of Passions 
(196-205) 

2. 5. 2. The Unpassion and the 

Divine Light (206-220) 

2. 5. 3. The Light and the Salvation 

as Holiness (221-238) 

2. 5. 4. The Union with God and the 

Communional Images (239-264) 

2. 5. 5. The Divine Light and the 

Ghostual Father (265-279) 

Sacramentology 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2. 6. The Holy Mysteries of the 
Church and the Feeling of the Divine 
Grace (280-380) 

2. 6. 1. The Holy Baptism and the 

Sight of God (281-301) 

2. 6. 2. The Holy Communion, the 
Feeling of Grace and the Ecstasy (302332) 

2. 6. 3. The Holy Confession and the 

Interior Experience of Grace (333-364) 

2. 6. 4. The Holy Matrimony and the 
Holy Priesthood as Sacramental Para- 
digms of Union with God (365-380) 

Ecclesiology 

2. 7. The Saints as Living Members 

of the Church (381-399) 

Eschatology 

2. 8. The Sight of Light and the 

Eschatology (400-419) 

3. The Receptation of the Theology 
of Glory in the Orthodox Space and the 
Importance of 
in the 
Postmodern World (420-455) 

its Assuming 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3. 1. The Sight of God in the 
Theology of Father Professor Dumitru 
Stăniloae (420-431) 

3. 2. The Mystical Theology and its 
Receptation by the Orthodox Professor 
Vladimir Lossky (432-441) 

in Postmodernity 

3. 3. The Interior Dissolution of the 
the 
Man 
Consequences of Personal Assuming of 
the Theology of Glory (442-455) 

and 

Final Conclusions (456-469) 

Index of Abbreviations (470-477) 
General Bibliography (478-492) 

 
 
 
 
 

 © Theology for Today | 2014 
 http://www.teologiepentruazi.ro/ 

This book is 
an online gratuitous edition 
and it is the exclusive property of 
Rev. D.Th. Dorin Octavian 

Picioruş. 

 It cannot be printed and 
 commercialized 

without 
his direct accord. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Rev. D.Th. Dorin Octavian Picioruş 

© Theology for Today 
All the rights reserved 

 
 
 
 
 
 

