n

MMHM

UlilWIIIWWII

kjs;ks*) *m.>,~.. -.m,* *?*-mr**.

.:.....,

.

...'...v...:,

..

WsSKi *vVfW*>M'HJ

Presented to the

library of the
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

hy
The Estate of the late
PROFESSOR A. S. P. WOODHOUSE
Head of the

Department of English

University Colleoe

1944-1964

A SELECT LIBRARY

OF THE

NICENE AND POST-NICENE FATHERS

OF

THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH.

EDITED BY

PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D., LL.D.,
PROFESSOR IN THE UNION THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY, NEW YORK.

IN CONNECTION WITH A NUMBER OF PATRISTIC SCHOLARS OF EUROPE
AND AMERICA.

VOLUME III.

ST. AUGUSTIN:

ON THE HOLY TRINITY.
DOCTRINAL TREATISES.
MORAL TREATISES.

BUFFALO
THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE COMPANY

bo

M ^,,-TKr-n',,

APR 1 3 1965

^*S/TV OF VO*<^

--. .-- ..-

97465?

Copyright, 1887, by

THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE COMPANY.

Electrotyped and Printed bv

The Publishers' Book Composition and Electrotyping Co.,
157 & 159 William St., New York.

PREFACE.

This third volume contains the most important doctrinal and moral treatises of St. Augus-

tin, and presents a pretty complete view of his dogmatics and ethics.

The most weighty of the doctrinal treatises is that on the Holy Trinity. The Latin original
[De Trinitate contra Arianos libri quindecini), is contained in the 8th volume of the BenedicIt is the most elaborate, and probably also the ablest and profoundest patristine edition.
tic discussion of this central doctrine of the Christian religion, unless we except the Orations
against the A nans, by Athanasius,
" the Father of Orthodoxy," who devoted his life to the
defense of the Divinity of Christ.
Augustin, owing to his defective knowledge of Greek,
wrote his work independently of the previous treatises of the Eastern Church on that subject.
He bestowed more time and care upon it than on any other book, except the City of God.

The value of the present translation, which first appeared in Mr. Clark's edition, 1873,
has been much increased by the revision, the introductory essay, and the critical notes of a
distinguished American divine, who is in full sympathy with St. Augustin, and thoroughly
at home in the history of this dogma.
I could not have intrusted it to abler hands than
those of my friend and colleague, Dr. Shedd.

The moral treatises (contained in the 6th volume of the Benedictine edition) were first
They contain much that will
translated for the Oxford Library of the Fathers (1847).
instruct and interest the reader ; while some views will appear strange to those who fail to
distinguish between different ages and different types of virtue and piety.
Augustin shared
with the Greek and Latin fathers the ascetic preference for voluntary celibacy and poverty.
He accepted the distinction which dates from the second century, between two kinds of
morality : a lower morality of the common people, which consists in keeping the ten commandments; and a higher sanctity of the elect few, which observes, in addition, the evangelical counsels, so called, or the monastic virtues. He practiced this doctrine after his converHe ought to have married the mother of his son; but in devoting himself to the
priesthood, he felt it his duty to remain unmarried, according to the prevailing spirit of the
His teacher, Ambrose, and his older contemporary, Jerome, went still
church in his age.
further in the enthusiastic praise of single life. We must admire their power of self-denial and
undivided consecration, though we may dissent from their theory.

sion.

1 On the ascetic tendencies of the second and third centuries, and the gradual introduction of clerical celibacy (which began with

a decree of Eishop Siricius of Rome, 385), see Schaff, Church Hist., vol. ii. 367-414, and vol. iii. 242-250.

i v

PREFACE.

The asceticism of the early church was a reaction against the awful sexual corruption of
It

surrounding heathenism, and with all its excesses it accomplished a great deal of good.
The fathers appealed to the example of Christ,
prepared the way for Christian family life.
who in this respect, as the Son of God, stood above ordinary human relations, and the
advice of St. Paul, which was given in view of "the present distress," in times of persecution.
They deemed single life better adapted to the undivided service of Christ and his church than
the married state with its unavoidable secular cares (i Cor. vii. 25 sqq.). Augustin expresses
this view when he says, on Virginity,

27 :

" Therefore go on, Saints of God. boys and girls, males and females, unmarried men and
Praise more sweetly the Lord, whom ye think
women ; go on and persevere unto the end.
on more richly ; hope more happily in Him, whom ye serve more earnestly ; love more
ardently Him, whom ye please more attentively. With loins girded, and lamps burning, wait
for the Lord, when He returns from the marriage. Ye shall bring unto the marriage of the
Lamb a new song, which ye shall sing on your harps."

The Reformation has abolished the system of monasticism and clerical celibacy, and
substituted for it, as the normal condition for the clergy as well as the laity, the purity,
chastity and beauty of family life, instituted by God in Paradise and sanctioned by our
Saviour's presence at the wedding at Cana.

New York, March, 1887

CONTENTS.

Preface.
I. DOCTRINAL TREATISES OF ST. AUGUSTIN.

On the Holy Trinity. .......... 1-228
The Enchiridion. .......... 237-276

Translated by the Rev. Arthur West Haddan, B.D.
Revised and annotated, together with an introductory essay, by

the Rev. Professor W. G. T. Shedd, D.D.

Translated by Professor J. F. Shaw.

PAGE

ill.

On the Catechising of the Uninstructed

Translated by the Rev. Professor S. D. F. S almond, D.D.

On Faith and the Creed

Translated by the Rev. Professor S. D. F. Salmond, D.D.

Concerning Faith of Things not Seen.
Translated by the Rev. C. L. Cornish, M.A.

On the Profit of Believing.

2S2-314

3 21 ~333

337-343

347-366

Translated by the Rev. C. L. Cornish, M.A.

( Translated by the Rev. H. Browne, M.A.

On the Creed : A Sermon to Catechumens. .... 369-375
Of Continence. ........... 379-393

II. MORAL TREATISES OF ST. AUGUSTIN.

Translated by the Rev. C. L. Cornish, M.A.

On the Good of Marriage.

Translated by the Rev. C. L. Cornish, M.A.

Of Holy Virginity.

Translated by the Rev. C. L. Cornish, M.A.

On the Good of Widowhood

Translated by the Rev. C. L. Cornish, M.A.

On Lying.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Translated by the Rev. H. Browne, M.A.

To Consentius :

Against Lying.

Translated by the Rev. H. Browne, M.A.

Of the Work of Monks.

.

Translated by the Rev. H. Browne, M.A.

On Patience.

Translated by the Rev. H. Browne, M.A.

On Care to be had for the Dead. ...

Translated by the Rev. H. Browne, M.A.

397-4 J 3

417-438

441-454

457-477

.

481-500

503-524

527-536

.

539~55 r

Index to On the Holy Trinity.

Index to Fifteen Doctrinal and Moral Treatises. ..... 560-578

ST. AUGUSTIN:

ON THE TRINITY.

[DE TRINITATE, LIBRI XV.]

TRANSLATED BY THE

REV. ARTHUR WEST HADDAN, B.D.,
HON. CANON OF WORCESTER, AND RECTOR OF BARTON-ON-THE-HEATH, WARWICKSHIRE.

REVISED AND ANNOTATED, WITH AN INTRODUCTORY ESSAY,

BY

WILLIAM G. T. SHEDD, D.D.,
ROOSEVELT PROFESSOR OF SYSTEMATIC THEOLOGY IN UNION THEOLOGICALSEMINARY, NEW YORK.

INTRODUCTORY ESSAY.

By William G. T. Shedd, D.D.

The doctrine of the Divine Unity is a truth of natural religion; the doctrine of the
The various systems of natural theism present
Trinity is a truth of revealed religion.
arguments for the Divine existence, unity, and attributes, but proceed no further.
They
do not assert and endeavor to demonstrate that the Supreme Being is three persons in one
It is because this doctrine is not discoverable by human reason, that the Christian
essence.
church has been somewhat shy of attempts to construct it analytically; or even to defend it
The keen Dr. South expresses the common sentiment, when he
upon grounds of reason.
remarks that
as he that denies this fundamental article of the Christian religion may lose
his soul, so he that much strives to understand it may lose his wits."
Yet all the truths of
revelation, like those of natural religion, have in them the element of reason, and are
At the very least their self-consistence can be shown, and
capable of a rational defense.
objections to them can be answered.
For one of the
surest characteristics of reason is, freedom from self contradiction, and consonance with
acknowledged truths in other provinces of human inquiry and belief.

And this is a rational process.

"

It is a remarkable fact, that the earlier forms of Trinitarianism are among the most
The controversy with the Arian
metaphysical and speculative of any in dogmatic history.
and the* Semi-Arian, brought out a statement and defense of the truth, not only upon
Such a powerful dialectician as Athanasius, while
scriptural but ontological grounds.
thoroughly and intensely scriptural
while starting from the text of scripture, and subjecting
did not hesitate to pursue the Arian and Semi-Arian dialectics to its
it to a rigorous exegesis
If any one doubts this, let him read the four
most recondite fallacy in its subtlest recesses.
Orations of Athanasius, and his defence of the Nicene Decrees. In some sections of Christendom, it has been contended that the doctrine of the Trinity should be received without any
attempt at all to establish its rationality and intrinsic necessity.
In this case, the tenets of
eternal generation and procession have been regarded as going beyond the Scripture data,
and if not positively rejected, have been thought to hinder rather than assist faith in three
divine persons and one God.
But the history of opinions shows that such sections of the
church have not proved to be the strongest defenders of the Scripture statement, nor the
most successful in keeping clear of the Sabellian, Arian, or even Socinian departure from it.
Those churches which have followed Scripture most implicitly, and have most feared
human speculation, are the very churches which have inserted into their creeds the most
The
highly analytic statement that has yet been made of the doctrine of the Trinity.
Nicene Trinitarianism is incorporated into nearly all the symbols of modern Christendom;
and this specifies, particularly, the tenets of eternal generation and procession with their
The English Church, to whose great divines, Hooker, Bull, Waterland, and
corollaries.
Pearson, scientific Trinitarianism owes a very lucid and careful statement, has added the
The Presbyterian churches, distinguished for the closeAthanasian creed to the Nicene.
ness of their adherence to the simple Scripture, yet call upon their membership to confess,

that "in the unity of the Godhead there be three persons, of one substance, power, and
The Father is of none,
eternity; God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost.
neither begotten nor proceeding; the Son is eternally begotten of the Father; the Holy
Ghost eternally proceeding from the Father and the Son." '

The treatise of Augustin upon the Trinity, which is here made accessible to the English
The author devoted nearly thirty
reader, is one of the ablest produced in the patristic age.
years of his matured life to its composition (a. d. 400 to 428). He was continually touching and retouching it, and would have delayed its publication longer than he did, had a
He seems to have derived little ascopy not been obtained surreptitiously and published.
Athanasius, the two Gresistance from others; for although the great Greek Trinitarians
had published their treatises, yet he informs us that his knowledge of
gories, and Basil
Greek, though sufficient for understanding the exegetical and practical writings of his brethren of the Greek Church, was not adequate to the best use of their dialectical and metaphy2 Accordingly, there is no trace in this work of the writings of the Greek
sical compositions.
The only Trinitarian author to
Trinitarians, though a substantial agreement with them.
whom he alludes is Hilary

a highly acute and abstruse Trinitarian.
In his general position, Augustin agrees with the Nicene creed; but laying more emphasis upon the consubstantiality of the persons, and definitely asserting the procession of
Some dogmatic historians seem to imply that he diffthe Spirit from the Father and Son.
ered materially from the Nicene doctrine on the point of subordination.
Hagenbach (Smith's
95) asserts that "Augustin completely purified the dogma of the Trinity from the
Ed.
older vestiges of subordination;" and adds that "such vestiges are unquestionably to be
found in the most orthodox Fathers, not only in the East but also in the West." He cites
Hilary and Athanasius as examples, and quotes the remark of Gieseler, that '
' the idea of
Neander (II. 470, Note 2) says
a subordination lies at the basis of such declarations."
These
that Augustin
statements are certainly too sweeping and unqualified.
There are three kinds of subordiThe first is taught, and
nation: the filial or trinitarian; the theanthropic; and the Arian.
the second implied, in the Nicene creed.
Accordingly,
dogmatic historians like Petavius, Bull, Waterland, and Pearson, contend that the Nicene
creed, in affirming the filial, but denying the Arian subordination; in teaching subordination as to person and relationship, but denying it as to essence; enunciates a revealed truth,
and that this is endorsed by all the Trinitarian fathers, Eastern and Western. And there
certainly can be no doubt that Augustin held this view. He maintains, over and over
again, that Sonship as a relationship is second and subordinate to Fatherhood; that while a
Divine Father and a Divine Son must necessarily be of the very same nature and grade of
being, like a human father and a human son, yet the latter issues from the former, not the
former from the latter.
Augustus's phraseology on this point is as positive as that of
Athanasius, and in some respects even more bold and capable of misinterpretation. He
denominates the Father the "beginning" (principium) of the Son, and the Father and Son
the "beginning" (principium) of the Holy Spirit. "The Father is the beginning of the
whole divinity, or if it is better so expressed, deity."
In their mutual relation to one another in the Trinity itself, if the begetter is a beginning (principium) in rela-

kept at a distance everything that bordered on subordinationism.

The last is denied and excluded.

IV. xx. 29.

"

"

"

1 Westminster Confession, II. iii.
2 That Augustin had considerable acquaintance with Greek is proved by his many references and citations throughout his writings.
In this work, see XII. vii. n; XII. x iv. 22 ; XIII. x. 14; XIV. i. 1; XV. ix. 15.
His statement in III. i. 1, is, that he was " not sff
familiar with the Greek tongue (Greece lingua non sit nobis tantus hab-itus), as to be able to read and understand the books that
treat of such [metaphysical] topics."
In V. viii. lo^he remarks that he does not comprehend the distinction which the Greek Trinitarians make between ovaia and VTrdoraais; which shows that he had not read the work of Gregory of Nyssa, in which it is defined
with great clearness. One may have a good knowledge of a language for general purposes, and yet be unfamiliar with its philosophical nomenclature.

INTRODUCTORY ESSAY.

tion to that which he begets, the Father is a beginning in relation to the Son, because he
begets Him." V. xiv. 15.
Since the Holy Spirit proceeds from both Father and Son,
"
the Father and Son are a beginning (principium) of the Holy Spirit, not two beginnings."
Augustin emThere is no
Consequently, the "suborbeginning" by generation and spiration) is not the Arian subordi-

V. xiv.
ploys this term
"beginning," or source, when the essence itself is spoken of.
dination" (implied in a
nation, as to essence, but the trinitarian subordination, as to person and relation. 1

beginning" only in relation to the person, not to the essence.

Compare also V. xiii.; X. iv. ; and annotations pp.

15.

"

"

in his mental constitution.

Augustin starts with the assumption that man was made in the image of the triune God,
the God of revelation; not in the image of the God of natural religion, or the untriune deity
Consequently, it is to be expected that a trinitarian analogue can be found
of the nations.
If man is God's image, he will show traces of it in every reAll acknowledge that the Divine unity, and all the communicable attributes, have
spect.
their finite correspondants in the unity and attributes of the human mind.
But the Latin
father goes further than this.
This, in his view, is not the whole of the Divine image.
When God says, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness" (Gen. i. 26), Augustin understands these words to be spoken by the Trinity, and of the Trinity
by and of
the true God, the God of revelation: the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, one God. He denies that this is merely the pluralis excellentice, and that the meaning of these words would
Let me make
be expressed by a change of the plural to the singular, and to the reading,
" For if the Father alone had made man without
man in my image, after my likeness."
the Son, it would not have been written, 'Let us make man in our image, after our likeness/"
In Augustin's opinion, the Old Testament declaration that God is a unity, does not exclude the New Testament declaration
' Hear O Israel: the Lord our
that he is a trinity.
God is one Lord '
ought certainly not to be understood as if the Son were excepted, or the
Holy Spirit were excepted; which one Lord our God we rightly call our Father, as regeneTrinity V. xi. 12. How far Moses understood the full meaning
rating us by his grace."
Who it really and actually was
of the Divine communication and instruction, is one thing.
that made the communication to him, is another.
Even if we assume, though with insufficient reason for so doing, that Moses himself had no intimation of the Trinity, it does not
The
follow that it was not the Trinity that inspired him, and all the Hebrew prophets.
apostle Peter teaches that the Old Testament inspiration was a Trinitarian inspiration, when
he says that "the prophets who prophesied of the grace that should come, searched what
the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand of the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow."

City of God XVI. vi. ; Trinity I. vii. 14.

" For" says he,

that which is written,

(1 Pet. i. 10, n).

"

"

In asserting, however, that an image of the Trinity exists in man's nature, Augustin
is careful to observe that it is utterly imperfect and inadequate. He has no thought or expectation of clearing up the mystery by any analogy whatever. He often gives expression
to his sense of the inscrutability and incomprehensibility of the Supreme Being, in language
"
I pray to our Lord God himself, of whom
of the most lowly and awe-struck adoration.
we ought always to think, and yet of whom we are not able to think worthily, and whom no
speech is sufficient to declare, that He will grant me both help for understanding and ex-
' O Lord the
plaining that which I design, and pardon if in anything I offend."
one God, God the Trinity, whatever I have said in these books that is of Thine, may they
acknowledge who are Thine; if anything of my own, may it be pardoned both by Thee and
by those who are Thine.

Amen." XV. xxviii.

V. i.

1.

1 For an analysis of Augustin's Trinitarianism, see Bauv : Dreieinigkeitslehre I. 828-885 ; Gangauf : Des A ugustinus speculative

Lehre von Gott dem Dreieinigcn; Schaff: History, iii. 684 sq.

*

Augustin's method in this work is (i.) The exegetical; (2.) The rational. He first
deduces the doctrine of the Trinity from Scripture, by a careful collation and combination
of the texts, and then defends it against objections, and illustrates it by the analogies which
The Scripture argument
he finds in nature generally, and in the human mind particularly.
The first part is, of
is contained in the first seven books; the rational in the last eight.
Though the reader may not be able to agree with
course, the most valuable of the two.
Augustin in his interpretation of some Scripture passages, particularly some which he cites
from the Old Testament, he will certainly be impressed by the depth, acumen, and accuracy
with which the Latin father reaches and exhausts the meaning of the acknowledged trinitarian
Augustin lived in an age when the Scriptures and the Greek and Roman classics
texts.
There
were nearly all that the student had, upon which to expend his intellectual force.
was considerable metaphysics, it is true, but no physics, and little mathematics.
There was
consequently a more undivided and exclusive attention bestowed upon revealed religion as
embodied in the Scriptures, and upon ethics and natural religion as contained in the classics,
One result was
than has ever been bestowed by any subsequent period in Christendom.
that scripture was expounded by scripture; things spiritual by things spiritual. This appears
Augustin reasons out of the Scriptures; not out of
in the exegetical part of this treatise.
metaphysics or physics.

The second, or speculative division of the work, is that which will be most foreign to
In it they will find what seems to them to be a philosothe thinking of some trinitarians.
phy, rather than an interpretation of the word of God. We shall, therefore, in this introductory essay, specify some of the advantages, as it seems to us, of the general method of
defending and illustrating the doctrine of the Trinity employed by Augustin and the patristic Trinitarians.

Revelation denominates the
These terms

1. Fuller justice is done to Scripture by this method.

"

in

the

paternity

literal, not
essence.
"

first trinitarian person the Father, the second the Son, the third the Spirit.
are

relations denoted by them are
that

metaphorical; because the
Scripture clearly teaches

eternally
such from eternity.
the Father is
(implied in the name Father) can no more be ascribed
Consequently,
to the first person of the Godhead in a figurative sense, than eternity can be.
For
a person that is a father must be so in relation to a son. No son, no father,
ConseAnd the same reasoning holds true of the
quently, an eternal Father implies an eternal Son.
The terms Father, Son, and Spirit, in the baprelation of the Father and Son to the Spirit.
tismal formula and the apostolic benediction, must designate primary and eternal distincThe rite that initiates into the kingdom of God, certainly would not be administered
tions.
in three names that denote only assumed and temporal relations of God; nor would blessings for time and eternity be invoked from God under such secondary names.

Hence, these trinal names given to God in the baptismal formula and the apostolic benediction, actually force upon the trinitarian theologian, the ideas of paternity, generation, .
filiation, spiration, and procession. He cannot reflect upon the implication of these names
without forming these ideas, and finding himself necessitated to concede their literal validity and objective reality. He cannot say that the first person is the Father, and then deny
that he "begets." He cannot say that the second person is the Son, and then deny that he
is "begotten." He cannot say that the third person is the Spirit, and then deny that he
'proceeds" by "spiration" (spiritus quia spiratus) from the Father and Son. When
therefore Augustin, like the primitive fathers generally, endeavors to illustrate this eternal,
necessary, and constitutional energizing and activity {opera ad intra) in the Divine Essence,
whereby the Son issues from the Father and the Spirit from Father and Son, by the emanation of sunbeam from sun, light from light, river from fountain, thought from mind, word

INTRODUCTORY ESSAY.

from thought when the ternaries from nature and the human mind are introduced to elucinothing more is done than when by other well-known and commonly
date the Trinity
adopted analogies the Divine unity, or omniscence, or omnipresence, is sought to be illusThere is no analogy taken from the finite that will clear up the mystery of the intrated.
finite
But, at the
same time, by the use of these analogies the mind is kept close up to the Biblical term or
statement, and is not allowed to content itself with only a half-way understanding of it. Such
a method brings thoroughness and clearness into the interpretation of the Word of God.

whether it be the mystery of the eternity of God, or that of his trinity.

2. A second advantage in this method is, that it shows the doctrine of the Trinity to be
The Deistical conception of the Divine unity
The former is that of natural religion, formed by
The latter is that of
The Deistical unity is mere
The latter a true
The latter is a pleni-

inseparable from that of the Unity of God.
is wholly different from the Christian.
the unassisted human mind in its reflection upon the Supreme Being.
revealed religion, given to the human mind by inspiration.
The Christian unity is a trinality.
singleness.
unity, and union.
.tnde

The former is meagre, having few contents.

the fullness of the Godhead "

what St. Paul denominates "

The former is a unit.

{rdiipui(iazri <i6e6TrjTo<s).

Coloss. i. 9.

It follows, consequently, that the Divine unity cannot be discussed by itself without
reference to trinality, as the Deist and the Socinian endeavor to do. 1
Trinality belongs as
necessarily and intrinsically to the Divine unity as eternity does to the Divine essence.
"If," says Athanasius (Oration I. 17) "there was not a Blessed Trinity from eternity, but
only a unity existed first, which at length became a Trinity, it follows that the Holy Trinity
must have been at one time imperfect, and at another time entire: imperfect until the Son
If we follow the
came to be created, as the Arians maintain, and then entire afterwards."
teachings of Revelation, and adopt the revealed idea of God, we may not discuss mere and
simple unity, nor mere and simple trinality; but we must discuss unity in trinality, and
trinality in unity. We may not think of a monad which originally, and in the order either
The instant there is a monad, there
of nature or of time, is not trinal, but becomes so.
The
is a triad; the instant there is a unity, there are Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Christian Trinity is not that of Sabellius: namely, an original untrinal monad that subsequently, in the order of nature if not of time, becomes a triad; whereby four factors are
There is no priintroduced into the problem.
mary monad, as such, and without trinality, to which the three distinctions are secondary
The monad, or essence, never exists in and by itself as untrinalized, as in the
adjuncts.
The Essence,
Sabellian scheme.
consequently, is not prior to the Persons, either in the order of nature or of time, nor subsequent to them, but simultaneously and eternally in and with them.

It exists only" as in the three Persons; only as trinalized.

God is not one and three, but one in three.

The Primitive church took this ground with confidence.

The term God meant for them the Trinity. A "

Unity and trinality were intheologian," in
separable in their view.
They called the Apostle John 6 OeoAop^, because
their nomenclature, was a trinitarian.
he was enlightened by the Holy Spirit to make fuller disclosures, in the preface to his Gospel, concerning the deity of the Logos and the doctrine of the Trinity, than were the other
evangelists. And they gave the same epithet to Gregory Nazianzum, because of the acumen
This work of Augustin adopts the same position,
and insight of his trinitarian treatises.
and defends it with an ability second to none.

3. A third advantage of this method of illustrating the doctrine of the Trinity is, that
it goes to show that the personality of God depends upon the trinality of the Divine Essence

i The Mohammedan conception of the Divine Unity, also, is deistic.

In energetically rejecting the doctrine of the Trinity, the Mo-

hammedan is the Oriental Unitarian.

-

that if there are no interior distinctions in the Infinite Being, he cannot be self-contem-

plative, self-cognitive, or self-communing.

This is an important and valuable feature of the method in question, when viewed in
This

its bearing upon the modern assertion that an Infinite Being cannot be personal.
treatise of Augustin does not develope the problem upon this point, but it leads to it.
illustrating the Trinity by the ternaries in nature, and especially in the human mind, he
aims only^to show that trinality of a certain kind does not conflict with unity of a certain
Augustin is conkind.
The elucidation of the Divine
tent with elucidating the Divine unity by such illustrations.
personality by them, was not attempted in his day nor in the Medieval and Reformation
The conflict with pantheism forced this point upon the attention of the Modern

Memory, understanding, and will are three faculties, yet one soul.

churches.

In

_

church.

At the same time, these Christian fathers who took the problem of the Trinity into the
centre of the Divine essence, and endeavored to show its necessary grounds there, prepared
the way for showing, by the same method, that trinality is not only consistent with personIn a brief essay like this, only the briefest hints
ality, but is actually indispensable to it.
can be indicated.

If God is personal, he is self-conscious.

Self-consciousness is, (i), the power which a
rational spirit, or mind, has of making itself its own object; and, (2), of knowing that it
If the first step is taken, and not the second, there is no self-consciousness.
has done so.
For the subject would not know that the object is the self. And the second step cannot be
These two acts of a rational spirit, or mind, involve three
taken, if the first has not been.
The whole mind as a subject contemplates the very
distinctions in it, or three modes of it.
Here are two distinctions, or modes of one mind. And
same whole mind as an object.
the very same whole mind perceives that the contemplating subject and the contemplated
Here are three modes of one mind, each
object are one and the same essence or being.
Undistinct from the others, yet all three going to make up the one self-conscious spirit.
Mere singleless there were these three distinctions, there would be no self-knowledge.
ness, a mere subject without an object, is incompatible with self-consciousness.

In denying distinctions in the Divine Essence, while asserting its personality, Deism,
with Socinianism and Mohammedanism, contends that God can be self-knowing and selfThe controversy, consequently, is as
communing as a single subject without an object.
much between the deist and the psychologist, as it is between him and the trinitarian.
It
is as much a question whether his view of personality and self-consciousness is correct, as
whether his interpretation of Scripture is.
For the dispute involves the necessary condiIf a true psychology does not require trinality in a spiritual essence
tions of personality.
in order to its own self-contemplation, and self-knowledge, and self-communion, then the
That the study of self-consciousness in
deist is correct; but if it does, then he is in error.
modern metaphysics has favored trinitarianism, is unquestionable.
Even the spurious trinitarianism which has grown up in the schools of the later pantheism goes to show, that a
trinal constitution is requisite in an essence, in order to explain self-consciousness, and that
absolute singleness, or the absence of all interior distinctions, renders the problem insoluble. 1
But the authority of Scripture is higher than that of psychology, and settles the matter.
Revelation unquestionably discloses a deity who is
blessed forever;" whose blessedness
is independent of the universe which he has made from nonentity, and who must therefore
find all the conditions of blessedness within himself alone. He is blessed from eternity, in
his own self-contemplation and self-communion. He does not need the universe in order

"

1 " That view of the divine nature which makes it inconsistent with the Incarnation and Trinity is philosophically imperfect, as

well as scnpturally incorrect."

H. B. Smith: Faith and Philosophy, p. 191.

INTRODUCTORY ESSAY.

Prior to creation, the Eternal Wisdom "

"The Father knoweth the Son," from all eternity (Matt. xi. 27); and "
"

that he may have an object which he can know, which he can love, and over which he can
loveth
rejoice.
the Son," from all eternity (John iii. 35); and
glorifieth the Son," from all eternity (John
was by Him as one brought up with Him,
xvii. 5).
and was daily His delight, rejoicing always before Him" (Prov. viii. 30); and the Eternal
Word "was in the beginning with God" (John i. 2); and "the Only Begotten Son (or God
Only Begotten, as the uncials read) was eternally in the bosom of the Father" (John i. 18).
Here is society within the Essence, and wholly independent of the universe; and communion and blessedness resulting therefrom.
But this is impossible to an essence without
Not the singular Unit of the deist, but the plural Unity of the trinpersonal distinctions.
itarian, explains this. A subject without an object could not know.
What is there to bs
known ?
Could not rejoice. What is there
to rejoice over ? And the object cannot be the universe.
The infinite and eternal object of
God's infinite and eternal knowledge, love, and joy, cannot be his creation: because this is
There was a time when the universe was not; and if God's selfneither eternal, nor infinite.
consciousness and blessedness depends upon the universe, there was a time when God was
The objective God for the subjective God must, thereneither self-conscious nor blessed.
fore, be very God of very God, begotten not made, the eternal Son of the eternal Father.

What is there to be loved ?

Could not love.

The same line of reasoning applies to the thifd trinitarian person, but there is no need
The history of opinion shows, that if the first two eternal distinc-

of going through with it.
tions are conceded, there is no denial of the reality and eternity of the third. '

is dependent upon the universe.

The analogue derived from the nature of finite personality and self-consciousness has
one great advantage
namely, that it illustrates the independence of the Divine personality
The later pantheism (not the earlier of Spinoza) constructs a kind
and self-consciousness.
God distinguishes Himself from the
of trinity, but it
world, and thereby finds the object required for the subject.
But this implies either that
The Christian trinithe world is eternal, or else, that God is not eternally self-conscious.
tarianism, on the contrary, finds all the media and conditions of self-consciousness within
The
the Divine Essence.
eternal Father beholds himself in the eternal Son, his alter ego, the "express image of his
own person" (Heb. i. 3). God does not struggle gradually into self-consciousness, as in the
Before that universe was in existence, and
Hegelian scheme, by the help of the universe.
in the solitude of his own eternity and self-sufficiency, he had within his own essence all the
And after the worlds were called into being,
media and conditions of self-consciousness.
the Divine personality remained the same immutable and infinite self-knowledge, unaffected
by anything in his handiwork.

God distinguishes himself from himself, not from the universe.

" O Light Eterne, sole in thyself that dwellest,
Sole knowest thyself, and known unto thyself,
"
And knowing, lovest and smilest on thyself !

Dante: Paradise xxxiii. 125.

While, however, this analogue from the conditions of

namely, memory, understanding, and will
is inadequate.

finite personality approaches
nearer to the eternal distinctions in the Godhead than does that ternary which Augustin
yet like all finite analogies to the Inemploys
For the subject-ego, object-ego, and ego-percipient, are not so
finite
essentially distinct and completely objective to each other, as are the Father, Son, and
They cannot employ the personal pronouns in reference to each other.
Holy Spirit.
They cannot reciprocally perform acts and discharge functions towards each other, like the

it

1 Upon the necessary conditions of self consciousness in God, see Miiller: On Sin, II. 136 sq. (Urwick's Trans); Dorner: Christian
Doctrine, I. 412-465; Christlieb: Modern Doubt, Lecture III.; Kurtz: Sacred History,
89,90;
Wilberforce: Incarnation, Chapter III; Kidd: On the Trinity, with Candlish's Introduction; Shedd: History 0/ Doctrine, I. 365-368.

2; Billroth: Religions Philosophic,

Revelation is explicit upon this point.

It specifies at least the following
Divine Three.
twelve actions and relations, that incontestably prove the conscious distinctness and mutual
One divine person loves another (John iii. 35);
objectivity of the persons of the Trinity.
dwells in another (John xiv. 10, 11); knows another (Matt., xi. 27); sends another (Gen.
xvi. 7); suffers from another (Zech. xiii. 7-13); addresses another (Heb. i. 8); is the way
to another (John xiv. 6); speaks of another (Luke iii. 22;) glorifies another (John xvii. 5);
ix. 6): rewards another
confers with another (Gen. i. 26; xi. 7); plans with another (Is.
(Phil. ii. 5-11; Heb. ii. 9).

Such are some of the salient features of this important treatise upon the Trinity.
has its defects; but they pertain to the form more thar to the matter; to arrangement and
Literary excellence is no. the forte of the patristic writers.
style more than to dogma.
Lactantius among the Latins, and Chrysostom
Hardly any of them are literary artists.
among the Greeks, are almost the only fathers that have rhetorical grace. And none of
them approach the beauty of the classic writers, as seen in the harmomous flow and diction
of Plato, and the exquisite finish of Horace and Catullus.

It

Augustin is prolix, repetitious, and sometimes leaves his theme to discuss cognate but
This appears more in the last eight chapters, which are speculadistantly related subjects.
The material in this second division is
tive, than in the first seven, which are scriptural.
capable of considerable compression. The author frequently employs two illustrations when
He discusses many themes
one would suffice, and three or more when two are enough.
which are not strictly trinitarian.

Yet the patient student will derive some benefit from this discursiveness. He will find,
for example, in this treatise on the Trinity, an able examination of the subject of miracles
(Book III); of creation ex nihilo (III. ix); of vicarious atonement (IV. vii-xiv); of the faculty of memory (XI. x); and, incidentally, many other high themes are touched upon.
Before such a contemplative intellect as that of Augustin, all truth lay spread out like the
Conocean, with no limits and no separating chasms.
sequently, one doctrine inevitably leads to and merges in another, and the eager and intense inquirer rushes forward, and outward, and upward, and downward, in every direction.
The neglect
The only aim is to see all that can be seen, and state all that can be stated.
of the form, and the anxiety after the substance, contribute to the discursiveness.
Caring
little for proportion in method, and nothing for elegance in diction, the writer, though
bringing forth a vast amount of truth, does it at the expense of clearness, conciseness, and
one of the most voluminous and
grace.
prolix of authors, yet one of the most original, suggestive, and fertilizing of any.

Such is the case with the North African father

Everything is connected and fluid.

It is the foundation of theology.

And this particular treatise is perhaps as pregnant and suggestive as any that Augustin,
The doctrine of the Trinity is the most immense
or any other theologian, ever composed.
of all the doctrines of religion.
Christianity, in the last
Take out of the New Testament the persons of the Father, the
analysis, is Trinitarianism.
Son, and the Holy Spirit, and there is no God left.
Take out of the Christian consciousness the thoughts and affections that relate to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
and there is no Christian consciousness left.
The Trinity is the constitutive idea of the
evangelical theology, and the formative idea of the evangelical experience.
The immensity of the doctrine makes it of necessity a mystery; but a mystery which like night enfolds
in its unfathomed depths the bright stars
points of light, compared with which there is no
light so keen and so glittering.
Mysterious as it is, the Trinity of Divine Revelation is the
doctrine that holds in it all the hope of man; for it holds within it the infinite pity of the Incarnation and the infinite mercy of the Redemption.

And it shares its mysteriousness with the doctrine of the Divine Eternity.

It is diffi-

INTRODUCTORY ESSAY.

i i

cult to say which is most baffling to human comprehension, the all-comprehending, simulYet no
taneous, successionless consciousness of the Infinite One, or his trinal personality.
theist rejects the doctrine of the Divine eternity because of its mystery. The two doctrines are
antithetic and correlative. On one of the Northern rivers that flows through a narrow chasm
whose depth no plummet has sounded, there stand two cliffs fronting each other, shooting
their pinnacles into the blue ether, and sending their roots down to the foundations of the
They have named them Trinity and Eternity.
So stand, antithetic and confrontearth.
ing, in the Christian scheme, the trinity and eternity of God.

The translation of this treatise is the work of the Rev. Arthur West Haddan, Hon.
Canon of Worcester, who, according to a note of the publisher, died while it was passing
It has been compared with the original, and a considerable number of
through the press.
The treatise is exceedingly difficult to render into English
alterations made.
probably the
The changes in some instances were necessary
most so of any in the author's writings.
from a misconception of the original; but more often for the purpose of making the meaning of the translator himself more clear.
It is believed that a comparison between the original and revised translation will show that the latter is the more intelligible.
At the same
time, the reviser would not be too confident that in every instance the exact meaning of
Augustin has been expressed, by either the translator or reviser.

The annotations of the reviser upon important points in the treatise, it is hoped, will
assist the reader in understanding Augustin's reasoning, and also throw some light upon the
doctrine of the Trinity.

New York, Feb. i, 1887.

William G. T. Shedd.

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.

The history of St. Augustin's treatise on the Trinity, as gathered by Tillemont and others from his own
It is placed by him in his Retractations among the works written (which in
allusions to it, may be briefly given.
the present case, it appears, must mean begun) in a.d. 400.
In letters of a.d. 410, 414, and at the end of a.d.
415 {Ad Consentium, Ep. 120, and two Ad Evodium, Epp. 162, 169), it is referred to as still unfinished and
But a letter of A.D. 412 {Ad Marcellinum, Ep. 143) intimates that friends were at that time imunpublished.
portuning him, although without success, to complete and publish it. And the letter to Aurelius, which was
sent to that bishop with the treatise itself when actually completed, informs us that a portion of it, wT hile it was
still unrevised and incomplete, was in fact surreptitiously made public,
a proceeding which the letters above
It was certainly still in hand in a.d. 416, inasmuch as
cited postpone apparently until at least after a.d. 415.
in Book XIII. a quotation occurs from the 12th Book of the Be Civitate Bei; and another quotation in Book
XV., irom the 90th lecture on St. John, indicates most probably a date of at least a year later, viz. a.d. 417.
The letter to Bishop Aurelius
The Retractations, which refer to it, are usually dated not later than a.d. 428.
also informs us that the work was many years in progress, and was begun in St. Augustin's early manhood, and
finished in his old age. We may infer from this evidence that it was written by him between a.d. 400, when he
was forty-six years old, and had been Bishop of Hippo about four years, and a.d. 428 at the latest; but prob-
" nonum
ably it was published ten or twelve years before this date. He writes of it, indeed, himself, as if the
prematnr in annum "
very inadequately represented the amount of deliberate and patient thought which a subject so profound and so sacred demanded, and which he had striven to give to it; and as if, even at the very
last, he shrank from publishing his work, and was only driven to do so in order to remedy the mischief of its
partial and unauthorized publication.

His motive for writing on the subject may be learned from the treatise itself.

It was not directed against
In fact, his labors upon it
any individual antagonist, or occasioned by any particular controversial emergency.
Certain ingenious and subtle
were, he says, continually interrupted by the distraction of such controversies.
theories respecting types or resemblances of the Holy Trinity, traceable in human nature as being the image of
God, seemed to him to supply, not indeed a logical proof, but a strong rational presumption, of the truth of the
doctrine itself; and thus to make it incumbent upon him to expound and unfold them in order to meet rationalizing objectors upon (so to say) their own ground. He is careful not to deal with these analogies or images as if
they either constituted a purely argumentative proof or exhausted the full meaning of the doctrine, upon both
which assumptions such speculations have at all times been the fruitful parent both of presumptious theorizing
But he nevertheless employs them more affirmatively than would perhaps have been
and of grievous heresy.
the case.
united, nevertheless, in the unity of a single human person,
that any presumption of reason against the Trinity
of persons in 'the Godhead is thereby, if not removed, at least materially and enormously lessened, St. Augustin
seems to argue positively from analogous grounds, as though they constituted a direct intimation of the doctrine
But he takes especial pains, at the same time, to dwell upon the incapacity of human thought to fathom
the depths of the nature of God; and he carefully prefaces his reasonings by a statement of the Scripture evidence of the catholic doctrine as a matter of faith and not of reason, and by an explanation of difficult texts
One of the most valuable portions, indeed, of the treatise is the eloquent and profound exupon the subject.
position given in this part of it of the rule of interpretation to be applied to Scripture language respecting the
It should be noticed, however, that a large proportion of St. Augustin's scriptural exegeperson of our Lord.

While modern theologians would argue negatively, from the triplicity of independent faculties,

itself.

, 4

SIS

IS founded upon a close verbal exposition of the old Latin version, and is frequently not borne out by
the original text. And the rule followed in rendering Scripture texts in the present translation has been, accordingly, wherever the argument in the context rests upon the variations of the old Latin, there to translate the
words as St. Augustin gives them, while adhering otherwise to the language of the authorized English version.
The reader's attention may allowably be drawn to the language of Book V. ex., and to its close resemblance to
some of the most remarkable phrases of the Athanasian Creed, and again to the striking passage respecting
miracles in Book III. C.V., and to that upon the nature of God at the beginning of Book V. ; the last named of
which seems to have suggested one of the profoundest passages in the profoundest of Dr. Newman's University
It may be added, that the writings of the Greek Fathers on the subject were, if
Sermons (p. 353, ed. 1843).
not wholly unknown, yet unfamiliar to Augustin, who quotes directly only the Latin work of Hilary of

Poictiers.

It remains to say, that the translation here printed was made about four years since by a friend of the writer
of this preface, and that the latter's share in the work has been that of thoroughly revising and correcting it, and
of seeing it through the press. He is therefore answerable for the work as now published.

A. W. HADDAN.

Nov. 5, 1872.

In the Retractations (ii. 15) Augustin speaks of this work in the following terms:
"

I spent some years in writing fifteen books concerning the Trinity, which is God.

When, however, I
had not yet finished the thirteenth Book, and some who were exceedingly anxious to have the work were kept
waiting longer than they could bear, it was stolen from me in a less correct state than it either could or would
have been had it appeared when I intended. And as soon as I discovered this, having other copies of it, I had
determined at first not to publish it myself, but to mention what had happened in the matter in some other
work; but at the urgent request of brethren, whom I could not refuse, I corrected it as much as I thought fit,
and finished and published it, with the addition, at the beginning, of a letter that I had written to the venerable Aurelius, Bishop of Carthage, in which I set forth, in the way of prologue, what had happened, what I had
intended to do of myself, and what love of my brethren had forced me to do."

The letter to which he here alludes is the following :
" To the most blessed Lord, whom he reveres with most sincere love, to his holy brother and fellow- priest,

Pope Aurelius, Augustin sends health in the Lord.

"

I began as a very young man, and have published in my old age, some books concerning the Trinity,
who is the supreme and true God.
I had in truth laid the work aside, upon discovering that it had been prematurely, or rather surreptitiously, stolen from me before I had completed it, and before I had revised and put the
For I had not designed to publish the Books one by one,
finishing touches to it, as had been my intention.
but all together, inasmuch as the progress of the inquiry led me to add the later ones to those which precede
When, therefore, these people had hindered the fulfillment of my purpose (in that some of them had obthem.
tained access to the work before I intended), I had given over dictating it, with the idea of making my complaint public in some other work that I might write, in order that whoso could might know that the Books had
not been published by myself, but had been taken away from my possession before they were in my own judgment fit for publication.
Compelled, however, by the eager demands of many of my brethren, and above all
by your command, I have taken the pains, by God's help, to complete the work, laborious as it is; and as now
corrected (not as I wished, but as I could, lest the Books should differ very widely from those which had surreptitiously got into people's hands), I have sent them to your Reverence by my very dear son and fellow-deacon,
and have allowed them to be heard, copied, and read by every one that pleases.
fulfilled my original intention, although they would have contained the same sentiments, they would have been
worked out much more thoroughly and clearly, so far as the difficulty of unfolding so profound a subject, and
so far, too, as my own powers, might have allowed.
There are some persons, however, who have the first four,
or rather five, Books without the prefaces, and the twelfth with no small part of its later chapters omitted.
But
these, if they please and can, will amend the whole, if they become acquainted with the present edition.
At
any rate, I have to request that you will order this letter to be prefixed separately, but at the beginning of the
Books.

Doubtless, if I could ha

Farewell.

Pray for me."

CONTENTS OF THE TRINITY.

Introductory Essay,

Translator's Preface,

BOOK I .

,

The unity and equality of the Trinity are demonstrated out of the Scriptures; and the true interpretation is

given of those texts which are wrongly alleged against the equality of the Son,

BOOK II.

The equality of the Trinity maintained against objections drawn from those texts which speak of the send-

ing of the Son and of the Holy Spirit,

The appearances of God to the Old Testament saints are discussed,

BOOK IV.

BOOK III.

Augustin explains for what the Son of God was sent; but, however, that the Son of God, although made
less by being sent, is not therefore less because the Father sent Him; nor yet the Holy Spirit less because both the Father sent Him and the Son

BOOK V.

He proceeds to refute those arguments which the heretics put forward, not out of the Scriptures, but from
their own conceptions. And first he refutes the objection, that to beget and to be begotten, or that to
be begotten and not-begotten, being different, are therefore different substances, and shows that these
things are spoken of God relatively, and not according to. substance,

BOOK VI.

In reply to the argument alleged against the equality of the Son from the apostle's words, saying that Christ
power of God and the wisdom of God," he propounds the question whether the Father Himis the <;
But deferring for a while the answer to this, he adduces further proof of the unity
self is not wisdom.
and equality of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit; and that God ought to be said and believed
to be a Trinity, not triple (triplicem). And he adds an explanation of the saying of Hilary
Eternity
in the Father, Appearance in the Image, and Use in the Gift

BOOK VII.

PAGE

He resolves the question he had deferred, and teaches us that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit is
one power and one wisdom, no otherwise than one God and one essence. And he then inquires how it
is that, in speaking of God, the Latins say, One essence, three persons; but the Greeks, One essence,
three substances or hypostases,

BOOK VIII.

He advances reasons to show not only that the Father is not greater than the Son, but that neither are both
together anything greater than the Holy Spirit, nor any two together in the same Trinity anything
greater than one, nor all three together anything greater than each singly. He also intimates that the
nature of God may be understood from our understanding of truth, from our knowledge of the supreme
good, and from our implanted love of righteousness; but above all, that our knowledge of God is to be
sought through love, in which he notices a trio of things which contains a trace of the Trinity, .

.

.115

1 6

CONTENTS.

BOOK IX.

He instructs us that there is a kind of trinity discernible in man, who is the image of God, viz. the mind,
and the knowledge by which the mind knows itself, and the love wherewith it loves both itself and its
own knowledge; these three being mutually equal and of one essence,

BOOK X.

That there is yet another and a more manifest trinity to be found in the mind of man, viz. in his memory,

understanding, and will,

BOOK XL

That even in the outer man some traces of a trinity may be detected, as e.g., in the bodily sight, and in the

recollection of objects seen with the bodily sight,

BOOK XII.

PAGE

After premising the difference between wisdom and knowledge, he points out a kind of trinity in that which
is properly called knowledge; but one which, although we have reached in it the inner man, is not yet
to be called the image of God,

BOOK XIII.
He expounds this trinity that he has found in knowledge by commending Christian faith, ...... 166
BOOK XIV.

He speaks of the true wisdom of man, viz. that by which he remembers, understands, and loves God; and
shows that it is in this very thing that the mind of man is the image of God, although his mind, which
is here renewed in the knowledge of God, will only then be made the (perfect likeness of God in that
image when there shall be a perfect sight of God,

He embraces in a brief compendium the contents of the previous books; and finally shows that the Trinity,
in the perfect sight of which consists the blessed lifethat is promised us, is here seen by us as in a glass
and in an enigma, so long as it is seen through that image of God which we ourselves are, .... igq

BOOK XV.

THE

FIFTEEN BOOKS OF AURELIUS AUGUSTINUS,
BISHOP OF HIPPO,
ON THE TRINITY.

BOOK I.
IN WHICH THE UNITY AND EQUALITY OF THE SUPREME TRINITY IS ESTABLISHED FROM THE SACRED SCRIPTURES, AND SOME TEXTS ALLEGED AGAINST THE EQUALITY OF THE SON ARE EXPLAINED.

CHAP. I.

THIS WORK IS WRITTEN AGAINST
THOSE WHO SOPHISTICALLY ASSAIL THE FAITH
OF THE TRINITY, THROUGH MISUSE OF REATHEY WHO DISPUTE CONCERNING GOD
SON.
ERR FROM A THREEFOLD CAUSE. HOLY SCRIPTURE, REMOVING WHAT IS FALSE, LEADS US
ON BY DEGREES TO THINGS DIVINE. WHAT
TRUE IMMORTALITY IS. WE ARE NOURISHED
BY FAITH, THAT WE MAY BE ENABLED TO
APPREHEND THINGS DIVINE.

1. The following dissertation concerning
the Trinity, as the reader ought to be informed, has been written in order to guard
against the sophistries of those who disdain
to begin with faith, and are deceived by a
crude and perverse love of reason. Now one
class of such men endeavor to transfer to
things incorporeal and spiritual the ideas they
have formed, whether through experience of
the bodily senses, or by natural human wit
and diligent quickness, or by the aid of art,
from things corporeal; so as to seek to measure and conceive of the former by the latter.
Others, again, frame whatever
sentiments
they may have concerning God according to
the nature or affections of the human mind;
and through this error they govern their discourse, in disputing concerning God, by disWhile yet a third
torted and fallacious rules.
class strive indeed to transcend the whole
creation, which doubtless is changeable, in

not,

and

cannot

substance, which

order to raise their thought to the unchangeais God; but being
ble
weighed down by the burden of mortality,
whilst they both would seem to know what
know what
they do
they would, preclude themselves from entering the very path of understanding, by an
over-bold affirmation of their own presumptuous judgments; choosing rather not to correct their own opinion when it
is perverse,
than to change that which they have once
And, indeed, this is the common
defended.
disease of all the three classes which I have
viz., both of those who frame
mentioned,
their thoughts of God according to things
corporeal, and of those who do so according
to the spiritual creature, such as is the soul;
and of those who neither regard the body nor
the spiritual creature, and yet think falsely
about God; and are indeed so much the further from the truth, that nothing can be found
answering to their conceptions, either in the
body, or in the made or created spirit, or in
For he who thinks, for
the Creator Himself.
instance, that God is white or red, is in error;
and yet these things are found in the body.
Again, he who thinks of God as now forgetting and now remembering, or anything of
the same kind, is none the less in error; and
But
yet these things are found in the mind.
he who thinks that God is of such power as
to have generated Himself, is so much the

i8

[Book I.

"

for

more in error, because not only does God not
so exist, but neither does the spiritual nor
there is nothing
the bodily creature;
whatever that generates its own existence .*

2. In order, therefore, that the human
mind might be purged from falsities of this
kind, Holy Scripture,which suits itself to babes,
has not avoided words drawn from any class of
things really existing, through which, as by
nourishment, our understanding might rise
gradually to things divine and transcendent.
For, in speaking of God, it has both used
words taken from things corporeal, as when
" Hide me under the shadow of Thy
it says,
2 and it has borrowed many things
wings;"
from the spiritual creature, whereby to signify that which indeed is not so, but must
as, for instance, "I the
needs so be said:
" 3 and,
Lord thy God am a jealous God;
It
repenteth me that I have made man." 4
But
it has drawn no words whatever, whereby to
frame either figures of speech or enigmatic
sayings, from things which do not exist at all.
And hence it is that they who are shut out
from the truth by that third kind of error are
more mischievously and emptily vain than
their fellows; in that they surmise respecting
God, what can neither be found in Himself
For divine Scripture is
nor in any creature.
wont to frame, as it were, allurements for
children from the things which are found in
the creature; whereby, according to their
measure, and as it were by steps, the affections of the weak may be moved to seek those
things that are above, and to leave those
But the same Scriptthings that are below.
ure rarely employs those things which are
spoken properly of God, and are not found
in any creature; as, for instance, that which
I am that I am;" and,
was said to Moses,
''I Am hath sent me to you." 3
For since
both body and soul also are said in some
sense to be, Holy Scripture certainly would
not so express itself unless it meant to be understood in some special sense of the term.
" Who
So, too, that which the Apostle says,
only hath immortality.
Since the soul also
both is said to be, and is, in a certain manner
immortal, Scripture would not say "only
hath," unless because true immortality is unchangeableness; which no creature can possess, since it belongs to the creator alone. 7

' ' 6

"

1 [Augustin here puts generare for creare which is rarely the
case with him, since the distinction between generation and creation is of the highest importance in discussing the doctrine of the
Trinity. His thought here is, that God does not bring himself into
being, because he always is. Some have defined God as the Selfcaused: causa sui.
But the category of cause and effect is inapplicable to the Infinite Being. W. G. T. S.]

2 Ps. xvii. 8.
5 Ex. iii. 14.
7 [God's being is necessary; that of the creature is contingent
Hence the name I Am, or Jehovah,
which denotes this difference'
God alone has immortality a parte ante, as well as a parte post

3 Ex. xx. 5.
6 t Xim. vi. 16.

4 Gen. vi. 7 .

"

"

So also David,

Every good gift and
So also James says,
every perfect gift is from above, and cometh
down from the Father of Lights, with whom
is no variableness, neither shadow of turnThou, shalt change
ing."
them, and they shall be changed; but Thou
art the same." 5
3. Further, it

is difficult to contemplate
and fully know the substance of God; who
fashions things changeable, yet without any
change in Himself, and creates things temporal, yet without any temporal movement in
And it is necessary, therefore, to
Hmselr.
purge our minds, in order to be able to see
ineffably that which is ineffable; whereto not
having yet attained, we are to be nourished
by faith, and led by such ways as are more
suited to our capacity, that we may be rendered
And hence
apt and able to comprehend it.
"
the Apostle says, that
in Christ indeed are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowl-
" I0 and yet has commended Him to us,
edge;
as to babes in Christ, who, although already
born again by His grace, yet are still carnal
and psychical, not by that
virtue
wherein He is equal to the Father, but by
that human infirmity whereby He was cruci-
"
I determined not to
fied.
know anything among you, save Jesus Christ
and Him crucified;"" and then he continues,
"And I was with you in weakness, and in
fear, and in much trembling." And a little
after he says to them, "And I, brethren,
could not speak unto you as unto spiritual,
12 even as unto babes in
but as unto carnal,
I have fed you with milk, and not
Christ.
with meat: for hitherto ye were not able to
bear it, neither yet now are ye able." I3 There
are some who are angry at language of this
kind, and think it is used in slight to themselves, and for the most part prefer rather to
believe that they who so speak to them have
nothing to say, than that they themselves
cannot understand what they have said. And
sometimes, indeed, we do allege to them, not
certainly that account of the case which they
seek in their inquiries about God,
because
neither can they themselves receive it, nor
can we perhaps either apprehend or express
but such an account of it as to demonstrate to them how incapable and utterly unfit
they are to understand that which they reBut they, on their parts, because
quire of us.

For he says,

divine

it,

Jas. i. 17.
"Col. 11. 3.

9 ps . c ii. 2 6 ) 2? .
11 x Cor. ii. 2, 3.

([

[St.Paul, in this place, denominates imperfect but true believers
carnal," in a relative sense, only. They are comparatively carnal, when contrasted with the law of God, which is absolutely and
They do not, however, beperfectly spiritual.
long to the class of carnal or natural men, in distinction from
spiritual. The persons whom the Apostle here denominates " caral," are " babes in Christ." W. G. T. S.]
nal," a **" ll ^l>^ !
J3 1 Cor. iii. 1 2.

(Rom. vii. 14.)

r\~~\~*. n

'i' o n

\\7

/-"

Chap. III. J

ON THE TRINITY.

they do not hear what they desire, think that
we are either playing them false in order to
conceal our own ignorance, or speaking in
malice because we grudge them knowledge;
and so go away indignant and perturbed.

it

by

that

in
be

unless

dazzled

CHAP. 2.

invigorated

IN WHAT MANNER THIS WORK PROPOSES TO DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE TRINITY.
4. Wherefore, our Lord God helping, we
will undertake to render, as far as we are
able, that very account which they so importunately demand: viz., that the Trinity is
the one and only and true God, and also how
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are
rightly said, believed, understood, to be of
one and the same substance or essence; in
such wise that they may not fancy themselves
mocked by excuses on our part, but may find
by actual trial, both that the highest good is
that which is discerned by the most purified
minds, and that for this reason it cannot be
discerned or understood by themselves, because the eye of the human mind, being
so transcendent
weak, is
the
light,
nourishment of the righteousness of faith.
First, however, we must demonstrate, acthe
Holy
authority
cording
Scriptures, whether the faith be so.
Then,
if God be willing and aid us, we may perhaps
at least so far serve these talkative arguers
more puffed up than capable, and therefore
laboring under the more dangerous disease
as to enable them to find something which
they are not able to doubt, that so, in that
case where they cannot find the like, they
may be led to lay the fault to their own
minds, rather than to the truth itself or to
our reasonings; and thus, if there be anything in them of either love or fear towards
God, they may return and begin from faith in
due order: perceiving at length how healthful a medicine has been provided for the
faithful in the holy Church, whereby a heedful pietv, healing the feebleness of the mind,
may render it able to perceive the unchangeable truth, and hinder it from falling headlong,
through disorderly rashness, into pestilent
and false opinion.
I' myself
I am anywhere in
shrink from inquiry, if
doubt; nor be ashamed to learn, if I am anywhere in error.

Neither will

the

to

of

is

to

to

to be in

hesitates, there

ever^ alike with myself, he is certain, there
to go on with me; wherever, alike
with
myself, he
with
join
me in
inquiring; wherever he recognizes
himself
error, there
return
to me ; wherever he recognizes me to be
so, there to call me back: so that we may
enter together upon the path of charity, and
advance towards Him of whom it
said,
"Seek His face evermore." 1 And I would
make this pious and safe agreement, in the
presence of our Lord God, with all who read
my writings, as well in all other cases as,
above all, in the case of those which inquire
into the unity of the. Trinity, of the Father
and the Son and the Holy Spirit; because in
no other subject is error more dangerous, or
inquiry more laborious, or
the discovery
truth more profitable.
of
then, any
If,
reader shall say, This is not well said, because I do not understand it; such an one
finds fault with my language, not with my
faith: and it might perhaps in very truth have
been put more clearly; yet no man ever so
spoke as to be understood in all things by all
Let him, therefore, who finds this
men.
fault with my discourse, see whether he can
understand other men who have handled similar subjects and questions, when he does not
understand me: and if he can, let him put down
my book, or even, if he pleases, throw it
away; and let him spend labor and time
rather on those whom he understands. 2
Yet
let him not think on that account that I ought
to have been silent, because I have not been
able to express myself so smoothly and clearly
to him as those do whom he understands.
For neither do all things, which all men have
And
written, come into the hands of all.
possibly some, who are capable of understanding even these our writings, may not find
those more lucid works, and may meet with
is useful that
ours only.
many persons should write many books, differing in style but not in faith, concerning
even the same questions, that the matter itself may reach the greatest number some
But if he who
in one way, some in another.
complains that he has not understood these
things has never been able to comprehend
any careful and exact reasonings at all upon
such subjects, let him in that case deal with
himself bv resolution and study, that he may

And therefore it

CHAP. 3. WHAT AUGUSTIN REQUESTS FROM
THE ERRORS OF READERS DULL
HIS READERS.
OF COMPREHENSION NOT TO BE ASCRIBED TO
THE AUTHOR.
5. Further let me ask of my reader, wher-

1 Ps. cv. 4.
= [This request of Augustin to his reader, involves an admirable
rule for authorship generally -the desire, namely, th?t truth be
Milton teaches
attained, be it through himself or through others.
the same, when he savs that the author must "
study and love
learning for itself, not' for lucre, or any other end, but the sen-ire
of God and of truth, and perhaps that lasting fame and perpetuity
of praise, which God and good men have consented shall bethereI ward of those whose published labors advance the good of mankind. ' w. <;. t.s.]

[Book I.

know better; not with me by quarrellings and
Let
wranglings, that I may hold my peace.
him, again, who says, when he reads my book,
Certainly I understand what is said, but it is
not true, assert, if he pleases, his own opinion,
and refute mine if he is able. And if he do
this with charity and truth, and take the pains
I am still alive),
to make it known to me (if
I shall then receive the most abundant fruit
And if he cannot inform
of this my labor.
myself, most willing and glad should I be that
he should inform those whom he can.
Yet,
for my part, "I meditate in the law of the
if not "day and night," at least
Lord," 1
such short times as I can; and I commit my
meditations to writing, lest they should escape me through forgetfulness; hoping by
the mercy of God that He will make me hold
steadfastly all truths of which I feel certain;
"
but if in anything I be otherwise minded,
that He will himself reveal even this to me," 2
whether through secret inspiration and admonition, or through His own plain utterances, or through the reasonings of my brethThis I pray for, and this my trust and
ren.
desire I commit to Him, who is sufficiently
able to keep those things which He has
given me, and to render those which He has
promised.

6.

I expect, indeed, that some, who are
more dull of understanding, will imagine that
in some parts of my books I have held sentiments which I have not held, or have not held
But their error, as none
those which I have.
can be ignorant, ought not to be attributed to
me, if they have deviated into false doctrine
through following my steps without apprehending me, whilst I am compelled to pick
my way through a hard and obscure subject:
seeing that neither can any one, in any way,
rightly ascribe trie numerous and various
errors of heretics to the holy testimonies
themselves of the divine books; although all
of them endeavor to defend out of those
same Scriptures their own false and erroneous
The law of Christ, that is, chanty,
opinions.
admonishes me clearly, and commands me
with a sweet constraint, that when men think
that I have held in my books something false
which I have not held, and that same falsehood displeases one and pleases another, I
should prefer to be blamed by him who reprehends the falsehood, rather than praised by him
For although I, who never held
who praises it.
the error, am not rightly blamed by the
is rightly cenformer, yet the error itself
whilst by the latter neither am I
sured;
rightly praised, who am thought to have held

1 Ps. i.

2 Phil. iii. 15.

that which the truth censures, nor the sentiment itself, which the truth also censures.
Let us therefore essay the work which we
have undertaken in the name of the Lord.

CHAP. 4. WHAT THE DOCTRINE OF THE CATHOLIC FAITH IS CONCERNING THE TRINITY.
7. All those Catholic expounders of the
divine Scriptures, both Old and New, whom
I have been able to read, who have written
before me concerning the Trinity, Who is
God, have purposed to teach, according to
the Scriptures, this doctrine, that the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy Spirit intimate a
divine unity of one and the same substance in
3 and therefore that
an indivisible equality;
they are not three Gods, but one God: although the Father hath begotten the Son, and
so He who is the Father is not the Son; and
the Son is begotten by the Father, and so He
who is the Son is not the Father; and the
Holy Spirit is neither the Father nor the Son,
but only the Spirit of the Father and of the
Son, Himself also co-equal with the Father
and the Son, and pertaining to the unity of
Yet not that this Trinity was
the Trinity.
born of the Virgin Mary, and crucified under
Pontius Pilate, and buried, and rose again the
third day, and ascended into heaven, but only
Nor, again, that this Trinity dethe Son.
scended in the form of a dove upon Jesus
when He was baptized;
4 nor that, on the day
of Pentecost, after the ascension of the Lord,
when "there came a sound from heaven, as
of a rushing mighty wind,'' 5 the same Trinity
"sat upon each of them with cloven tongues
like as of fire," but only the Holy Spirit.
Nor yet that this Trinity said from heaven,
" Thou art my Son," 6 whether when He was
baptized by John, or when the three disciples
were with Him in the mount, 7 or when the
"
I have both glorified
voice sounded, saying,
8 but that it
it, and will glorify it again;"
was a word of the Father only, spoken to the
Son; although the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, as they are indivisible, so
This is also my faith,
work indivisibly.
since it is the Catholic faith.

3 [Augufitin teaches the Nicene doctrine of a numerical unity of
essence in distinction from a specific unity. The latter is that of
part after part
mankind. In this case there is division of substance
of the specific nature being separated and formed, by propagation,
No human individual contains the whole speinto individuals.
But in the case of the numerical unity of the
cific nature.
Trinity, there is no division of essence. The whole divine nature is
in each divine person. The three divine persons do not constitute
that is, three divine individuals made by the division
a species
but are three modes
and distribution of one common divine nature
or " forms
(Phil. ii. 6) of one undivided substance, numerically
and identically the same in each.- W. G. T. S.]

"

4 Matt. iii. 16.
7 Matt. xvii. 5.
9 [The term Trinity denotes the Divine essence in all three
modes. The term Father (or Son, or Spirit) denotes the essence
Consequently, there is something in the
in only one mode.

5 Acts. ii. 2, 4.
8 John xii. 28.

6 Mark i. n.

Chap. VI.]

ON THE TRINITY.

that

CHAP. 5.

how they are

OF DIFFICULTIES CONCERNING THE
TRINITY : IN WHAT MANNER THREE ARE ONE
GOD, AND HOW, WORKING INDIVISIBLY, THEY
YET PERFORM SOME THINGS SEVERALLY.
8. Some persons, however, find a difficulty
in this faith ; when they hear that the Father
is God, and the Son God, and the Holy
Spirit God, and yet
this Trinity is
not three Gods, but one God; and they
ask
understand
to
this :
especially when it
is said that the Trinity
works indivisibly in everything that God
works, and yet that a certain voice of the
Father spoke, which is not the voice of the
Son; and that none except the Son was born
in the flesh, and suffered, and rose again, and
ascended into heaven; and that none except
the Holy Spirit came in the form of a dove.
They wish to understand how the Trinity
uttered that voice which was only of the
Father; and how the same Trinity created
that flesh in which the Son only was born of
the Virgin; and how the very same Trinity
itself wrought that form of a dove, in which
the Holy Spirit only appeared.
Yet, otherwise, the Trinity does not work indivisibly,
but the Father does some things, the Son
other things, and the Holy Spirit yet others:
or else, if they do some things together, some
severally, then the Trinity is not indivisible.
It is a difficulty, too, to them, in what manner the Holy Spirit is in the Trinity, whom
neither the Father nor the Son, nor both,
have begotten, although He is the Spirit both
of the Father and of the Son.
Since, then,
men weary us with asking such questions, let
us unfold to them, as we are able, whatever
wisdom God's gift has bestowed upon our
"
weakness on this subject; neither
let us go
on our way with consuming envy."
Should
we say that we are not accustomed to think
about such things, it would not be true; yet
if we acknowledge that such subjects commonly dwell in our thoughts, carried away as
we are by the love of investigating the truth,
then they require of us, by the law of charity,
to make known to them what we have herein
been able to find out.
Not as though I had
"
already attained, either were already perfect
(for, if the Apostle Paul, how much more
must I, who lie far beneath his feet, count
myself not to have apprehended!); but, according to my measure,
if I forget those
things that are behind, and reach forth unto
those things which are before, and press to-

"

"

wards the mark for the prize of the high call2 I am requested to disclose so much of
ing,"
the road as I have already passed, and the
point to which I have reached, whence the
course yet remains to bring me to the end.
And those make the request, whom a generous charity compels me to serve.
Needs
must too, and God will grant that, in supplying them with matter to read, I shall profit
myself also; and that, in seeking to reply to
their inquiries, I shall myself likewise find
that for which I was inquiring.
Accordingly
I have undertaken the task, by the bidding
and help of the Lord my God, not so much
of discoursing with authority respecting things
I know already, as of learning those things
by piously discoursing of them.

CHAP. 6.

THAT THE SON IS VERY GOD, OF THE
SAME SUBSTANCE WITH THE FATHER.
NOT
ONLY THE FATHER, BUT THE TRINITY, IS
AFFIRMED TO BE IMMORTAL.
ALL THINGS
ARE NOT FROM THE FATHER ALONE, BUT ALSO
FROM THE SON.
THAT THE HOLY SPIRIT IS
VERY GOD, EQUAL WITH THE FATHER AND
THE SON.

"

9. They who have said that our Lord Jesus
^
Christ is not God, or not very God, or not
with the Father the One and only God, or not
truly immortal because changeable, are proved
wrong by the most plain and unanimous voice
of divine testimonies; as, for instance,
In
the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God."
For
it is plain that we are to take the Word of God
to be the only Son of God, of whom it is afterwards said, "And the Word was made flesh,
and dwelt among us," on account of that birth
of His incarnation, which was wrought in time
But herein is declared, not
of the Virgin.
only that He is God, but also that He is of
the same substance with the Father; because,
after saying, "And the Word was God," it is
said also, "The same was in the beginning
with God: all things were made by Him, and
without Him was not anything made." 3 Not
all things;" but only all things that
simply
From
were made, that is, the whole creature.
which it appears clearly, that He Himself was
not made, by whom all things were made.
And if He was not made, then He is not a
creature; but if He is not a creature, then He
is of the same substance with the Father.
For
all substance that is not God is creature; and
all that is not creature is God. 4 And if the

"

Trinity that cannot be attributed to any one of the Persons, as
such;_and something in a Person that cannot be attributed to
the Trinity, as such.
Trinality cannot be ascribed to the first
Person; paternity cannot be ascribed to the Trinity. W. GTS

' J

1 Wisd. vi. 23.

- Phil. iii. 12-14.
* [Augustin here postulates the theistic doctrines of two subinfinite and finite; in contradiction to the postulate of panthe infinite. W. G. T. S.]

stances
theism, that there is only one substance

3 John i.

1. 14, 2, 3.

[Book I.

Son is not of the same substance with the
Father, then He is a substance that was made:
and if He is a substance that was made, then all
things were not made by Him; but "all things
were made by Him," therefore He is of one
and the same substance with the Father.
And so He is not only God, but also very
God. And the same John most expressly
" For we know that
affirms this in his epistle:
the Son of God is come, and hath given us
an understanding, that we may know the true
God, and that we may be in His true Son
Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal
life." >

10. Hence also it follows by consequence,
that the Apostle Paul did not say, "Who
alone has immortality," of the Father merely;
but of the One and only God, which is the
For that which is itself eternal
Trinity itself.
is not mortal according to any change -
life
ableness; and hence the Son of God, because
" He is Eternal Life," is also Himself understood with the Father, where it
is said,
" Who only hath immortality."
For we, too,
are made partakers of this eternal life, and
become, in our own measure, immortal.
But
the eternal life itself, of which we are made
partakers, is one thing; we ourselves, who, by
partaking of it, shall live eternally, are anFor if He had said, "Whom in His
other.
own time the Father will show, who is the
blessed and only Potentate,
the King of
lords; who only hath
kings, and Lord of
" not even so would" it be necesimmortality;
sarily understood that the Son is excluded.
For neither has the Son separated the Father
from Himself, because He Himself, speaking
elsewhere with the voice of wisdom (for He
Himself is the Wisdom of God),
says, "I
alone compassed the circuit of heaven." 3
And therefore so much the more is
it not
necessary that the words, "Who hath imthe
mortality,"
Father alone, omitting the Son; when they
are said thus: "That thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukeable, until
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ:
whom in His own time He will show, who is
the blessed and only Potentate, the King of
kings, and Lord of lords; who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man
can approach unto; whom no man hath seen,
nor can see: to whom be honor and power
words
everlasting.
neither is the Father specially named, nor
the Son, nor the Holy Spirit; but the blessed
and only Potentate, the King of kings, and

should be understood of

Amen." 4

which

In

1 ' John v. 20.
3 Kcclus. xxiv. 5.

2 t Cor. i. 24.
4 r Tim. vi. 14-16.

"

Lord of lords; that is, the One and only and
true God, the Trinity itself.

11. But perhaps what follows may interfere with this meaning; because it
is said,
"Whom no man hath seen, nor can see:"
although this may also be taken as belonging
to Christ according to His divinity, which
the Jews did not see, who yet saw and crucified Him in the flesh; whereas His divinity
can in no wise be seen by human sight, but is
seen with that sight with which they who see
are no longer men, but beyond men.
Rightly,
therefore, is God Himself, the Trinity, understood to be the "blessed and only Potentate," who "shows the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ in His own time."
For the
words, "Who only hath immortality," are
" Who only
said in the same way as it is said,
doeth wondrous things." 5 And I should be
glad to know of whom they take these words
If only of the Father, how then
to be said.
is that true which the Son Himself says,.
"For what things soever the Father doeth,
these also doeth the Son likewise ?
Is there
any, among wonderful works, more wonderful
than to raise up and quicken the dead ?
Yet
the same Son saith, "As the Father raiseth
up the dead, and quickeneth them, even so
the Son quickeneth whom He will." 6 How,
then, does the Father alone "do wondrousthings/' when these words allow us to understand neither the Father only, nor the Son
only, but assuredly the one only true God,
that is, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Spirit? 7
" But to us there is but one God, the Father,
of whom are all things, and we in Him; and
one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are
all
things, and we by Him," 8 who can doubt
that he speaks of all things which are created;
as does John, when he says,
All things were
made by Him"? I ask, therefore, of whom
he speaks in another place: "For of Him,
and through Him, and in Him, are all things:
to whom be glory for ever. Amen." 9
For
if of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Spirit, so as to assign each clause severally
to each person: of Him, that is to say, of the
Father; through Him, that is to say, through
the Son; in Him, that is to say, in the Holy
is manifest that the Father, and
Spirit,
the Son, and the Holy Spirit is one God, inasmuch as the words continue in the singular
number, "To whom 10 be glory for ever."

12. Also, when the same apostle

says,

"

it

5 Ps. lxxii. 18.
7 [Nothing is more important, in order to a correct interpretation of the New Testament, than a correct explanation of the term
God. Sometimes it denotes the Trinity, and soinetimes a person
of the Trinity. The context always shows which it is. The examples given here by Augustin are only a few out of many. W.

6 John v. 19, 21.

1 G. T. S.]

8 ! Cor. viii. 6.

9 Rom. xi. 36.

Ipsi.

Chap. VI.]

ON THE TRINITY.

For at the beginning of the passage he does
" O the depth of the riches both of
not say,
the wisdom and knowledge" of the Father,
"
or of the Son, or of the Holy Spirit, but
of
" " How
the wisdom and knowledge of God !
unsearchable are His judgments, and His
For who hath known
ways past finding out !
the mind of the Lord ? or who hath been His
counsellor ? Or who hath first given to Him
and it shall be recompensed unto him again?
For of Him, and through Him, and in Him,
are all things: to whom be glory for ever.
Amen." 1
But if they will have this to be understood only of the Father, then in what way
are all things by the Father, as is said here;
and all things by the Son, as where it is said
to the Corinthians, "And one Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom are all things,"
2 and as in
the Gospel of John, "All things were made
by Him ?"
For if some things were made by
the Father, and some by the Son, then all
things were not made by the Father, nor all
things by the Son; but if all things were made
by the Father, and all things by the Son, then
the same things were made by the Father and
The Son, therefore, is equal
by the Son.
with the Father, and the wosking of the
Father and the Son is indivisible.
Because
if the Father made even the Son, whom certainly the Son Himself did not make, then all
things were not made by the Son; but all
things were made by the Son: therefore He
Himself was not made, that with the Father
He might make all things that were made.
And the apostle has not refrained from using
the very word itself, but has said most expressly, "Who, being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery to be equal with
" 3 using here the name of God specially
God;
But the head
of the Father; 4 as elsewhere,
of Christ is God." 5

"

"

subsisting

3 Phil. ii. 6.

2 1 Cor. viii. 6.

But in Phil. ii. 6

St. Paul refers to one of three " forms "

1 Rom. xi. 33-36.
4 [It is not generally safe to differ from Augustin in tnnitarian
" God " must surely denote the Diexegesis.
vine Essence, not the first Person of the Essence.
St. Paul describes "Christ Jesus" as "
(inrdpxw) originally, that is
prior to incarnation, "in a form of God" (h fiop4>fi deou), and because
he so subsisted, as being "equal with God." The word MP<f>?j is
anarthrous in the text: a form, not the form; as the A.V. and R.V.
of God namely,
render.
that particular form of Sonship, which is peculiar to the second |
person of the Godhead. Had the apostle employed the article
with nopijjjj, the implication would be that there is only one
" form of God" that is, only one person in the Divine Essence.
If then #eou, in this place, denotes the Father, as Augustin
says, St. Paul would teach that the Logos subsisted "
in a form of
the Father" which would imply that the Father had more than
one "
form," or else (if |u.op<Jj be rendered with the article) that
the Logos subsisted in the " form" of the Father, neither of which
But if
is true.
God," in this place, denotes the Divine Essence,
then St. Paul teaches that the unincarnate Logos subsisted in a par-
" form "
of the Essence the Father and Spirit subsisting
ticular
in other "forms" of it.
The student will observe that Augustin is careful to teach
that the Logos, when he took on him " a form of a servant," did
not lay aside "a form of God." He understands the kenosis
(e/ceVcucre) to be, the humbling of the divinity by its union with
the humanity; not the exinanition of it in the extremest sense of
entirely divesting himself of the divinity, nor the less extreme
sense of a total non-use of it during the humiliation.
.G.T.S.].

\Y

"

r

5 1 Cor. xi. 3.

x 3'

Simi! ar

concerning

evidence has been collected
the Holy Spirit, of which
also
those who have discussed the subject before
ourselves have most fully availed themselves,
that He too is God, and not a creature.
But
if not a creature, then not only God (for men
), but also very God;
likewise are called gods
and therefore absolutely equal with the Father
and the Son, and in the unity of the Trinity
But that the
consubstantial and co-eternal.
Holy Spirit is not a creature is made quite
plain by that passage above all others, where
we are commanded not to serve the creature,
but the Creator; 7 not in the sense in which
we are commanded to "serve" one another
8 which is in Greek oooUbzv;, but in
by love,
that in which God alone is served, which
From whence they
is in Greek Xazpzbzv;.
are called idolaters who tender that service
For it is this
to images which is due to God.
service concerning which it is said, "Thou
shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him
For this is found
only shalt thou serve." 9
also more distinctly in the Greek Scriptures,
which have ka-Tptbazi^. Now if we are forbidden to serve the creature with such a service, seeing that it is written, "Thou shalt
worship the Lord thy God, and Him only
shalt thou serve "
(and hence, too, the apostle
repudiates those who worship and serve the
creature more than the Creator), then assuredly the Holy Spirit is not a creature, to
whom such a service is paid by all the saints;
" For we are the circumas says the apostle,
cision, which serve the Spirit of God," I0
For even
which is in the Greek XarpeuovTes.
' We
most Latin copies also have it thus,
who serve the Spirit of God;" but all Greek
ones, or almost all, have it so.
Although in
some Latin copies we find, not "We worship
the Spirit of God," but, "We worship God
in the Spirit." But let those who err in this case,
and refuse to give up to the more weighty
authority, tell us whether they find this text
" Know ye not that
also varied in the mss. :
your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost,
which is in you, which ye have of God ?
Yet
what can be more senseless or more profane,
than that any one should dare to say that the
members of Christ are the temple of one who,
in their opinion, is a creature inferior to
For the apostle says in another
Christ?
" Your bodies are members of Christ."
place,
But if the members of Christ are also the
temple of the Holy Spirit, then the Holy
Spirit is not a creature; because we must
needs owe to Him, of whom our body is the

"

6 Ps. lxxxii. 6.
8 Gal. v. 13.
10 Phil. iii. 3 (Vulgate, etc.).

7 Rom. i. 25.
9 Deut. vi. 13.

'4

[ Book I.

temple, that service wherewith God only is to
be served, which in Greek is called Xarpeia.
And accordingly the apostle says,
' ' Therefore glorify God in youi body.''

CHAP. 7.

IN WHAT MANNER THE SON IS LESS

THAN THE FATHER, AND THAN HIMSELF.
14. In these and like testimonies of the
divine Scriptures, by free use of which, as I
have said, our predecessors exploded such
sophistries or errors of the heretics, the unity
and equality of the Trinity are intimated to
But because, on account of the
our faith.
incarnation of the Word of God for the working out of our salvation, that the man Christ
Jesus might be the Mediator between God
and men, 2 many things are so said in the
sacred books as to signify, or even most expressly declare, the Father to be greater than
the Son; men have erred through a want of
careful examination or consideration of the
whole tenor of the Scriptures, and have endeavored to transfer those things which are
said of Jesus Christ according to the flesh, to
that substance of His which was eternal before
the incarnation, and is eternal. They say, for
instance, that the Son is less than the Father,
because it is written that the Lord Himself
said, "My Father is greater than I." 3
But
the truth shows that after the sams sense the
Son is less also than Himself; for how was
He not made less also than Himself, who
"
emptied 4 Himself, and took upon Him the
For He did not so take
form of a servant 1"
the form of a servant as that He should lose
the form of God, in which He was equal to
the Father.
If, then, the form of a servant
was so taken that the form of God was not
lost, since both in the form of a servant and
in the form of God He Himself is the same
only-begotten Son of God the Father, in the
form of God equal to the Father, in the form
of a servant the Mediator between God and
men, the man Christ Jesus; is there any one
who cannot perceive that He Himself in the
form of God is also greater than Himself, but
yet likewise in the form of a servant less than
Himself ? And not, therefore, without cause
the Scripture says both the one and the other,
both that the Son is equal to the Father, and
that the Father is greater than the Son.
For
there is no confusion when the former is understood as on account of the form of God,
and the latter as on account of the form of a
servant.
And, in truth, this rule for clearing
the question through all the sacred Scriptures
is set forth in one chapter of an epistle of the

by whom all things are made;

Apostle Paul, where this distinction is commended to us plainly enough.
For he says,
"Who, being in the form of God, thought it
not robbery to be equal with God; but emptied
Himself, and took upon Him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of
men: and was found in fashion 5 as a man." 6
The Son of God, then, is equal to God the
Father in nature, but less
in "fashion." 7
For in the form of a servant which He took
He is less than the Father; but in the form
of God, in which also He was before He took
the form of a servant, He is equal to the
In the form of God He is the Word,
Father.
"
" 8 but in the
form of a servant He was " made of a woman,
made under the law, to redeem them that
were under the law/' 9 In like manner, in the
form of God He made man; in the form of a
servant He was made man.
For if the Father
alone had made man without the Son, it
would not have been written,
Let us make
man in our image, after our likeness." 10
Therefore, because the form of God took the
form of a servant, both is God and both is
man; but both God, on account of God who
takes; and both man, on account of man who
For neither by that taking is the
is taken.
one of them turned and changed into the
other: the Divinity is not changed into the
creature, so as to cease to be Divinity; nor
the creature into Divinity, so as to cease to
be creature.

"

CHAP. 8.

THE TEXTS OF SCRIPTURE EXPLAINED
RESPECTING THE SUBJECTION OF THE SON TO
THE FATHER, WHICH HAVE BEEN MISUNDERCHRIST WILL NOT SO GIVE UP THE
STOOD.
KINGDOM TO THE FATHER, AS TO TAKE IT
AWAY FROM HIMSELF.
THE BEHOLDING HIM
IS THE PROMISED END OF ALL ACTIONS.
THE
HOLY SPIRIT IS SUFFICIENT TO OUR BLESSEDNESS EQUALLY WITH THE FATHER.

15. As for that which the apostle says,
"And when all things shall be subdued unto
Him, then shall the Son also Himself be subject unto Him that put all things under
Him:' :
either the text has been so turned,
lest any one should think that the
fashion" 11
of Christ, which He took according to the
human creature, was to be transformed hereafter into the Divinity, or (to express it more
precisely) the Godhead itself, who is not a
creature, but is the unity of the Trinity,
a
nature incorporeal, and unchangeable, and
consubstantial, and co-eternal with itself; or if

"

1 i Cor. vi. 19, 15, 20.
3 John xiv. 28.

2 1 Tim. ii. 5.
4 Exinanivit.

5 Habitu.
8 John i. 3.
11 Habititm.

6 Phil. ii. 6, 7.
9 Gal. iv. 4, 5 .

7 Habitu.
I(J ( )en. i. 26.

Chap. VIII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

"

"

any one contends, as some have thought, that
the text, "Then shall the Son also Himself
be subject unto Him that put all things under
Him," is so turned in order that one may beto be a change
lieve that very
subjection
and conversion hereafter of the creature into
the substance or essence itself of the Creator,
that is, that that which had been the substance
of a creature shall become the substance of
such an one at any rate admits
the Creator;
this, of which in truth there is no possible
doubt, that this had not yet taken place, when
the Lord said, "My Father is greater than
For He said this not only before He
I."
ascended into heaven, but also before He had
But
suffered, and had risen from the dead.
they who think that the human nature in Him
is to be changed and converted into the substance of the Godhead, and that it was so said,
" Then shall the Son also Himself be subject
unto Him that put all things under Him,"
as if to say, Then also the Son of man Himself, and the human nature taken by the Word
of God, shall be changed into the nature of Him
who put all things under Him,
must also
think that this will then take place, when,
" He shall have
after the day of judgment,
delivered up the kingdom to God, even the
Father." And hence even still, according to
this opinion, the Father is greater than that
form of a servant which was taken of the
But if some affirm even further, that
Virgin.
the man Christ Jesus has already been changed
into the substance of God, at least they cannot
deny that the human nature still remained,
when He said before His passion, "For my
Father is greater than I;" whence there is no
question that it was said in this sense, that
the Father is greater than the form of a servant, to whom in the form of God the Son is
Nor let any one, hearing what the
equal.
apostle says, "But when He saith all things
are put under Him, it is manifest that He is
put all things under
excepted which did
Him," 1 think the words, that He hath put
all things under the Son, to be so understood
of the Father, as that He should not thinkthat the Son Himself put all things under
For this the apostle plainly deHimself.
" For
clares, when he says to the Philippians,
our conversation is in heaven; from whence
also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus
Christ: who shall change our vile body, that
it may be fashioned like unto His glorious
body, according to the working whereby He
is able even to subdue 2 all things unto HimFor the working of the Father and
self." 3
Otherwise, neither
of the Son is indivisible.

For when it

hath the Father Himself put all things under
Himself, but the Son hath put all things under
Him, who delivers the kingdom to Him, and
puts down all rule and all authority and power.
For these words are spoken of
the Son:
"When He shall have delivered up," says
the apostle, "the kingdom to God, even the
Father; when He shall have put down 4 all
rule, and all authority, and all power."
For
the same that puts down, also makes subject.
16. Neither may we think that Christ shall
so give up the kingdom to God, even the
Father, as that He shall take it away from
For some vain talkers have thought
Himself.
is said, "He shall
even this.
have delivered up the kingdom to God, even
the Father,'' He Himself is not excluded; because He is one God together with the Father.
But that word "until" deceives those who
are careless readers of the divine Scriptures,
For the text
but eager for controversies.
" For He must reign, until He
continues,
hath put all enemies under His feet;" 3 as
though, when He had so put them, He would
no more reign.
Neither do they perceive
that this is said in the same way as that other
" His heart is established: He shall not
text,
be afraid, until He see His desire upon His
For He will not then be afraid
enemies." 6
when He has seen it.
What then means,
" When He shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father," as though God
and the Father has not the kingdom now ?
But because He is hereafter to bring all the
just, over whom now, living by faith, the
Mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus, reigns, to that sight which the
same apostle calls
face to face;" 7 therefore
the words, "When He shall have delivered
up the kingdom to God, even the Father," are
as much as to say, When He shall have brought
believers to the contemplation of God, even
For He says, "All things are
the Father.
delivered unto me of my Father: and no man
knoweth the Son, but the Father;
neither
knoweth any man the Father, save the Son,
and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal
Him." 8 The Father will then be revealed by
the Son, "when He shall have put down all
rule, and all authority, and all power;" that
is, in such wise that there shall be no more
need of any economy of similitudes, by means
of angelic rulers, and authorities, and powers.
Of whom that is not unfitly understood, which
is said in the Song of Songs to the bride,
"We will make thee borders 9 of gold, with
studs of silver, while the King sitteth at His

"

1 1 Cor. xv. 28, 24, 27.
- Sabjicere.

3 Phil. iii. 20, 21.

t Evacuaverit.
6 Ps. cxii. 8.
8 Matt. xi. 27.

5 1 Cor. xv. 24, 25.
7 1 Cor. xiii. 12.
9 Similitudines.

[Book I.

table;" 1 that is, as long as Christ is in His
is hid with
secret place:
since "your life
Christ in God; when Christ, who is our 2
life,
shall appear, then shall ye also appear with
Before which time, "we
Him in glory." 3
see now through a glass, in an enigma," that
is, in similitudes, "but then face to face." 4

17. For this contemplation is held forth to
us as the end of all actions, and the everlastFor "we are the sons of
ing fullness of joy.
God ; and it doth not yet appear what we shall
be: but we know that, when He shall appear,
we shall be like Him; for we shall see Him
as He is." s
For that which He said to His
servant Moses, "I am that 1 am; thus shalt
thou say to the children of Israel, I Am hath
sent me to you;" 6 this it
is which we shall
contemplate when we shall live in eternity.
is said, "And this is life eternal,
For so it
that they might know Thee, the only true
God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast
This shall be when the Lord shall
sent.'' 7
have come, and "
shall have brought to light
the hidden things of darkness;" 8 when the
darkness of this present mortality and corrupThen will be
tion shall have passed away.
our morning, which is spoken of in the Psalm,
"
In the morning will I direct my prayer unto
Thee, and will contemplate Thee." 9 Of this
contemplation I understand it to be said,
" When He shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father;
that is, when
He shall have brought the just, over whom
now, living by faith, the Mediator between
God and man, the man Christ Jesus, reigns,
to the contemplation of God, even the Father.
If herein I am foolish, let him who knows
better correct me; to me at least the case
seems as I have said. 10
For we shall not seek
anything else, when we shall have come to the
contemplation of Him.
But that contemplation is not yet, so long as our joy is in hope.
For "
hope that is seen is not hope: for what
a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for ?
But
if we hope for that we see not, then do we
with patience wait for it,"
as long as
the King sitteth at His table." 12 Then will
take place that which is written,
In Thy
Nothing more
presence is fullness of joy." I3
than that joy will be required; because there

viz.

"

"

"

"

!

1 In rectditu. Cant. i. n; see LXX.
2 Vestra.
3 Col. iii. 3, 4.
6 Ex. iii. 14.
5 1 John 111. 2.
8 1 Cor. iv. 5.
9 Ps. v. 5.

4 1 Cor. xiii. 12.
7 John xvii. 3.
The common explanation is better, which regards the "
kingdom ' that is to be delivered up. to be the mediatorial commission.
When Christ shall have finished his work of redeeming men, he
no longer discharges the office of a mediator.
It seems incongruous to denominate the beatific vision of God by the redeemed,
a surrender of a kingdom.
In I. x. 21, Augustin says that when
" He is
the Redeemer brings the redeemed from faith to sight,
said to 'deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father' "

W.G.T.S.]
" Horn. viii. 24, 25.

1= Cant. i. 12.

13 Ps. xvi. 11.

" 14 For "

will be nothing more than can be required.
For the Father will be manifested to us, and
that will suffice for us. And this much Philip
had well understood, so that he said to the
" Show us the Father, and it sufficeth
Lord,
But he had not yet understood that he
us."
himself was able to say this very same thing
in this way also: Lord, show Thyself to us,
and it sufficeth us.
For, that he might under-
" Have
stand this, the Lord replied to him,
I been so long time with you, and yet hast
thou not known me, Philip ? he that hath
seen me hath seen the Father."
But because He intended him, before he could see
this, to live by faith, He went on to say,
"
Believest thou not that I am in the Father,
and the Father in me ?
while we are
at home in the body, we are absent from the
Lord: for we walk by faith, not by sight." IS
For contemplation is the recompense of faith,
for which recompense our hearts are purified
Purifying their
by faith;
is written,
hearts by faith." l6 And that our hearts are to
be purified for this contemplation, is proved
"
above all by this text,
Blessed are the pure
in heart, for they shall see God." 17 And that
this is life eternal, God says in the Psalm,
" With long life will I satisfy him, and show
him my salvation" 18
Whether, therefore,
we hear, Show us the Son ; or whether we
hear, Show us the Father ;
is even all
one, since neither can be manifested without
For they are one, as He also
the other.
" My Father and I are one/"9
Himself says,
Finally, on account of this very indivisibility,
it suffices that sometimes the Father alone, or
the Son alone, should be named, as hereafter
to fill us with the joy of His countenance.

as it

"

it

" 30

18. Neither is the Spirit of either thence
excluded, that is, the Spirit of the Father and
of the Son; which Holy Spirit is specially
called "the Spirit of truth, whom the world
cannot receive.
For to have the fruition
of God the Trinity, after whose image we are
made, is indeed the fullness of our joy, than
which there is no greater. On this account
the Holy Spirit is sometimes spoken of as if
He alone sufficed to our blessedness: and He
does alone so suffice, because He cannot be
divided from the Father and the Son; as the
Father alone is sufficient, because He cannot
be divided from the Son and the Holy Spirit;
and the Son alone is sufficient because He cannot be divided from the Father and the Holy
For what does He mean by saying,
Spirit.
''If ye love me, keep my commandments;
and I will pray the Father, and He shall give

r 4 lohn xiv. 8, 10.
'7 Matt. v. 8.
20 John xiv. 17.

J 5 2 Cor. v. 6, 7.
18 Ps. xci. 16.

16 Acts xv. 9.
! 9 John x. 30.

Chap. IX.]

ON THE TRINITY.

2 7

Let them say then, if

you another Comforter, that He may abide
with you for ever; even the Spirit of truth,
whom the world cannot receive,"
' that is,
For "the natural
the lovers of the world?
man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of
God." 2
But it may perhaps seem, further,
" And I will pray the Father,
as if the words,
and He shall give you another Comforter,"
were so said as if the Son alone were not
sufficient. And that place so speaks of the
Spirit, as if He alone were altogether sufficient: "When He, the Spirit of truth, is
come, He will guide you into all truth." 3
Pray, therefore, is the Son here excluded, as
if He did not teach all truth, or as if the Holy
Spirit were to fill up that which the Son could
not fully teach ?
pleases them, that the Holy Spirit is greater
than the Son, whom they are wont to call less.
Or is it, forsooth, because it is not said, He
or. No one else except Himself
will
alone,
guide you into all truth, that they allow that
the Son also may be believed to teach together with Him ?
In that case the apostle
has excluded the Son from knowing those
things which are of God, where he says,
15 Even so the things of God knoweth no one,
but the Spirit of God:" 4 so that these perverse
men might, upon this ground, go on to say
that none but the Holy Spirit teaches even
the Son the things of God, as the greater
teaches the less; to whom the Son Himself
ascribes so much as to say,
But because I
have said these things unto you, sorrow hath
Nevertheless I tell you
filled your heart.
the truth; it is expedient for you that I go
away: for if I go not away, the Comforter
will not come unto you.''

"

it

CHAP. 9.

ALL ARE SOMETIMES UNDERSTOOD IN

ONE PERSON.

But this is said, not on account of any inequality of the Word of God and of the Holy
Spirit, but as though the presence of the Son
of man with them would be a hindrance to
the coming of Him, who was not less, because He did not "empty Himself, taking
upon Him the form of a servant,"
6 as the Son
It was necessary, then, that the form
did.
of a servant should be taken away from their
eyes, because, through gazing upon it, they
thought that alone which they saw to be
" If
Christ.
ye loved me, ye would rejoice because I said,
"I go unto the Father; for my Father is
greater than I :" 7 that is, on that account it
is necessary for me to go to the Father, be-

Hence also is that which is said,

the

have with

cause, whilst you see me thus, you hold me
to be less than the Father through that which
you see; and so, being taken up with the
creature and the "fashion" which I have
taken upon me, you do not perceive the
equality which I
Father.
Hence, too, is this: "Touch me not; for I
am not yet ascended to my Father." !
For
touch, as it were, puts a limit to their conception, and He therefore would not have
the thought of the heart, directed towards
Himself, to be so limited as that He should
be held to be- only that which He seemed to
But the "ascension to the Father"
be.
meant, so to appear as He is equal to the
Father, that the limit of the sight which sufficeth us might be attained there.
Sometimes
also it is said of the Son alone, that He himself sufficeth, and the whole reward of our
love and longing is held forth as in the sight
" He that hath my
of Him. For so it is said,
commandments, and keepeth them, he it is
that lovethme; and he that loveth me shall be
loved of my Father; and I will love him, and
will manifest myself to him." 9
Pray, because He has not here said, And I will show
to him, has He therefore
the Father also
On the contrary, beexcluded the Father ?
I and my Father are one,"
cause it is true,
when the Father is manifested, the Son also,
who is in Him, is manifested; and when the
Son is manifested, the Father also, who is in
As, therefore, when it
Him, is manifested.
" And I will manifest myself to him,"
is said,
it is understood that He manifests also the
Father; so likewise in that which is said,
"When He shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father," it
is understood that He does not take it away from
Himself; since, when He shall bring believers
to the contemplation of God, even the Father,
doubtless He will bring them to the contem-
" And I will
plation of Himself, who has said,
And so, consemanifest myself to him."
"
quently, when Judas had said to Him,
Lord,
it that Thou wilt manifest Thyself
how is
unto us, and not unto the world?"
Jesus
answered and said to him, "If a man love
me, he will keep my words: and my Father
will love him, and we will come unto him,
and make our abode with him." 10
Behold,
that He manifests not only Himself to him
by whom He is loved, because He comes to
him together with the Father, and abides
with him.

"

19. Will it perhaps be thought, that when
the Father and the Son make their abode
with him who loves them, the Holy Spirit

1 John xiv. 154 1 Cor. ii. 11.
7 John xiv. 2 ?.

- 1 Cor. ii. 14.
5 John xvi. 6, 7.

3 John xvi. 13.
6 Phil. ii. ?

8 John xx. 17.
10 John xiv. 22, 23.

9 John xiv. 21.

[Book I.

?

is

"

abode ?

from

that

excluded

What,
then, is that which is said above of
the
" Whom the world cannot
Holy Spirit :
receive, because it seeth Him not: but ye
know Him; for He abideth with you, and is
He, therefore, is not excluded
in you
is said, "He
from that abode, of whom it
abideth with you, and is in you;" unless,
perhaps, any one be so senseless as to think,
that when the Father and the Son have come
that they may make their abode with him
who loves them, the Holy Spirit will depart
thence, and (as it were) give place to those
who are greater.
But the Scripture itself
for it says a little
meets this carnal idea;
"
I will pray the Father, and He shall
above:
give you another Comforter, that He may
He will not
abide with you for ever." 1
therefore depart when the Father and the
Son come, but will be in the same abode with
them eternally; because neither will He come
without them, nor they without Him.
But
in order to intimate the Trinity, some things
are separately affirmed, the Persons being
also each severally named; and yet are not to
be understood as though the other Persons
were excluded, on account of the unity of the
same Trinity and the One substance and
Godhead of the Father and of the Son and
of the Holy Spirit.

CHAP. IO.

IN WHAT MANNER CHRIST SHALL
DELIVER UP THE KINGDOM TO GOD, EVEN THE
THE KINGDOM HAVING BEEN DEFATHER.
LIVERED TO GOD, EVEN THE FATHER, CHRIST
WILL NOT THEN MAKE INTERCESSION FOR US.
20. Our Lord Jesus Christ, therefore, will
so deliver up the kingdom to God, even the
Father, Himself not being thence excluded,
nor the Holy Spirit, when He shall bring believers to the contemplation of God, wherein
is the end of all good actions, and everlasting
rest, and joy which never will be taken from
For He signifies this in that which He
us.
says: "I will see you again, and your heart
shall rejoice; and your joy no man taketh
from you." 3
Mary, sitting at the feet of the
Lord, and earnestly listening to His word,
foreshowed a similitude of this joy; resting

"

in

"

as she did from all business, and intent upon
the truth, according to that manner of which
is capable, by which, however, to
this life
prefigure that which shall be for eternity.
For while Martha, her sister, was cumbered
about necessary business, which, although
good and useful, yet, when rest shall have
succeeded, is to pass away, she herself was
resting in the word of the Lord. And so the
Lord replied to Martha, when she complained
that her sister did not help her:
Mary hath
chosen the best part, which shall not be taken
away from her." 4 He did not say that Martha was acting a bad part; but that "best
For that
part that shall not be taken away."
part which is occupied in the ministering to
" when the need
taken away
a need shall be
Since the reward of
itself has passed away.
a good work that will pass away is rest that
In that contemplation,
will not pass away.
therefore, God will be all
all; because
nothing else but Himself will be required,
but it will be sufficient to be enlightened by
and to enjoy Him alone.
And so he in
whom "the Spirit maketh intercession with
groanings which cannot be uttered,'' s
says,
" One thing have I desired of the Lord, that
I will seek after; that I may dwell in the
house of the Lord all the days of my life, to
For
contemplate the beauty of the Lord." 6
we shall then contemplate God, the Father
and the Son and the Holy Spirit, when the
Mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus, shall have delivered up the
kingdom to God, even the Father, so as no
longer to make intercession for us, as our
Mediator and Priest, Son of God and Son of
man; 7 but that He Himself too, in so far as
He is a Priest that has taken the form of a
servant for us, shall be put under Him who
has put all things under Him, and under
whom He has put all things: so that, in so
far as He is God, He with Him will have put
us under Himself; in so far as He is a Priest,
He with us will be put under Him. 8
And
therefore as the [incarnate] Son is both God
and man, it is rather to be said that the manhood in the Son is another substance [from
the Son], than that the Son in the Father [is
another substance from the Father]; just as

1 John xiv. 16-23.
2 [An act belonging- eminently and officially to a particular trinitarian person is not performed to the total exclusion of the other
persons, because of the numerical unity of essence. The whole
undivided essence is in each person; consequently, what the essence in one of its personal modes, or forms, does officially and eminently, is participated in by the essence in its other modes or
Hence the interchange of persons in Scripture.
forms.
Though
creation is officially the Father's work, yet the Son creates (Col.
i. 16; Heb. i. 3). The name Saviour is given to the Father (1 Tim.
Judgment belongs officially to the Son (John v. 22; Matt.
i. 1).
xxv. 31); yet the Father judgeth (1 Pet. i. 17). The Father raises
Christ (Acts xiii. 30); yet Christ raises himself (John x. 18; Acts
x. 41; Rom. xiv. 9). W. G. T. S.]

3 John xvi. 22.

6 Ps. xxvii. 4.

4 Luke x. 30-42.
5 Rom. viii. 26.
7 [The redeemed must forever stand in the relation of redeemed
sinners to their Redeemer. Thus standing, they will forever need
Christ's sacrifice and intercession in respect to their past sins in
But as in the heavenly state they are sinless,
this earthly state.
and are incurring no new guilt, it is true that they do not require
the fresh application of atoning blood for new sins, nor Christ's inThis is probably what Augustin means by
tercession for such.
saying that Christ " no longer makes intercession for us," when he
has delivered up the kingdom to God. When the Mediator has
surrendered his commission, he ceases to redeem sinners from
death, while yet he continues forever to be the Head of those whom
he has redeemed, and their High Priest forever, after the order of
Melchizedek (Heb. vii. 1; .) W. G. T. S.]
S 1 Cor. xv. 24-28,

Chap. XL]

ON THE TRINITY.

the carnal nature of my soul is more another
substance in relation to my soul itself, although in one and the same man, than the
soul of another man is in relation to
my
soul. *

"

"

"

to

that

that is,

when He shall

21. When, therefore, He "shall have
delivered up the kingdom to God, even the
have
Father,"
brought those who believe and live by faith,
for whom now as Mediator He maketh incontemplation, for the
tercession,
obtaining of which we sigh and groan, and
when labor and groaning shall have passed
then, since the kingdom will have
away,
been delivered up to God, even the Father,
He will no more make intercession for us.
And this He signifies, when He says:
These
things have I spoken unto you in
simili2 but the time cometh when I shall no
tudes;
more speak unto you in similitudes,
- but I
"
shall declare 3 to you plainly of the Father:
that is, they will not then be "similitudes,"
"
when the sight shall be
For
face to face."
" But I will declare
this it is which He says,
as if He said,
to you plainly of the Father;
For He
I will plainly show you the Father.
"
to you, because He is
declare
says, I will
" At that
For He goes on to say,
His word.
day ye shall ask in my name; and I say not
unto you, that I will pray the Father for
you: for the Father Himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed
I came forth
that I came out from God.
from the Father, and am come into
the
world: again, I leave the world, and go to the
Father." 4 What is meant by
I came forth
from the Father," unless this, that I have
not appeared in that form in which I am
equal to the Father, but otherwise, that is,
as less than the Father, in the creature which
I have taken upon me? And what is meant
I am come into the world," unless this,
by
that I have manifested to the eyes even of
sinners who love this world, the form of a
servant which I took, making myself of no
reputation? And what is meant by
Again,
" unless this, that I take
I leave the world,
away from the sight of the lovers of this
world that which they have seen ? And what
is meant by
I go to the Father," unless
this, that I teach those who are my faithful
ones to understand me in that being in which
I am equal to the Father ?
Those who be-

"

"

"

"

1 [The animal soul is different in kind from the rational soul,
though both constitute one person; while the rational soul of a man
Similarly, says Auis the same in kind with that of another man.
gustin, there is a difference in kind between the human nature and
the divine nature of Christ, though constituting one theanthropic
person, while the divine nature of the Son is the same in substance
with that of the Father, though constituting two different persons,
the Father and Son. W. G. t. S.]

2 Proverbs A. V.

3 Show A.V.

4 John xvi. 25-28.

"

"

lieve this will be thought worthy of being
brought by faith to sight, that is, to that very
sight, in bringing them to which He is said
deliver up the kingdom to God, even the
to
For His faithful ones, whom He
Father."
has redeemed with His blood, are called His
kingdom, for whom He now intercedes; but
then, making them to abide in Himself there,
where He is equal to the Father, He will no
longer pray the Father for them.
For,"
He says, "the Father Himself loveth you."
For indeed He "prays," in so far as He is
less than the Father; but as He is equal
with the Father, He with the Father grants.
Wherefore He certainly does
not exclude
" The
Himself from that which He says,
" but He means
Father Himself loveth you;
it to be understood after that manner which I
have above spoken of, and sufficiently intimatnamely, that for the most part each Pered,
son of the Trinity is so named, that the other
Persons also may be understood.
AccordFor the Father Himself loveth you,"
ingly*
is so said that by consequence both the Son
and the Holy Spirit also may be understood:
not that He does not now love us, who spared
not His own Son, but delivered Him up for
3 but God loves us, such as we shall
us all;
be, not such as we are, For such as they are
whom He loves, such are they whom He
keeps eternally; which shall then be, when
He who now maketh intercession for us shall
have "
delivered up the kingdom to God,
even the Father," so as no longer to ask the
Father, because the Father Himself loveth
But for what deserving, except of faith,
us.
by which we believe before we see that which
For by this faith we shall aris promised ?
rive at sight; so that He may love us, being
such, as He loves us in order that we may
become; and not such, as He hates us because we are, and exhorts and enables us to
wish not to be always.

"

CHAP. II

BY WHAT RULE IN THE SCRIPTURES
IT IS UNDERSTOOD THAT THE SON IS NOW
EQUAL AND NOW LESS.
22. Wherefore, having mastered this rule
for interpreting the Scriptures concerning the
Son of God, that we are to distinguish in them
what relates to the form of God, in which He
is equal to the Father, and what to the form
of a servant which He took, in which He is
less than the Father; we shall not be disquieted by apparently contrary and mutually
For
repugnant sayings of the sacred books.
both the Son and the Holy Spirit, according
to the form of God, are equal to the Father,

5 Rom. viii. 32.

[Book I.

is

and He is
said

because neither of them is a creature, as we
have already shown: but according to the
form of a servant He is less than the Father,
because He Himself has said, "My Father
less than
is greater than I;"
of Him, He
Himself, because it
"
and He is less than
emptied Himself ;
the^Holy Spirit, because He Himself says,
a word against the
"Whosoever speaketh
Son of man, it shall be forgiven him; but
whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost,
it shall not be forgiven Him." 3 And in the
" But
Spirit too He wrought miracles, saying:
if I with the Spirit of God cast out devils, no
doubt the kingdom of God is come upon
you." 4 And in Isaiah He says,
in the lesson which He Himself read in the synagogue,
and showed without a scruple of doubt to be
fulfilled concerning Himself," The Spirit of
the Lord God," He says, "is upon me: because He hath anointed me to preach good
tidings unto the meek He hath sent me to
for
5 etc.:
proclaim liberty to the captives/'
He therefore dethe doing of which things
because the
clares Himself to be "sent,"
Spirit of God is upon Him.
According to
the form of God, all things were made by
Him; 6 according to the form of a servant,
He was Himself made of a woman, made
According to the form of
under the law. 7
God, He and the Father are one;
according
to the form of a servant, He came not to do
His own will, but the will of Him that sent
According to the form of God, "As
Him. 9
the Father hath life in Himself, so hath He
given to the Son to have life in Himself;" 10
"
according to the form of a servant, His
soul
" O my
is sorrowful even unto death;'' and,
"
Father," He says,
if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me." "
According to the form
of God, "He is the True God, and eternal
according to the form of a servant,
life;"
" He became obedient unto death, even the
23, According to the
death of the cross." I3
form of God, all things that the Father hath
are His, I4 and "All mine," He says, "are
" I5 according to
Thine, and Thine are mine;
the form of a servant, the doctrine is not His
own, but His that sent Him. 16

CHAP. 12.

IN WHAT MANNER THE SON IS SAID
NOT TO KNOW THE DAY AND THE HOUR
SOME THINGS
WHICH THE FATHER KNOWS.
SAID OF CHRIST ACCORDING TO THE FORM OF
GOD, OTHER THINGS ACCORDING TO THE FORM
OF A SERVANT. IN WHAT WAY IT IS OF CHRIST
TO GIVE THE KINGDOM, IN WHAT NOT OF
CHRIST WILL BOTH JUDGE AND NOT
CHRIST.
JUDGE.

Again,

" Of that day and that hour knoweth
no man, no, not the angels which are in heaven;
neither the Son, but the Father." 17 For He is
ignorant of this, as making others ignorant ; that
is, in that He did not so know as at that time
lS as it was said to
to show His disciples:
Abraham, "Now I know that thou fearest
God," 19 that is, now I have caused thee to
know it; because he himself, being tried in
that temptation, became known to himself.
For He was certainly going to tell this same
thing to His disciples at the fitting time;
speaking of which yet future as if past, He
says, "Henceforth I call you not servants,
but friends; for the servant knoweth not what
his Lord doeth: but I have called you friends;
for all things that I have heard of my Father
I have made known unto you;" 20 which He
had not yet done, but spoke as though He
had already done it, because He certainly
For He says to the disciples
would do it.
themselves, "I have yet many things to say
unto you; but ye cannot bear them now." 21
" Of
Among which is to be understood also,
For the apostle also
the day and hour."
says, "I determined not to know anything
among you, save Jesus Christ, and Him cru22 because he was speaking to those
cified;"
who were not able to receive higher things
concerning the Godhead of Christ. To whom
I could not
also a little while after he says,
speak unto you as unto spiritual,but as unto carnal." 23 He was
ignorant," therefore, among
them of that which they were not able to know
from him. And that only he said that he
knew, which it was fitting that they should
In short, he knew among
know from him.
the perfect what he knew not among babes;
" We speak wisdom among
for he there says:
For a man is said
them that are perfect."

"

"

1 John xiv. 28.
3 Matt. xii. 32.
5 Isa lxi. 1; Luke iv. 18, 19.
7 Gal. iv. 4.
9 John vi. 38.
! John v. 26.

2 Phil. ii. 7.
4 Matt. xii. 28.
6 John i. 3.
8 John. x. 30.

[In communicating the- Divine Essence to the
Son, in eternal generation, the essence is communicated with all
In this
its attributes.
way, the Father "
gives to the Son to have life in himself." when
he makes common (icot.vu>i>eiv), between Himself and the Son, the
one Divine Essence. W. G. T. S.]

Self existence is one of these attributes.

r 7 Mark xiii. 32.
18 [The more common explanation of this text in modern exegesis makes the ignorance to be literal, and referable solely to
the human nature of our Lord, not to his person as a whole.
Augustin's explanation, which Bengel, on Mark xiii. 32, is inclined to favor, escapes the difficulty that arises from a seeming
division of the one theanthopic person into two portions, one of
Yet this same difficulty bewhich knows, and the other does not.
sets the fact ol a. growth in knowledge, which is plainly taught in
Luke i. 80.
In this case, the increase in wisdom must relate to the
humanity alone. W.G.T.S.l

11 Matt. xxvi. 38, 39.
13 Phil. ii. 8.
15 John xvii. 10.

I2 1 John v. 20.
U John xvii. 15.
l6 John vii. 16.

*9 Gen. xxii. 12.
21 John xvi. 12.
23 1 Cor. iii. 1.

2 John xv. 15.
22 1 Cor. ii. 2.
24 1 Cor. ii. 6.

Chap. XII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

not to know what he hides, after that kind of
speech, after which a ditch is called blind
For the Scriptures do not
which is hidden.
use any other kind of speech than may be
found in use among men, because they speak
to men.

"

"

"

"

created in the beginning of the ways

24. According to the form of God, it is said,
Before all the hills He begat me," ' that is,
before all the loftinesses of things created;
Before the dawn I begat Thee," 2 that
and,
is, before all times and temporal things: but
according to the form of a servant, it is said,
*' The Lord created me in the beginning of
Because, according to the form
His ways." 3
of God, He said, "I am the truth;" and acI am the
cording to the form of a servant,
For, because He Himself, being the
way." 4
first-begotten of the dead, 5 made a passage to
the kinodom of God to life eternal for His
Church, to which He is so the Head as to
make the body also immortal, therefore He
"
was
of God in His work.
For, according to the
form of God, He is the beginning,
6 that also
speaketh unto us, in which "beginning" God
created the heaven and the earth; 7 but ac-
" He is a
cording to che form of a servant,
bridegroom coming out of His chamber." 8
" He is the
According to the form of God,
first-born of every creature, and He is before
"
all things and by him all things consist;
" He
according to the form of a servant,
the body, the Church." 9
is the head of
" He is
According to the form of God,
the Lord of glory."
evident that He Himself glorifies His saints:
for, "Whom He did predestinate, them He
also called; and whom He called, them He
also justified; and whom He justified, them
Of Him accordingly it
He also glorified.""
is said, that He justifieth the ungodly;
12 of
Him it is said, that He is just and a justifier.
If, therefore, He has also glorified those whom
He has justified, He who justifies, Himself
also glorifies; who is, as I have said, the Lord
Yet, according to the form of a
of glory.
servant, He replied to His disciples, when
inquiring about their own glorification: "To
sit on my right hand and on my left is not
mine to give, but [it shall be given to them]
for whom it is prepared by my Father." I4

From which it

is

25. But that which is prepared by His
Father is prepared also by the Son Himself,
because He and the Father are one. IS For we
have already shown, by many modes of speech
in the divine Scriptures, that, in this Trinity,

1 Prov. viii. 25.
3 Prov. viii. 22.
6 John viii. 25.
9 Col. i. 15, 17, 18.
12 Rom. iv. 5.
T 5 John x. 30.

2 Ps. ex. 3, Vulgate.
4 John xiv. 6.
7 Gen. i. 1.
10 1 Cor. ii. 8.
*3 Rom. iii. 26.

S Apoc. i. 5.
8 Ps. xix. <;.
" Rom. viii. 30.
*4 Matt. xx. 23.

'

what is said of each is also said of all, on account of the indivisible working of the one
As He also says of the
and same substance.
Holy Spirit, "If I depart, I will send Him
16 He did not say, We will send;
unto you."
but in such way as if the Son only should
send Him, and not the Father; while yet He
says in another place, "These things have I
spoken unto you, being yet present with you;
but the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my name, He
Here again it
shall teach you all things." 17
is so said as if the Son also would not send
As therefore in
Him, but the Father only.
"
these texts, so also where He says,
But for
them for whom it is prepared by my Father,"
He meant it to be understood that He Himself, with the Father, prepares seats of glory
for those for whom He will.
But some one
may say: There, when He spoke of the Holy
Spirit, He so says that He Himself will send
Him, as not to deny that the Father will send
Him; and in the other place, He so says that
the Father will send Him, as not to deny
that He will do so Himself; but here He exIt is not mine to give," and
pressly says,
so goes on to say that these things are preBut this is the very
pared by the Father.
thing which we have already laid down to be
said according to the form of a servant: viz.,
that we are so to understand "It is not mine
it were said, This is not in the
to give,'' as if
power of man to give; that so He may be understood to give it through that wherein He
is God equal to the Father.
"It is not
mine," He says,
to give;" that is, I do not
give these things by human power, but "to
"
those for whom it is prepared by my Father;
but then take care you understand also, that
if "all things which the Father hath are
mine," 18 then this certainly is mine also, and
I with the Father have prepared these things.
26. For I ask again, in what manner this is
If any man hear not my words, I will
said,
not judge him?'' I9 For perhaps He has said
here, "I will not judge him," in the same
sense as there, "It is not mine to give."
But
"I came not," He
what follows
says, "to judge the world, but to save the
" and then He adds," He that rejectworld;
eth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one
Now here we should
that judgeth him."
understand the Father, unless He had added,
" The word that I have spoken, the same
shall judge him in the last day."
Well, then,
will neither the Son judge, because He says,
" nor the Father, hut
"
Nay.

the word which the Son hath spoken ?

I will not judge him,

here?

"

"

16 John xvi. 7.
18 John xvi 15.

*7 John xiv. 25, 26.
'9 John xii. 47-50.

[Book I.

"

"

"

"

I am not born of myself.

For I," He says,
but hear what yet follows:
" have not spoken of myself; but the Father
which sent me, He gave me a commandment,
what I should say, and what I should speak;
and I know that His commandment is
life
everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore,
even as the Father said unto me, so I speak."
If therefore the Son judges not, but "the
word which the Son hath spoken;" and the
word which the Son hath spoken therefore
judges, because the Son
hath not spoken of
Himself, but the Father who sent Him gave
Him a commandment what He should say,
and what He should speak:" then the Father
assuredly judges, whose word it is which the
Son hath spoken; and the same Son Himself
is the very Word of the Father.
For the
commandment of the Father is not one thing,
and the word of the Father another; for He
hath called it both a word and a commandLet us see, therefore, whether perment.
chance, when He says,
I have not spoken
of myself," He meant to be understood thus,
For if He speaks
the word of the Father, then He speaks Him1 because He is Himself the Word of the
self,
For ordinarily He says, "The
Father.
by which He means it
Father gave to me;
to be understood that the Father begat Him:
not that He gave anything to Him, already
existing and not possessing it; but that the
very meaning of, To have given that He
might have, is, To have begotten that He
For it is not, as with the creature,
might be.
so with the Son of God before the incarnation
and before He took upon Him our flesh, the
Only-begotten by whom all things were made;
that He is one thing, and has another: but
He is in such way as to be what He has.
And this is said more plainly, if any one is
fit to receive it, in that place where He says:
"
For as the Father hath life in Himself, so
hath He given to the Son to have life in HimFor He did not give to Him, already
self." 2
existing and not having life, that He should
have life in Himself; inasmuch as, in that He
is, He is life.
Therefore "He gave to the
Son to have life in Himself" means, He begat
the Son to be unchangeable life, which is life
Since, therefore, the Word of God
eternal.
is the Son of God, and the Son of God is
"the true God and eternal life,"
3 as John
says in his Epistle; so here, what else are we
to acknowledge when the Lord says, "The
word which I have spoken, the same shall
judge him at the last day,"* and calls that
very word the word of the Father and the
commandment of the Father, and that very

"

commandment everlasting life?"
know," He says,
life everlasting."

"And I
" that His commandment is

27. I ask, therefore, how we are to understand, "I will not judge him; but the Word
which I have spoken shall judge him:" which
appears from what follows to be so said, as if
He would say, I will not judge; but the Word
But the Word of
of the Father will judge.
the Father is the Son of God Himself.
Is it
to be so understood: I will not judge, but I
will judge ? How can this be true, unless in
this way: viz., I will not judge by human
power, because I am the Son of man; but I
will judge by the power of the Word, because
I am the Son of God ? Or if it still seems
contradictory and inconsistent to say, I will
not judge, but I will judge; what shall we say
of that place where He says, "My doctrine
is not mine?" How "mine," when "not
For He did not say, This doctrine
mine ?
is not mine, but "My doctrine is not mine:"
that which He called His own, the same He
called not His own. How can this be true,
unless He has called it His own in one relation; not His own, in another ?
According to
the form of God, His own; according to the
For when
form of a servant, not His own.
He says, "It is not mine, but His that sent
me," 5 He makes us recur to the Word itself.
For the doctrine of the Father is the Word of
And
the Father, which is the Only Son.
" He that believeth
what, too, does that mean,
" 6 How believe
on me, believeth not on me ?
on Him, yet not believe on Him? How can
so opposite and inconsistent a thing be understood "Whoso believeth on me," He says,
"believeth not on me, but on Him that sent
me;" unless you so understand it, Whoso
believeth on me believeth not on that which
he sees, lest our hope should be in the creature; but on Him who took the creature,
whereby He might appear to human eyes, and
so might cleanse our hearts by faith, to contemplate Himself as equal to the Father? So
that in turning the attention of believers to
"
the Father, and saying,
Believeth not on me,
but on Him that sent me," He certainly did
not mean Himself to be separated from the
Father, that is, from Him that sent Him; but
that men might so believe on Himself, as
they believe on the Father, to whom He is
And this He says in express terms in
equal.
another place, "Ye believe in God, believe
also in me:" 7 that is, in the same way as
you believe in God, so also believe in me;
because I and the Father are One God.
As
therefore, here, He has as it were withdrawn

1 Seifisum loquitur.
3 i John v. 20

2 John v. 26.
4 John xii. 48.

5 John vii. 16.

6 John xii. 44.

7 John xiv. 1.

Chap. XIII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

"

"

the faith of men from Himself, and transferred
Believeth not
it to the Father, by saying,
on me, but on Him that sent me," from
whom nevertheless He certainly did not separate Himself; so also, when He says,
It is
shall be given to
not mine to give, but [it
them] for whom it is prepared by my Father,"
it is 1 think plain in what relation both are to
For that other also is of the same
be taken.
whereas He Himkind,
self shall judge the quick and dead. 1
But
because He will not do so by human power,
therefore, reverting to the Godhead, He raises
the hearts of men upwards; which to lift up,
He Himself came down.

I will not judge;

"

"

''

taking

For that

CHAP. 13.

DIVERSE THINGS ARE SPOKEN CONCERNING THE SAME CHRIST, ON ACCOUNT OF
THE DIVERSE NATURES OF THE ONE HYPOSTASIS [theanthropic PERSON]. WHY IT IS
SAID THAT THE FATHER WILL NOT JUDGE, BUT
HAS GIVEN JUDGMENT TO THE SON.
28. Yet unless the very same were the Son
of man on account of the form of a servant
which He took, who is the Son of God on account of the form of God in which He is;
Paul the apostle would not say of the princes
" For had they known it, they
of this world,
would not have crucified the Lord of glory."
For He was crucified after the form of a ser-
" was cruci-
" the Lord of glory
vant, and yet
'' was such as to make
fied.
God man, and man God.
Yet what is said
on account of what, and what according to
what, the thoughtful, diligent, and pious reader
discerns for himself, the Lord being his helper.
For instance, we have said that He glorifies
His own, as being God, and certainly then as
being the Lord of glory; and yet the Lord of
glory was crucified, because even God is
rightly said to have been crucified, not after
the power of the divinity, but after the weakjust as we say, that He
ness of the flesh: 3
judges as God, that is, by divine power, not by
human; and yet the man Himself will judge,
just as the Lord of glory was crucified: for so
He expressly says, "When the Son of man
shall come in His glory, and all the holy
angels with Him, and before Him shall be
gathered all nations;" 4 and the rest that is
foretold of the future judgment in that place
even to the last sentence. And the Jews, inasmuch as they will be punished in that judgment for persisting in their wickedness, as it
"
shall look upon Him
is elsewhere written,
whom they have pierced." 5
For whereas
both good and bad shall see the Judge of the

1 2 Tim. iv. 1.
4 Matt. xxv. 31, 32.

2 1 Cor. ii. 8.
5 Zech. xii. 10.

3 2 Cor. xiii. 4.

"

quick and dead, without doubt the bad will
not be able to see Him, except after the form
in which He is the Son of man; but yet in the
glory wherein He will judge, not in the lowliness wherein He was judged.
But the ungodly without doubt will not see that form of
God in which He is equal to the Father.
For
they are not pure in heart; and
Blessed are
the pure in heart: for they shall see God." 6
And that sight is face to face, 7 the very sight
that is promised as the highest reward to the
just, and which will then take place when He
"
shall have delivered up the kingdom to God,
even the Father;" and in this "kingdom"
He means the sight of His own form also to
be understood, the whole creature being made
subject to God, including that wherein the
Son of God was made the Son of man.
Because, according to this creature, "The Son
also Himself shall be subject unto Him, that
put all things under Him, that God may be
Otherwise if the Son of God,
all in all."
judging in the form in which He is equal to
the Father, shall appear when He judges to
the ungodly also; what becomes of that which
He promises, as some great thing, to him who
loves Him, saying, "And I will love him, and
will manifest myself to him?" 9 Wherefore
He will judge as the Son of man, yet not by
human power, but by that whereby He is
the Son of God; and on the other hand,
He will judge as the Son of God, yet not
appearing in that [unincarnate] form in which
He is God equal to the Father, but in that [incarnate form] in which He is the Son of man. 10
29. Therefore both ways of speaking may
be used; the Son of man will judge, and, the
Son of man will not judge: since the Son of
man will judge, that the text may be true
which says, "When the Son of man shall
come, then before Him shall be gathered all
nations;" and the Son of man will not judge,
that the text may be true which says,
I will
I seek not mine own
not judge him;
glory: there is One that seeketh and judgFor in respect to this, that in the
eth.'' 13
judgment, not the form of God, but the form
of the Son of man will appear, the Father
Himself will not judge; for according to this

and,

""

"

"

7 1 Cor. xiii. 12.
9 John xiv. 21.

6 Matt. v. 8.
8 1 Cor. xv. 24-28.
10 [Augustin, in this discussion, sometimes employs the phrase
"Son of man" to denote the human nature of Christ, in distincHut in Scripture and in trinitarian theology
tion from the divine.
generally, this phrase properly denotes the whole theanthropic perjust as '" man," (1 Tim. ii. 5), "last Adam"
son under a human title
(1 Cor. xv. 45), and "second man" (1 Cor. xv. 47), denote not tinhuman nature, but the whole divine-human person under a human
does not designate the
title. Strictly used, the phrase
difference between the divine and human natures in the theanthro-
-incarnate and that of the
pos, but between the person of the
Augustin's meaning is. that the Son of God will
incarnate Logos.
" form of God," but
judge men at the last day, not in his original
as the Son of man. W. G.
as this is united with human nature
T. S.]

" Son of man "

I2 John viii. 50.

XI John xii. 47.

'

;4

[Book I.

it

is said,

" For the Father judgeth no man,
hut hath committed all judgment unto the
Whether this is said after that mode
Son."
of speech which we have mentioned above,
where it is said, "So hath He given to the
Son to have life in Himself," 1 that it should
signify that so He begat the Son; or, whether
after that of which the apostle speaks, saying,
"Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him,
and given Him a name which is above every
(For this is said of the Son of man,
name:"
in respect to whom the Son of God was raised
from the dead; since He, being in the form of
the Father, wherefrom He
God equal to
"emptied" Himself by taking the form of a
servant, both acts and suffers, and receives,
in that same form of a servant, what the
apostle goes on to mention: "He humbled
Himself, and became obedient unto death,
even the death of the cross; wherefore God
also hath highly exalted Him ; and given Him
a name which is above every name; that at
the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of
things in heaven, and things in earth, and
things under the earth; and that every tongue
should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, in.
the Glory of God the Father:" 2
whether
" He hath committed all
then the words,
judgment unto the Son," are said according
to this or that mode of speech; it sufficiently
appears from this place, that if they were said
according to that sense in which it is said,
"He hath given to the Son to have life in
Himself," it certainly would not be said,
" The Father judgeth no man."
For in respect to this, that the Father hath begotten
the Son equal to Himself, He judges with
Him.
Therefore it is in respect to this that
it is said, that in the judgment, not the form
of God, but the form of the Son of man will
Not that He will not judge, who
appear.
hath committed all judgment unto the Son,
" There is One
since the Son saith of Him,
that seeketh and judgeth:" but it is so said,
' The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son;" as if it
were said, No one will see the Father in the
judgment of the quick and the dead, but all
will see the Son: because He is also the Son
of man, so that He can be seen even by the
ungodly,. since they too shall see Him whom
they have pierced.

30. Lest, however, we may seem to conjecture this rather than to prove it clearly, let us
produce a certain and plain sentence of the
Lord Himself, by which we may show that
" The Father
this was the cause why He said,
judgeth no man, but hath committed all judg-

)

"

"

ment unto the Son," viz. because He will appear as Judge in the form of the Son of man,
which is not the form of the Father, but of
the Son; nor yet that form of the Son in which
He is equal to the Father, but that in which
He is less than the Father; in order that, in
the judgment. He may be visible both to the
For a little while after
good and to the bad.
"
Verily, verily, I say unto you, He
He says,
that heareth my word, and believeth on Him
that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall
not come into condemnation; but shall pass 3
from death unto life." Now this life eternal
is that sight which does not belong to the bad.
Then follows,
Verily, verily, I say unto you,
The hour is coming, and now is, when the
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God,
and they that hear shall live." 4 And this is
proper to the godly, who so hear of His incarnation, as to believe that He is the Son of
God, that is, who so receive Him, as made
for tneir sakes less than the Father, in the
form of a servant, that they believe Him
equal to the Father, in the form of God.
And thereupon He continues, enforcing this
For as the Father hath life in
very point,
Himself, so hath He given to the Son to have
life in Himself." And then He comes to the
sight of His own glory, in which He shall
come to judgment; which sight will be comFor He
mon to the ungodly and to the just.
goes on to say, "And hath given Him authority to execute judgment also, because He
is the Son of man." 5
I think nothing can be
For inasmuch as the Son of God
more clear.
is equal to the Father, He does not receive
this power of executing judgment, but He has
it with the Father in secret; but He receives
it, so that the good and the bad may see Him
judging, inasmuch as He is the Son of man.
Since the sight of the Son of man will be
shown to the bad also: for the sight of the
form of God will not be shown except to the
pure in heart, for they shall see God; that is,
to the godly only, to whose love He promises
this very thing, that He will show Himself to
And see, accordingly, what follows:
them.
"
Marvel not at this," He says. Why does
He forbid us to marvel, unless it be that, in
truth, every one marvels who does not understand, that therefore He said the Father gave
Him power also to execute judgment, because
He is the Son of man; whereas, it might
rather have been anticipated that He would
say, since He is the Son of God ? But because
the wicked are not able to see the Son of God
as He is in the form of God equal to the Father,

1 John v. 22, 26.

2 Phil. ii. 8-11.

3 TransizV in Vulg.; and so in the Greek.
4 John v. 24, 25.

5 John v. 25, 26.

Chap. XIII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

but yet it is necessary that both the just and the
wicked should see the Judge of the quick and
dead, when they will be judged in His presence; "Marvel not at this," He says, "for
the hour is coming, in the which all that are in
the graves shall hear His voice, and shall come
forth; they that have done good, unto the
resurrection of life; and they that have done
evil, unto the resurrection of damnation." 1
For this purpose, then, it was necessary that
He should therefore receive that power, because He is the Son of man, in order that all
in rising again might see Him in the form in
which He can be seen by all, but by some to
And
damnation, by others to life eternal.
what is life eternal, unless that sight which is
not granted to the ungodly? "That they
might know Thee," He says, "the One true
God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast
sent." 2 And how are they to know Jesus
Christ Himself also, unless as the One true
God, who will show Himself to them; not as
He will show Himself, in the form of the Son
of man, to those also that shall be punished ? 3
31. He is "good," according to that sight,
according to which God appears to the pure
truly God is good unto Israel,
in heart; for
But
even to such as are of a clean heart." 4
when the wicked shall see the Judge, He will
not seem good to them; because they will not
rejoice in their heart to see Him, but all
"kindreds of the earth shall then wail because of Him," 5 namely, as being reckoned
in the number of all the wicked and unbelievers. On this account also He replied to
him, who had called Him Good Master, when
seeking advice of Him how he might attain
Why askest thou me about
eternal
good? 6 there is none good but One, that is,
God." 7 And yet the Lord Himself, in another place, calls man good: "A good man,"
He says,
out of the good treasure of his
heart, bringeth forth good things: and an evil
man, out of the evil treasure of his heart,
But because
bringeth forth evil things."
that man was seeking eternal life, and eternal
life consists in that contemplation in which
God is seen, not for punishment, but for everlasting joy; and because he did not under-

life,

"

"

"

2 John xvii. 3.

1 John v. 22-29.
3 [Augustin here seems to teach that the phenomenal appearance of Christ to the redeemed in heaven will be different from
that to all men in the day of judgment. He says that he will show
himself to the former "in the form of God;" to the latter, "in the
form of the Son of man." But, surely, it is one and the same Godm.in who sits on the judgment throne, and the heavenly throne.
His appearance must be the same in both instances: namely, that
of God incarnate. The effect of his phenomenal appearance upon
the believer will, indeed, "be very different from that upon the unFor the wicked, this vision of God incarnate will be
believer.
one of terror; for the redeemed one of joy. W. G. T. S.]

4 Ps. lxxiii. 1.
6 [Augustin's reading of this text is that of the uncials; and in

5 Apoc. i. 7.

that form which omits the article with aya.-<iov. W. G. T. S.]

7 Matt. xix. 17.

8 Matt. xii. 35.

stand with whom he was speaking, and thoug it
Him to be only the Son of man: 9 Why, He
says, askest thou me about good ?
that is,
with respect to that form which thou seest,
why askest thou about good, and callest me.
according to what thou seest, Good Master ?
This is the form of the Son of man, the form
which has been taken, the form that will appear in judgment, not only to the righteous,
but also to the ungodly; and the sight of this
form will not be for good to those who are
But there is a sight of that form of
wicked.
mine, in which when I was, I thought it not
robbery to be equal with God: but in order
That
to take this form I emptied myself.
one God, therefore, the Father and the Son
and the Holy Spirit, who will not appear,
except for joy which cannot be taken away
from the just; for which future joy he sighs,
" One thing have I desired of the
who says,
Lord, that will I seek after; that I may dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of my
" " that
life, to behold the beauty of the Lord:
one God, therefore, Himself, I say, is alone
good, for this reason, that no one sees Him
for sorrow and wailing, but only for salvation
If you understand me after
and true joy.
this latter form, then I am good; but if according to that former only, then why askest
thou me about good ?
If thou art among
those who "
shall look upon Him whom they
I2 that very sight itself will be
have pierced,"
That
evil to them, because it will be penal.
the Lord said,
after
" Why askest thou me about good ? there is
none good but One, that is, God," is probable upon those proofs which I have alleged,
because that sight of God, whereby we shall
contemplate the substance of God unchangeable and invisible to human eyes (which is
promised to the saints alone; which the Apos-
"
I3 and
tle Paul speaks of, as
of which the Apostle John says, "We shall
" u
be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is;
is said, "One thing have I
and of which it
desired of the Lord, that I may behold the
beauty of the Lord," and of which the Lord
I will both love him, and will
Himself says,
IS and on account of
manifest myself to him;
which alone we cleanse our hearts by faith,
"
pure in heart who are
that we may be those
blessed for they shall see God:" 16 and what-

this meaning, then,

face to face;

"

"

"

" Son of, man "

9 [That is, a mere man. Augustin here, as in some other places,
to denote the human nature
employs the phrase
not the divine and human natures united in one person,
by itself
and designated by this human title. The latter is the Scripture
usage. As " Immanuel "
does not properly denote the divine na-
" Son of man "
ture, but the union of divinity and humanity, so
does not properly denote the human nature, but the union of divinity and humanity.

\\ . G. T. S.]

" Ps. xxvii. 4.
M 1 John iii. 2.

z - Zech. xii. 10.
>S John xiv. 21.

10 Phil. ii. 6, 7.
13 1 Cor. xiii. 12.
6 Matt. v. 8.

[Book I.

"

ever else is spoken of that sight: which whosoever turns the eye of love to seek it, may
find most copiously scattered through all the
that sight alone, I say, is our
Scriptures),
chief good, for the attaining of which we are
But
directed to do whatever we do aright.
that sight of the Son of man which is foretold,
when all nations shall be gathered before
Lord, when saw
Him, and shall say to Him,
" will
we Thee an hungered, or thirsty, etc.?
neither be a good to the ungodly, who shall
be sent into everlasting fire, nor the chief
For He still goes on
good to the righteous.
to call these to the kingdom which has been
prepared for them from the foundation of the
" DeFor, as He will say to those,
world.
part into everlasting fire;" so to these," Come,
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you." And as those will go into
everlasting burning; so the righteous will go
But what is life eternal, exinto life eternal.
cept "that they may know Thee/' He says,
"the One true God, and Jesus Christ, whom
" * but know Him now in that
Thou hast sent ?
" Which
glory of which He says to the Father,
I had with Thee before the world was." 2
For
then He will deliver up the kingdom to God,

"

strife

"the

sentence;

even the Father, 3 that the good servant may
enter into the joy of his Lord, 4 and that He
may hide those whom God keeps in the hiding of His countenance from the confusion of
men, namely, of those men who shall then be
confounded by hearing this
of
which evil hearing "the righteous man shall
not be afraid" 5 if only he be kept in
the
tabernacle," that is, in the true faith of the
from
Catholic
of
Church,
6 that is, from the sophistries of
tongues,"
But if there is any other explanaheretics.
tion of the words of the Lord, where He says,
"
Why asketh thou me about good ? there is
none good, but One, that is, God;" provided
only that the substance of the Father be not
therefore believed to be of greater goodness
than that of the Son, according to which He is
the Word by whom all things were made; and
if there is nothing in it abhorrent from sound
doctrine; let us securely use it, and not one
explanation only, but as many as we are able
For so much the more powerfully
to find.
are the heretics proved wrong, the more outlets are open for avoiding their snares.
But
let us now start afresh, and address ourselves
to the consideration of that which still remains.

1 Matt. xxv. 37, 41, 34.

2 John xvii. 3-5.

3 1 Cor. xv. 24.
5 Ps. cxii. 7.

4 Matt. xxv. 31, 23.
6 Ps. xxxi. 31.

BOOK II.

AUGUSTIN PURSUES HIS DEFENSE OF THE EQUALITY OF THE TRINITY; AND IN TREATING OF THE
SENDING OF THE SON AND OF THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND OF THE VARIOUS APPEARANCES OF GOD,
DEMONSTRATES THAT HE WHO IS SENT IS NOT THEREFORE LESS THAN HE WHO SENDS, BECAUSE THE ONE HAS SENT, THE OTHER HAS BEEN SENT; BUT THAT THE TRINITY, BEING IN
ALL THINGS EQUAL, AND ALIKE IN ITS OWN NATURE UNCHANGEABLE AND INVISIBLE AND
OMNIPRESENT, WORKS INDIVISIBLY IN EACH SENDING OR APPEARANCE.

sacred

PREFACE.
When men seek to know God, and bend
their minds according to the capacity of human weakness to the understanding of the
Trinity; learning, as they must, by experience,
the wearisome difficulties of the task, whether
from the sight itself of the mind striving to
gaze upon light unapproachable, or, indeed,
from the manifold and various modes of
speech employed in the
writings
(wherein, as it seems to me, the mind is
nothing else but roughly exercised, in order
that it may find sweetness when glorified by
such men, I say, when
the grace of Christ);
they have dispelled every ambiguity, and
arrived at something certain, ought of all
others most easily to make allowance for
those who err in the investigation of so deep
a secret.
But there are two things most hard
to bear with, in the case of those who are in
error: hasty assumption before the truth is
made plain; and, when it has been made
plain, defence of the falsehood thus hastily
From which two faults, inimical
assumed.
as they are to the finding out of the truth,
and to the handling of the divine and sacred
books, should God, as I pray and hope, defend and protect me with the shield of His
1 and with the grace of His mercy,
good will,
I will not be slow to search out the substance
of God, whether through His Scripture or
For both of these are
through the creature.
set forth for our contemplation to this end,
that He may Himself be sought, and Himself be loved, who inspired the one, and

Nor shall I be afraid of
created the other.
giving my opinion, in which I
shall more
desire to be examined by the upright, than
fear to be carped at by the perverse.
For
charity, most excellent and
unassuming,
gratefully accepts the dovelike eye; but for
the dog's tooth nothing remains, save either
to shun it by the most cautious humility, or
to blunt it by the most solid truth; and far
rather would I be censured by any one whatsoever, than be praised by either the erring
For the lover of truth need
or the flatterer.
fear no one's censure.
For he that censures,
must needs be either enemy or friend.
And
if an enemy reviles, he must be borne with:
but a friend, if he errs, must be taught; if
But if one who errs
he teaches, listened to.
praises you, he confirms your error; if one
who flatters, he
error.
"Let the righteous," therefore, "smite me,
it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove
me; but the oil of the sinner shall not anoint
my head." 2

seduces you into

CHAP. I.

THERE IS A DOUBLE RULE FOR UNDERSTANDING THE SCRIPTURAL MODES OF
SPEECH CONCERNING THE SON OF GOD.
MODES OF SPEECH ARE OF A THREEFOLD KIN P.

TH I

2. Wherefore,

we hold most
although
firmly, concerning our Lord Jesus Christ,
what may be called the canonical rule, as it
is both disseminated through the Scriptures,
and has been demonstrated by learned and
Catholic handlers of the same Scriptures,
namely, that the Son of God is both under-

1 PS. V. 12.

" Ps. cxli. 5.

[Book II.

stood to be equal to the Father according to
the form of God in which He is, and less
than the Father according to the form of a
1 in which form He
servant which He took;
was found to be not only less than the Father,
but also less than the Holy Spirit; and not
not
only so, but less even than Himself,
than Himself who was, but than Himself who
is; because, by taking the form of a servant,
He did not lose the form of God, as the testimonies of the Scriptures taught us, to which
we have referred in the former book: yet
there are some things in the sacred text so
put as to leave it ambiguous to which rule
they are rather to be referred; whether to
that by which we understand the Son as less,
in that He has taken upon Him the creature,
or to that by which we understand that the
Son is not indeed less than, but equal to the
Father, but yet that He is from Him, God
For we call the Son
of God, Light of light.
God of God; but the Father, God only; not
Whence it is plain that the Son has
^/"God.
another of whom He is, and to whom He is
Son; but that the Father has not a Son of
whom He is, but only to whom He is father.
For every son is what he is, of his father,
and is son to his father; but no father is
what he is, of his son, but is father to his
son. 2

"

"

3. Some things, then, are so put in the
Scriptures concerning the Father and the
Son, as to intimate the unity and equality of
I and the
their substance; as, for instance,
Father are one;" 3 and,
Who, being in the
form of God, thought it not robbery to be
" 4 and whatever ether texts
equal with God;
And some, again, are
there are of the kind.
so put that they show the Son as less on account of the form of a servant, that is, of
His having taken upon Him the creature of
a changeable and human substance; as, for
" For my Father is
instance, that which says,
" The Father judgeth
greater than I;
no man, but hath committed all judgment
For a little after he goes on
unto the Son."
" And hath given Him authority to
to say,
execute judgment also, because He is the
Son of man." And further, some are so put,
as to show Him at that time neither as less

" 5 and,

1 Phil. ii. 6, 7.
2 [Augustin here brings to view both the trinitarian and the
The former is the
theanthropic or mediatorial subordination.
status of Sonship. God the Son is God of God.
Sonship as a
Rut a son must be of the
relation is subordinate to paternity.
same grade of being, and of the same nature with his father. A
human son and a human father arealikeand equally human. And
a Divine Son and a Divine Father are alike and equally divine.
The theanthropic or mediatorial subordination is the status of
humiliation, by reason of the incarnation.
In the words of Augusthat by which we understand the Son as less, in that he
tin, it is
has taken upon Him the creature." The subordination in this
case is that of voluntary condescension, for the purpose of redeeming sinful man.
3 John x. 30.

W.G.T.S.]

4 Phil. ii. 6.

5 John xiv. 28.

"

it

nor as equal, but only to intimate that He is
of the Father; as, for instance, that which
" For as the Father hath life in Himsays,
self, so hath He given to the Son to have
life in Himself;" and that other: "The Son
can do nothing of Himself, but what He
For if we shall take
seeth the Father do." 6
this to be therefore so said, because the Son
is less in the form taken from the creature,
will follow that the Father must have
walked on the water, or opened the eyes with
clay and spittle of some other one born blind,
and have done the other things which the
Son appearing in the flesh did among men,
before the Son did them; 7 in order that He
might be able to do those things, who said
that the Son was not able to do anything of
Himself, except what He hath seen the Father
Yet who, even though he were mad,
do.
would think this ?
It remains, therefore, that
these texts are so expressed, because the life
of the Son is unchangeable as that of the
Father is, and yet He is of the Father; and
the working of the Father and of the Son is
indivisible, and yet so to work is given to the
Son from Him of whom He Himself is, that
is, from the Father; and the Son so sees the
Father, as that He is the Son in the very seeing Him.
For to be of the Father, that is, to
be born of the Father, is to Him nothing else
than to see the Father; and to see Him working, is nothing else than to work with Him:
but therefore not from Himself, because He
is not from Himself.
And, therefore, those
" He sees the Father do, these
things which
also doeth the Son likewise," because He is
For He neither does other
of the Father.
things in like manner, as a painter paints other
pictures, in the same way as he sees others
to have been painted by another man; nor
the same things in a different manner, as the
body expresses the same letters, which the
mind has thought; but
whatsoever things,"
saith He, "the Father doeth, these same
things also doeth the Son likewise." 8 He
both "these same things," and
has said
" and hence the working of both
the Father and the Son is indivisible and
equal, but it is from the Father to the Son.
Therefore the Son cannot do anything of
Himself, except what He seeth the Father
rule, then, whereby the
do.
Scriptures so speak as to mean, not to set
forth one as less than another, but only to
show which is of which, some have drawn this
meaning, as if the Son were said to be less.
And some among ourselves who are more unlearned and least instructed in these things,

From this

likewise;

"

'

6 John v. 22, 27, 26, 19.
8 John v. 19.

7 Matt. xiv. 26. and John ix. 6, 7.

Chap. IV.]

ON THE TRINITY.

endeavoring to take these texts according to
the form of a servant, and so mis-interpretAnd to prevent
ing them, are troubled.
this, the rule in question is to be observed,
whereby the Son is not less, but it is simply
intimated that He is of the Father, in which
words not His inequality but His birth is
declared.

is

CHAP. 2.

And in my opinion, if this

THAT SOME WAYS OF SPEAKING CONCERNING THE SON ARE TO BE UNDERSTOOD ACCORDING TO EITHER RULE.
4. There are, then, some things in the
sacred books, as I began by saying, so put,
that it is doubtful to which they are to be referred: whether to that rule whereby the Son
is less on account of His having taken the
creature; or whether to that whereby it is intimated that although equal, yet He is of the
in
Father.
such way doubtful, that which it really is can
neither be explained nor discerned, then such
passages may without danger be understood
according to. either rule, as that, for instance,
" My doctrine is not mine, but His that sent
me." 1
For this may both be taken according
to the form of a servant, as we have already
treated it in the former book; 2 or according
to the form of God, in which He is in such
way equal to the Father, that He is yet of the
For according to the form of God,
Father.
as the Son is not one and His life another,
but the life itself is the Son; so the Son is
not one and His doctrine another, but the
And hence, as
doctrine itself is the Son.
" He hath given life to the Son," is
the text,
no otherwise to be understood than, He hath
life; so also when
begotten the Son, who is
is said, He hath given doctrine to the
Son, it may be rightly understood to mean,
He hath begotten the Son, who is doctrine;
" My doctrine is not
so that, when it is said,
mine, but His who sent me," it is so to be
understood as if it were, I am not from myself, but from Him who sent me.

it

CHAP. 3.

SOME THINGS CONCERNING THE HOLY
SPIRIT ARE TO .BE UNDERSTOOD ACCORDING
TO THE ONE RULE ONLY.
5. For even of the Holy Spirit, of whom
it is not said, "He emptied Himself, and took
upon Him the form of a servant;" yet the
Howbeit, when He the
Lord Himself says,
Spirit of Truth is come, He will guide you
For He shall not speak of
into all truth.
Himself, but whatsoever He shall hear that
shall He speak; and He will show you things

"

"

self,

(for He says,

to come. He shall glorify me; for He shall
receive of mine, and shall show it unto you."
And except He had immediately gone on to
All things that the Father
say after this,
hath are mine; therefore said I, that He shall
take of mine, and shall show it unto you;" 3
it might, perhaps, have been believed that the
Holy Spirit was so born of Christ, as Christ
Since He had said of Himis of the Father.
" My doctrine is not mine, but His that
sent me;" but of the Holy Spirit," For He
shall not speak of Himself, but whatsoever he
" For
shall hear, that shall He speak;" and,
He shall receive of mine, and shall show it
unto you." But because He has rendered the
reason why He said, "He shall receive of
"
mine "
All things that the
Father hath are mine; therefore said I, that
He shall take of mine"); it remains that the
Holy Spirit be understood to have of that
which is the Father's, as the Son also hath.
And how can this be, unless according to
that which we have said above, "But when
the Comforter is come, whom I will send
unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of
truth which proceedeth from the Father, He
shall testify of me "
4 He is said, therefore,
not to speak of Himself, in that He proceedeth from the Father; and as it does not folless because He said,
low that the Son is
" The Son can do nothing of Himself, but
what He seeth the Father do "
(for He has
not said this according to the form of a servant, but according to the form of God, as
we have already shown, and these words do
not set Him forth as less than, but as of the
Father), so it is not brought to pass that the
Holy Spirit is less, because it is said of Him,
" For He shall not speak of Himself, but
shall He
whatsoever He shall hear, that
speak;" for the words belong to Him as proBut whereas both
ceeding from the Father.
the Son is of the Father, and the Holy Spirit
proceeds from the Father, why both are not
called sons, and both not said to be begotten,
but the former is called the one only-begotten Son, and the latter, viz. the Holy Spirit,
neither son nor begotten, because if begotten,
then certainly a son, we will discuss in another place, if God shall grant, and so far as
He shall grant. 5

?

CHAP. 4.

THE GLORIFICATION OF THE SON BY

THE FATHER DOES NOT PROVE INEQUALITY.
6. But here also let them wake up if they
can, who have thought this, too, to be a testimony on their side, to show that the Father

John

16.

2 See above, Book I. c. 12.

3 John xvi. 13-15.
5 Below, Bk. XV. c. 25.

4 John xv. 26.

[Book II.

"

Father, glorify me."

is greater than the Son, because the Son hath
Why, the Holy
said,
Spirit also glorifies Him.
Pray, is the Spirit,
too, greater than He? Moreover, if on that
account the Holy Spirit glorifies the Son, because He shall receive of that which is the
Son's, and shall therefore receive of
that
which is the Son's because all things that the
is evident
Father has are the Son's also; it
that when the Holy Spirit glorifies the Son,
Whence it may
the Father glorifies the Son.
be perceived that all things that the Father
hath are not only of the Son, but also of the
Holy Spirit, because the Holy Spirit is able
to glorify the Son, whom the Father glorifies.
But if he who glorifies is greater than he whom
he glorifies, let them allow that those are equal
who mutually glorify each other.
But it is
written, also, that the Son glorifies the Father;
for He says,
I have glorified Thee on the
Truly let them beware lest the
earth." 1
Holy Spirit be thought greater than both, because He glorifies the Son whom the Father
glorifies, while it is not written that He Himself is glorified either by the Father or by the
Son.

"

CHAP. 5.

THE SON AND HOLY SPIRIT ARE NOT
THE SON IS
OF THE SENDING OF

THEREFORE LESS BECAUSE SENT.
SENT ALSO BY HIMSELF.
THE HOLY SPIRIT.
7. But being proved wrong so far, men betake themselves to saying, that he who sends
is greater than he who is sent: therefore the
Father is greater than the Son, because the
Son continually speaks of Himself as being
sent by the Father; and the Father is also
greater than the Holy Spirit, because Jesus
" Whom the Father
has said of the Spirit,
will send jn my name; '' " and the Holy Spirit
is less than both, because both the Father
sends Him, as we have said, and the Son,
"
when He says,
But if I depart, I will send
Him unto you."
I first ask, then, in this inquiry, whence and whither the Son was sent.
" came forth from the Father,
"I," He says,
and am come into the world." 3
Therefore,
to be sent, is to come forth forth from the
Father, and to come into the world.
What,
then, is that which the same evangelist says
" He was in the world, and
concerning Him,
the world was made by Him, and the world
knew Him not;" and then he adds, "He
Certainly He was
came unto His own?" 4
sent thither, whither He came; but if He was
sent into the world, because He came forth
from the Father, then He both came into the

world and was in the world. He was sent
therefore thither, where He already was.
For
consider that, too, which is written in the
" Do not I fill heaven
prophet, that God said,
and earth V s
If this is said of the Son (for
some will have it understood that the Son
Himself spoke either by the prophets or in the
prophets), whither was He sent except to the
place where He already was ?
For He who
says, "I fill heaven and earth/' was everyBut if it is said of the Father, where
where.
could He be without His own word and without His own wisdom, which
reacheth from
one end to another mightily, and sweetly orBut He cannot be anydereth all things ?
where without His own Spirit.
Therefore, if
God is everywhere, His Spirit also is everyTherefore, the Holy Spirit, too, was
where.
sent thither, where He already was.
For he,
too, who finds no place to which he might go
from the presence of God, and who says,
If
I ascend up into heaven, Thou art there; if I
shall go down into hell, behold, Thou art
wishing it to be understood that God
there;
is present everywhere, named in the previous
verse His Spirit; for He says,
Whither shall
I go from Thy Spirit ? or whither shall I flee
" 7
from Thy presence ?

" 6

"

"

"

"

8. For this reason, then, if both the Son
and the Holy Spirit are sent thither where
they were, we must inquire, how that sending,
whether of the Son or of the Holy Spirit, is
to be understood; for of the Father alone, we
nowhere read that He is sent.
Now, of the
"
But when the
Son, the apostle writes thus:
fullness of the time was come, God sent forth
His Son, made of a woman, made under the
law, to redeem them that were under the
law." 8 " He sent," he says,
" His Son, made
of a woman." And by this term, woman, 9
what Catholic does not know that he did not
wish to signify the privation of virginity; but,
according to a Hebraism, the difference of
sex? When, therefore, he says, "God sent
His Son, made of a woman," he sufficiently
shows that the Son was "sent" in this very
way, in that He was "made of a woman."
Therefore, in that He was born of God, He
was in the world; but in that He was born of
Mary, He was sent and came into the world.
Moreover, He could not be sent by the Father
without the Holy Spirit, not only because the
Father, when He sent Him, that is, when He
made Him of a woman, is certainly understood not to have so made Him without His
own Spirit; but also because it is most plainly
and expressly said in the Gospel in answer to
the Virgin Mary, when she asked of the angel,

1 John xvii. 1, 4.
3 John xvi. 7, 28.

2 John xiv. 26.
4 John i. 10, ii.

5 Jer. xxiii. 24.
8 Gal. iv. 4, 5.

6 Wisd. viii
9 Mulicr.

7 Ps.

Chap. V.]

ON THE TRINITY.

(

"How shall this be?" "The Holy Ghost
'shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Highest shall overshadow thee." 1 And Matthew says, "She was found with child of the
Holy Ghost." 2
Although, too, in the prophet
Isaiah, Christ Himself is understood to say of
His own future advent, "And now the Lord
God and His Spirit hath sent me." 3

"

For the

Who," he says,

9. Perhaps some one may wish to drive us
to say, that the Son is sent also by Himself,
because the conception and childbirth of Mary
is the working of the Trinity, by whose act
And how,
of creating all things are created.
he will go on to say, has the Father sent Him,
if He sent Himself? To whom I answer first,
by asking him to tell me, if he can, in what
manner the Father hath sanctified Him, if
He hath sanctified Himself?
For the same
Say ye of Him,*' He says,
Lord says both;
4 'whom the Father hath sanctified and sent
into the world, Thou blasphemest, because I
" 4 while in another
said, I am the Son of God;
place He says, "And for their sake I sanctify
I ask, also, in what manner the
myself."
Father delivered Him, if He delivered HimPaul says
both:
self?
Apostle
"
"
spared not His own Son,
but delivered Him up for us all;"
6 while
elsewhere he says of the Saviour Himself,
" Who loved me, and delivered Himself for
me." 7 He will reply, I suppose, if he has a
right sense in these things, Because the will
of the Father and the Son is one, and their
In like manner, then, let
working indivisible.
him understand the incarnation and nativity of
the Virgin, wherein the Son is understood as
sent, to have been wrought by one and the
same operation of the Father and of the Son
indivisibly; the Holy Spirit certainly not being
thence excluded, of whom it is expressly said,
"She was found with child by the Holy
For perhaps our meaning will be
Ghost."
more plainly unfolded, if we ask in what
manner God sent His Son. He commanded
that He should come, and He, complying with
Did He then rethe commandment, came.
quest, or did He only suggest ?
But whichever of these it was, certainly it was done by
a word, and the Word of God is the Son of
God Himself.
Wherefore, since the Father
sent Him by a word, His being sent was the
work of both the Father and His Word;
therefore the same Son was sent by the Father
and the Son, because the Son Himself is the
For who would embrace
"Word of the Father.
so impious an opinion as to think the Father
to have uttered a word in time, in order that

the eternal Son might thereby be sent and
might appear in the flesh in the fullness of
But assuredly it was in that Word of
time?
God itself which was in the beginning with
God and was God, namely, in the wisdom
itself of God, apart from time, at what time
that wisdom must needs appear in the flesh.
Therefore, since without any commencement
of time, the Word was in the beginning, and
the Word was with God, and the Word was
God, it was in the Word itself without any
time, at what time the Word was to be made
flesh and dwell among us. 8 And when this
fullness of time had come, "God sent His
Son, made of a woman," 9 that is, made in
time, that the Incarnate Word might appear
to men; while it was in that Word Himself,
apart from time, at what time this was to be
done; for the order of times is in the eternal
wisdom of God without time.
Since, then,
that the Son should appear in the flesh was
wrought by both the Father and the Son, it
is fitly said that He who appeared in that flesh
was sent, and that He who did not appear in
it, sent Him; because those things which are
transacted outwardly before the bodily eyes
have their existence from the inward structure
(apparatu) of the spiritual nature, and on that
account are fitly said to be sent.
Further,
that form of man which He took is the person
of the Son, not also of the Father; on which
account the invisible Father, together with
the Son, who with the Father is invisible, is
said to have sent the same Son by making
But if He became visible in
Him visible.
such way as to cease to be invisible with the
Father, that is, if the substance of the invisible Word were turned by a change and transition into a visible creature, then the Son
would be so understood to be sent by the
Father, that He would be found to be only
But
sent; not also, with the Father, sending.
since He so took the form of a servant, as
that the unchangeable form of God remained,
it is clear that that which became apparent in
the Son was done by the Father and the Son
not being apparent; that is, that by the invisible Father, with the invisible Son, the
same Son Himself was sent so as to be visiNeither
ble.
This, we may now say,
I came I of myself?
is said according to the form of a servant, in
I judge no man." IO
the same way as it is said,
10. If, therefore, He is said to be sent, in
so far as He appeared outwardly in the bodily
creature, who inwardly in His spiritual nature
is always hidden from the eyes of mortals, it
is now easy to understand also of the Holy

Why, therefore, does He say,
"

"

"

1 Luke i. 34, 35
4 John x. 36.
7 Gal. ii. 20.

2 Matt. i. 18.
5 John xvii. 19.

3 Isa. xlviii. 16.
6 Rom. viii. 32.

8 John i. 1, 2, 14.

9 Gal. iv. 4.

i John viii. 42, 15.

[Book II.

Spirit why He too is said to be sent.
For in
due time a certain outward appearance of the
creature was wrought, wherein the Holy Spirit
might be visibly shown; whether when He
descended upon the Lord Himself in a bodily
* or when, ten days having
shape as a dove,
past since His ascension, on the day of Pentecost a sound came suddenly from heaven as
of a rushing mighty wind, and cloven tongues
like as of fire were seen upon them, and it sat
This operation, visibly
upon each of them. 2
exhibited, and
to mortal eyes,
presented
is called the sending of the Holy Spirit;
that His very substance appeared, in
not
which He himself also is invisible and unchangeable, like the Father and the Son, but
that the hearts of men, touched by things
seen outwardly, might be turned from the
manifestation in time of Him as coming to
His hidden eternity as ever present.

CHAP. 6.

THE CREATURE IS NOT SO TAKEN BY

THE HOLY SPIRIT AS FLESH IS BY THE WORD.

self.

ii. It

is, then, for this reason nowhere
written, that the Father is greater than the
Holy Spirit, or that the Holy Spirit is less
than God the Father, because the creature in
which the Holy Spirit was to- appear was not
taken in the same way as the Son of man was
taken, as the form in which the person of the
Word of God Himself should be set forth;
not that He might possess the word of God,
as other holy and wise men have possessed it,
but "above His fellows;" 3 not certainly that
He possessed the word more than they, so as
to be of more surpassing wisdom than the rest
were, but that He was the very Word HimFor the word in the flesh is one thing,
and the Word made flesh is another; i.e. the
word in man is one thing, the Word that is
man is another.
For flesh is put for man,
said, "The Word was made
where it
flesh;" 4 and again, "And all flesh shall see
the salvation of God." "
For it does not
mean flesh without soul and without mind;
all flesh," is the same as if it were said,
but
The creature, then, in which the
every man.
Holy Spirit should appear, was not so taken,
as that flesh and human form were taken, of
For the Spirit did not
the Virgin Mary.
beatify the dove, or the wind, or the fire, and
join them for ever to Himself and to His
person in unity and "
fashion." 6 Nor, again,
is the nature of the Holy Spirit mutable and

"

is

2 Actsii. 2-4.
4 John i. 14.

1 Matt. iii. 16.
3 Heb. i. q.
6 [The reference is to crxwa, in Phil. ii. 8

5 Luke iii. 6.
the term chosen bv
St. Paul to describe the "likeness of men," which the second
trinitarian person assumed. The variety in the terms by which
St. Paul describes the incarnation is very striking. The person incarnated subsists first in a " form of God;
'' he then takes along
with this (still retaining this) a " form of a servant;
" which form

"

" 8

changeable; so that these things were not
made of the creature, but He himself was
turned and changed first into one and then
into another, as water is changed into ice.
But these things appeared at the seasons at
which they ought to have appeared, the creature serving the Creator, and being changed
and converted at the command of Him who
remains immutably in Himself, in order to
signify and manifest Him in such way as it
was fit He should be signified and manifested
to mortal men.
Accordingly, although that
dove is called the Spirit; 7 and in speaking of
that fire, "There appeared unto them," he
cloven tongues, like as of fire, and it
says,
sat upon each of them; and they began to
speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave
them utterance;
in order to show that the
Spirit was manifested by that fire, as by the
dove; yet we cannot call the Holy Spirit both
God and a dove, or both God and fire, in the
same way as we call the Son both God and
man; nor as we call the Son the Lamb of
God; which not only John the Baptist says,
"Behold the Lamb of God," 9 but also John
the Evangelist sees the Lamb slain
in the
For that prophetic vision was
Apocalypse.
not shown to bodily eyes through bodily
forms, but in the spirit through spiritual
But whosoever saw
images of bodily things.
that dove and that fire, saw them with their
Although it may perhaps be disputed
eyes.
concerning the fire, whether it was seen by
the eyes or in the spirit, on account of the
form of the sentence.
For the text does not
say, They saw cloven tongues like fire, but,
" There appeared to them."
But we are not
wont to say with the same meaning, It apAnd in
peared to me; as we say, I saw.
those spiritual visions of corporeal images the
usual expressions are, both, It appeared to
me; and, I saw: but in those things which are
shown to the eyes through express corporeal
forms, the common expression is not, It apThere may,
peared to me; but,
therefore, be a question raised respecting that
fire, how it was seen; whether within in the
spirit as it were outwardly, or really outwardly
But of that
before the eyes of the flesh.
dove, which is said to have descended in a
bodily form, no one ever doubted that it was
Nor, again, as we call the
seen by the eyes.
Son a Rock (for it is written, "And that Rock
"), can we so call the Spirit a dove
was Christ
For that rock was a thing already
or fire.
created, and after the mode of its action was

saw.

"

of a servant is a " likeness of men;
" scheme" (A. V. "fashion' 1
T.S.]

7 Matt. iii. 16.
9 John i. 29.

8 Acts ii. 3, 4.
I0 Apoc. v. 6.

" which likeness of men is a
) or external form of a man. W.G.

IT 1 Cor. x. 4.

Chap. VIII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

4.

called by the name of Christ, whom it signilike the stone placed under Jacob's
fied;
head, and also anointed, which he took in
order to signify the Lord; 1 or as Isaac was
Christ, when he carried the wood for the sacrifice of himself. 2 A particular significative
action was added to those already existing
tilings; they did not, as that dove and fire,
suddenly come into being in order simply so
The dove and the fire, indeed,
to signify.
seem to me more like that flame which appeared to Moses in the bush, 3 or that pillar
which the people followed in the wilderness, 4
or the thunders and lightnings which came
when the Law was given in the mount. 5
For
the corporeal form of these things came into
being for the very purpose, that it might signify something, and then pass away.

CHAP. 7.

A DOUBT RAISED ABOUT DIVINE AP-

PEARANCES.

12. The Holy Spirit, then, is also said to
be sent, on account of these corporeal forms
which came into existence in time, in order
to signify and manifest Him, as He must
needs be manifested, to human senses; yet
He is not said to be less than the Father, as
the Son, because He was in the form of a
servant, is said to be; because that form of a
servant inhered in the unity of the person of
the Son, but those corporeal forms appeared
for a time, in order to show what was necessary
to be shown, and then ceased to be.
Why,
then, is not the Father also said to be sent,
through those corporeal forms, the fire of the
bush, and the pillar of cloud or of fire, and
the lightnings in the mount, and whatever
other things of the kind appeared at that time,
when (as we have learned from Scripture testimony) He spake face to face with the fathers,
if He Himself was manifested by those modes
and forms of the creature, as exhibited and
presented corporeally to human sight?
But
if the Son was manifested by them, why is
He said to be sent so long after, when He was
made of a woman, as the apostle says,
But
when the fullness of time was come, God sent
forth His Son, made of a woman/' 7 seeing
that He was sent also before, when He appeared to the fathers by those changeable
Or if He cannot
forms of the creature ?

"

3 Ex. iii. 2.

2 Gen. xxii. 6.
5 Ex. xix. 16.

1 Gen. xxviii. 18.
4 Ex. xiii. 21, 22.
6 [A theophany, though a harbinger of the incarnation, differs
from it, by not effecting a hypostatical or personal union between
God and the creature. When the Holy Spirit appeared in the
form of a dove, he did not unite himself with it. The dove did
not constitute an integral part of the divine person who employed
it. Nor did the illuminated vapor in the theophany of the ShekiBut when the Logos appeared in the form of a man, he
nah.
united himself with it, so that it became a constituent part of his
A theophany, as Augustin notices, is temporary and tranperson.
sient. The incarnation is perpetual. W.G.T.S.]
7 Gal. iv. 4^

rightly be said to be sent, unless when the
Word was made flesh, why is the Holy Spirit
said to be sent,of whom no such incarnation was
But if by those visible things,
ever wrought ?
which are put before us in the Law and in the
prophets, neither the Father nor the Son but
the Holy Spirit was manifested, why also is
He said to be sent now, when He was sent
also before after these modes ?

13. In the perplexity of this inquiry, the
Lord helping us, we must ask, first, whether
the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit; or
whether, sometimes the Father, sometimes
the Son, sometimes the Holy Spirit;
or
whether it was without any distinction of persons, in such way as the one and only God is
spoken of, that is, that the Trinity itself appeared to the Fathers by those forms of the
Next, whichever of these alternacreature.
tives shall have been found or thought true,
whether for this purpose only the creature
was fashioned, wherein God, as He judged
it suitable at that time, should be shown to
human sight; or whether angels, who already
existed, were so sent, as to speak in the person of God, taking a corporeal form from the
corporeal creature, for the purpose of their
ministry, as each had need; or else, according to the power the Creator has given them,
changing and converting their own body
itself, to which they are not subject, but govern it as subject to themselves, into whatever
appearances they would that were suited and
Lastly, we shall
apt to their several actions.
discern that which it was our purpose to ask,
viz. whether the Son and the Holy Spirit were
also sent before ; and, if they were so sent, what
difference there is between that sending, and
the one which we read of in the Gospel; or
whether in truth neither of them were sent,
except when either the Son was made of the
Virgin Mary, or the Holy Spirit appeared in
a visible form, whether in the dove or in
tongues of fire.

CHAP. 8.

THE ENTIRE TRINITY INVISIBLE.

14. Let us therefore say nothing of those
who, with an over carnal mind, have thought
the nature of the Word of God, and the Wisdom, which, "remaining in herself, maketh
8 whom we call the only Son
all things new/'
of God, not only to be changeable, but also
For these, with more audacity
to be visible.
than religion, bring a very dull heart to the
For whereas the
inquiry into divine things.
soul is a spiritual substance, and whereas itself also was made, yet could not be made

8 Wisd. vii. 27.

[Book II.

by any other than by Him by whom all things
were made, and without whom nothing is
it, although changeable, is yet not
made,
visible; and this they have believed to be the
case with the Word Himself and with the
Wisdom of God itself, by which the soul was
made; whereas this Wisdom is not only invisible, as the soul also is, but likewise unchangeable, which the soul is not.
It is in
truth the same unchangeableness in it, which
is referred to when it was said, "Remaining
Yet
in herself she maketh all things new."
these people, endeavoring, as it were, to prop
up their error in its fall by testimonies of the
divine Scriptures, adduce the words of the
Apostle Paul; and take that, which is said of
the one only God, in whom the Trinity itself
is understood, to be said only of the Father,
and neither of the Son nor of the Holy Spirit:
"Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and
glory for ever and ever;" 2 and that other
passage, "The blessed and only Potentate,
the King of kings, and Lord of lords; who
only hath immortality, dwelling in the light
which no man can approach unto; whom no
man hath seen, nor can see." 3 How these
passages are to be understood, I think we
have already discoursed sufficiently.

CHAP. 9.

AGAINST THOSE WHO BELIEVED THE
FATHER ONLY TO BE IMMORTAL AND INVISIBLE.
THE TRUTH TO BE SOUGHT BY PEACEFUL
STUDY.
15. But they who will have these texts understood only of the Father, and not of the
Son or the Holy Spirit, declare the Son to be
visible, not by having taken flesh of the
For
Virgin, but aforetime also in Himself.
He Himself, they say, appeared to the eyes
And if you say to them, In
of the Fathers.
whatever manner, then, the Son is visible in
Himself, in that manner also He is mortal in
Himself; so that it plainly follows that you
would have this saying also understood only
" Who only hath immorof the Father, viz.,
for if the Son is mortal from having
tality;
taken upon Him our flesh, then allow that it
is on account of this flesh that He is also
visible: they reply, that it is not on account of
this flesh that they say that the Son is mortal;
but that, just as He was also before visible,
so He was also before mortal.
For if they
say the Son is mortal from having taken our
flesh, then it is not the Father alone without
the Son who hath immortality; because His

"

3.

1 John i.
4 [For an example of the manner in which the patristic writers
present the doctrine of the divine invisibility, see Irena;us, Adv.
Hterescs, IV. xx. W.G.T.S.]

3 r Tim. vi. 15, 16.

2 1 Tim. i. 17.

Word also has immortality, by which all things
were made.
For Fie did not therefore lose
His immortality, because He took mortal
flesh; seeing that it could not happen even to
the human soul, that it should die with the
" Fear
body, when the Lord Himself says,
not them which kill the body, but are not
able to kill the soul." s Or, forsooth, also the
Holy Spirit took flesh: concerning whom certainly they will, without doubt, be troubled to
if the Son is mortal on account of taking
say
in what manner they understand
our flesh
that the Father only has immortality without
the Son and the Holy Spirit, since, indeed,
the Holy Spirit did not take our flesh; and if
He has not immortality, then the Son is not
mortal on account of taking our flesh; but if
the Holy Spirit has immortality, then it is not
said only of the Father, "Who only hath
immortality." And therefore they think they
are able to prove that the Son in Himself was
mortal also before the incarnation, because
changeableness itself is not unfitly called mortality, according to which the soul also is said
to die; not because it is changed and turned into body, or into some substance other than
itself, but because, whatever in its own selfsame substance is now after another mode than
it once was, is discovered to be mortal, in so
far as it has ceased to be what it was.
Because then, say they, before the Son of God
was born of the Virgin Mary, He Himself appeared to our fathers, not in one and the same
form only, but in many forms; first in one
form, then in another; He is both visible in
Himself, because His substance was visible
to mortal eyes, when He had not yet taken
our flesh, and mortal, inasmuch as He is
changeable. And so also the Holy Spirit,
who appeared at one time as a dove, and another time as fire.
Whence, they say, the
following texts do not belong to the Trinity,
but singularly and properly to the Father only:
"Now unto the King eternal, immortal, and
invisible, the only wise God;" and, "Who
only hath immortality, dwelling in the light
which no man can approach unto; whom no
man hath seen, nor can see/'

16. Passing by, then, these reasoners, who
are unable to know the substance even of the
soul, which is invisible, and therefore are very
far indeed from knowing that the substance
of the one and only God, that is, the Father
and the Son and the Holy Spirit, remains
ever not only invisible, but also unchangeable, and that hence it possesses true and real
us, who deny that God,
immortality;
whether the Father, or the Son, or the Holy

let

5 Matt. x. 28.

Chap. X.]

ON THE TRINITY.

Spirit, ever appeared to bodily eyes, unless
through the corporeal creature made subject
to His own power; let us, I say
ready to be
corrected, if we are reproved in a fraternal
and upright spirit, ready to be so, even if
carped at by an enemy, so that he speak the
in catholic peace and with peaceful
truth
study inquire, whether God indiscriminately
appeared to our fathers before Christ came in
the flesh, or whether it was any one person of
the Trinity, or whether severally, as it were
by turns.

CHAP. IO WHETHER GOD THE TRINITY INDISCRIMINATELY APPEARED TO THE FATHERS, OR
ANY ONE PERSON OF THE TRINITY.
THE APPEARING OF GOD TO ADAM.
OF THE SAME APPEARANCE.

THE VISION TO ABRAHAM.

17. And first, in that which is written in
Genesis, viz., that God spake with man whom
He had formed out of the dust; if we set apart
the figurative meaning, and treat it so as to
place faith in the narrative even in the letter,
it should appear that God then spake with
man in the appearance of a man.
This is
not indeed expressly laid down in the book,
but the general tenor of its reading sounds in
this sense, especially in that which is written,
that Adam heard the voice of the Lord God,
walking in the garden in the cool of the evening, and hid himself among the trees of the
"
garden; and when God said,
Adam, where
replied, "I heard Thy voice,
art thou?" 1
and I was afraid because I was naked, and I
hid myself from Thy face."
For I do not
see how such a walking and conversation of
God can be understood literally, except He
appeared as a man. For it can neither be said
that a voice only of God was framed, when
God is said to have walked, or that He who
was walking in a place was not visible; while
Adam, too, says that he hid himself from the
face of God. Who then was He ? Whether
the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit ?
Whether altogether indiscriminately did God
the Trinity Himself speak to man in the form
of man ?
The context, indeed, itself of the
Scripture nowhere, it should seem, indicates
a change from person to person; but He seems
still to speak to the first man, who said,
Let
"
there be light," and,
Let there be a firmament," and so on through each of those days;
whom we usually take to be God the Father,
making by a word whatever He willed to
For He made all things by His word,
make.
which Word we know, by the right rule of
If, therefore, God
faith, to be His only Son.

"

the Father spake to the first man, and Himself
was walking in the garden in the cool of the
evening, and if it was from His face that the
sinner hid himself amongst the trees of the
garden, why are we not to go on to understand that it was He also who appeared to
Abraham and to Moses, and to whom He
would, and how He would, through the
changeable and visible creature, subjected to
Himself, while He Himself remains in Himself and in His own substance, in which He is
unchangeable and invisible ?
But, possibly,
it might be that the Scripture passed over in
a hidden way from person to person, and while
it had related that the Father said "Let
there be light," and the rest which it mentioned Him to have done by the Word, went
on to indicate the Son as speaking to the first
man; not unfolding this openly, but intimating it to be understood by those who could
understand it.

does

because it

18. Let him, then, who has the strength
whereby he can penetrate this secret with his
mind's eye, so that to him it appears clearly,
either that the Father also is able, or that
only the Son and Holy Spirit are able, to appear to human eyes through a visible creature;
let him, I say, proceed to examine these things
if he can, or even to express and handle them
in words; but the thing itself, so far as concerns this testimony of Scripture, where God
spake with man, is, in my judgment, not disnot evidently
coverable,
appear even whether Adam usually saw God
with the eyes of his body; especially as it is
a great question what manner of eyes it was
that were opened when they tasted the forbidden fruit;
for before they had tasted,
these eyes were closed.
Yet I would not
rashly assert, even if that scripture implies
Paradise to have been a material place, that
God could not have walked there in any way
except in some bodily form.
For it might
be said, that only words were framed for the
man to
seeing any form.
is written, "Adam hid
Neither, because it
himself from the face of God," does it follow
forthwith that he usually saw His face.
For
what if he himself indeed could not see, but
feared to be himself seen by Him whose voice
he had heard, and had felt His presence as
For Cain, too,
he walked ?
said to God,
"From Thy face I will hide myself;" 3
yet
we are not therefore compelled to admit that
he was wont to behold the face of God with
his bodily eyes in any visible form, although
he had heard the voice of God questioning
and speaking with him of his sin.
But what

without

hear,

1 Gen. iii. 8-10.

2 Gen. iii. 7.

3 Gen. iv. 14.

[Book II.

"

manner of speech it was that God then uttered
to the outward ears of men, especially in
speaking to the first man, it is both difficult
to discover, and we have not undertaken to
But if words alone and
say in this discourse.
sounds were wrought, by which to bring about
some sensible presence of God to those first
men, I do not know why I should not there
understand the person of God the Father,
seeing that His person is manifested also in
that voice, when Jesus appeared in glory on
the mount before the three disciples;
1 and in
that when the dove descended upon Him at
2 and in that where He cried to
His baptism;
the Father concerning His own glorification,
and it was answered Him,
I have both gloriNot that the
fied, and will glorify again." 3
voice could be wrought without the work of
the Son and of the Holy Spirit (since the
Trinity works indivisibly), but that such a
voice was wrought as to manifest the person
of the Father only;
just as the Trinity
wrought that human form from the Virgin
Mary, yet it is the person of the Son alone;
for the invisible Trinity wrought the visible
person of the Son alone.
Neither does anything forbid us, not only to understand those
words spoken to Adam as spoken by the
Trinity, but also to take them as manifesting
For we are comthe person of that Trinity.
pelled to understand of the Father only, that
which is said, "This is my beloved Son." 4
For Jesus can neither be believed nor understood to be the Son of the Holy Spirit, or
even His own Son. And where the voice
I have both glorified, and will
uttered,
glorify again," we confess it was only the
person of the Father; since it is the answer
to that word of the Lord, in which He had
Father, glorify thy Son," which He
said,
could not say except to God the Father only,
and not also to the Holy Spirit, whose Son
He was not.
is written,
"And the Lord God said to Adam," no reason can be given why the Trinity itself should
not be understood.
19. Likewise, also, in that which is written,
" Now the Lord had said unto Abraham, Get
thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and thy father's house," it is not clear
whether a voice alone came to the ears of
Abraham, or whether anything also appeared
to his eyes.
somewhat more clearly said, "And the Lord
appeared unto Abraham, and said, Unto thy
seed will I give this land." 5
But neither
it expressly said in what form God
there is

But a little while after, it

But here, where it

"

"

is

"

apostle

for instance,

appeared to him, or whether the Father, or
the Son, or the Holy Spirit appeared to him.
Unless, perhaps, they think that it was the
Son who appeared to Abraham, because it is
not written, God appeared to him, but "the
Lord appeared to him."
For the Son seems
to be called the Lord as though the name was
appropriated to Him; as e.g. the apostle
For though there be that are called
says,
gods, wh'ether in heaven or in earth,
(as
there be gods many and lords many,) but to
us there is but one God, the Father, of whom
are all things, and we in Him; and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we
by Him." 6
But since it is found that God
the Father also is called Lord in many places,
" The Lord hath said unto
me, Thou art my Son; this day have I be-
" The Lord said
" 7 and again,
gotten Thee;
" 8
unto my Lord, Sit Thou at my right hand;
since also the Holy Spirit is found to be
called Lord, as where the
says,
"Now the Lord is that Spirit;" and then,
lest any one should think the Son to be signified, and to be called the Spirit on account
of His incorporeal substance, has gone on to
say, "And where the Spirit of the Lord is,
" 9 and no one ever doubted
there is liberty;
the Spirit of the Lord to be the Holy Spirit:
therefore, neither here does it appear plainly
whether it was any person of the Trinity that
appeared to Abraham, or God Himself the
" Thou
Trinity, of which one God it is said,
shalt fear the Lord thy God, and Him only
But under the oak at
shalt thou serve." 10
Mamre he saw three men, whom he invited,
and hospitably received, and ministered to
them as they feasted.
Yet Scripture at the
narrative does not say,
beginning of that
" The Lord
three men appeared to him, but,
appeared to him." And then, setting forth
in due order after what manner the Lord appeared to him, it has added the account of
the three men, whom Abraham invites to his
hospitality in the plural number, and afterwards speaks to them in the singular number
as one; and as one He promises him a son
by Sara, viz. the one whom the Scripture calls
Lord, as in the beginning of the same narrative, "The Lord," it says, "appeared to
He invites them then, and
Abraham."
washes their feet, and leads them forth at
their departure, as though they were men;
but he speaks as with the Lord God, whether
when a son is promised to him, or when the
destruction is shown to him that was impending over Sodom."

1 Matt. xvii. 5.
4 Matt. iii. 17.

2 Matt. iii. 17.
5 Gen. xii. i, 7.

3 John xii. 28.

6 1 Cor. viii. 5, 6.
9 2 Cor. iii. 17.

7 Ps. ii. 7.
10 Deut. vi. 13.

8 Ps. ex. 1.
11 Gen. xviii.

Chap. XII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

CHAP. II.

OF THE SAME APPEARANCE.

CHAP. 12.

THE APPEARANCE TO LOT IS EX-

"

place

20. That

Scripture demands
of
neither a slight nor a passing consideration.
For if one man had appeared, what else would
those at once cry out, who say that the Son
was visible also in His own substance before
He was born of the Virgin, but that it was
Himself? since it
is said, they say, of the
" To the only invisible God." * And
Father,
yet, I could still go on to demand, in what
manner " He was found in fashion as a man,"
before He had taken our flesh, seeing that
his feet were washed, and that He fed upon
earthly food ? How could that be, when He
in the form of God, and thought
was still
it not robbery to be equal with God?" 2
For, pray, had He already
emptied Himself, taking upon Him the form of a servant,
and made in the likeness of men, and found
in fashion as a man?" when we know when
it was that He did this through His birth of
How, then, before He had done
the Virgin.
this, did He appear as one man to Abraham ?
or, was not that form a reality?
I could put
these questions, if it had been one.man that
appeared to Abraham, and if that one were
But since
believed to be the Son of God.
three men appeared, and no one of them is
said to be greater than the rest either in form,
or age, or power, why should we not here
understand, as visibly' intimated by the visible creature, the equality of the Trinity, and
one and the same substance in three persons ? 3

"

21. For, lest any one should think that
one among the three is in this way intimated
to have been the greater, and that this one
is to be understood to have been the Lord,
the Son of God, while the other two were His
because, whereas three appeared,
angels;
Abraham there speaks to one as the Lord:
Holy Scripture has not forgotten to anticipate,
by a contradiction, such future cogitations
and opinions, when a little while after it says
that two angels came to Lot, among whom
that just man also, who deserved to be freed
from the burning of Sodom, speaks to one as
For so Scripture goes on to
to the Lord.
say, "And the Lord went His way, as soon
as He left communing with Abraham; and
Abraham returned to his place." 4

2 Phil. ii. 6, 7.

1 1 Tim. i. 17.
3 [The thenphanies of the Pentateuch are trinitarian in their
implication. They involve distinctions in God God sending, and
<lod sent; God speaking: of God, and God speaking to God. The
trinitarianism of the Old Testament has been lost sight of to some
extent in the modern construction of the doctrine. The patristic,
mediaeval, and reformation theologies worked this vein with thoroughness, and the analysis of Augustin in this reference is worthy
of careful study. W.G.T.S.]

4 Gen. xviii. 33.

AMINED.

"But there came two angels to Sodom at
Here, what I have begun to set forth
even."
must be considered more attentively.
Certainly Abraham was speaking with three, and
called that one, in the singular number, the
Perhaps, some one may say, he recogLord.
nized one of the three to be the Lord, but
the other two His angels.
What, then, does
that mean which Scripture goes on to say,
"And the Lord went His way, as soon as He
had left communing with Abraham; and
Abraham returned to his place: and there
came two angels to Sodom at even?"
Are
we to suppose that the one who, among the
three, was recognized as the Lord, had departed, and had sent the two angels that were
with Him to destroy Sodom ?
Let us see,
then, what follows.
is
said, "two angels to Sodom at even; and
Lot sat in the gate of Sodom: and Lot seeing
them, rose up to meet them; and he bowed
himself with his face toward the ground; and
he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I
Here
pray you, into your servant's house."
it is clear, both that there were two angels,
and that in the plural number they were invited to partake of hospitality, and that they
were honorably designated lords, when they
perchance were thought to be men.

"There came," it

they are

22. Yet, again, it

is objected that except
they were known to be angels of God, Lot
would not have bowed himself with his face
to the ground. Why, then, is both hospitality
and food offered to them, as though they
wanted such human succor ? But whatever
may here lie hid, let us now pursue that
Two appear;
which we have undertaken.
both are
called
invited
angels;
plurally; he speaks as with two plurally, until
the departure from Sodorn. And then Scripture goes on to say, "And it came to pass,
when they had brought them forth abroad,
that they said, Escape for thy life; look not
behind thee, neither stay thou in
all the
escape to the mountain, and there
plain;
thou shalt be saved, 5 lest thou be consumed.
And Lot said unto them, Oh ! not so, my
lord: behold now, thy servant hath found
What is meant by
6 etc.
grace in thy sight,"
" Oh ! not so, my lord,"
his saying to them,
if He who was the Lord had already departed,
and had sent the angels? Why is
it said,
" Oh ! not
" Oh ! not so, my lord," and not,
so, my lords?" Or if he wished to speak to
one of them, why does Scripture say, "But
Lot said to them. Oh ! not so, my lord: be-

S This clause is not in the Hebrew.

6 Gen. xix. 1-19.

[Book II.

hold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy
sight," etc.? Are we here, too, to understand
two persons in the plural number, but when
the two are addressed as one, then the one
But which two
Lord God of one substance ?
persons do we here understand ?
of the
Father and of the Son, or of the Father and
of the Holy Spirit, or of the Son and of
the Holy Spirit ? The last, perhaps, is the
for they said of themselves
more suitable;
that they were sent, which is that which we
For
say of the Son and of the Holy Spirit.
we find nowhere in the Scriptures that the
Father was sept.

THE APPEARANCE IN THE BUSH.

CHAP. 13.
23. But when Moses was sent to lead the
children of Israel out of Egypt, it is written
" Now
that the Lord appeared to him thus:
Moses kept the flock of Jethro his father-inlaw, the priest of Midian: and he led the flock
to the back side of the desert, and came to
And
the mountain of God, even to Horeb.
the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in
a flame of fire, out of the midst of a bush;
and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned
with fire, and the bush was not consumed.
And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and
see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt.
And when the Lord saw that he turned aside
to see, God called unto him out of the midst
of the bush, and said, I am the God of thy
father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac,
2 He is here also first
and the God of Jacob."
called the Angel of the Lord, and then God.
Was an angel, then, the God of Abraham, and
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob ?
Therefore He may be rightly understood to
be the Saviour Himself, of whom the apostle
" Whose are the fathers, and of whom as
says,
concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over
all, God blessed forever." 3
He, therefore,
"who is over all, God blessed for ever," is
not unreasonably here understood also to be
Himself the God of Abraham, the God of
But why is He
Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
previously called the Angel of the Lord, when

"

"

that " came to Sodom at even "

[It is difficult to determine the details of this theophany, beJehovah "' who " went his
yond all doubt: namely, whether the "
way as soon as he had left communing with Abraham." (Gen. xviii.
33) joins the " two angels
(Gen.
xix. 1); or whether one of these " two angels
is Jehovah himself.
One or the other supposition must be made; because a person is
addressed by Lot as God (Gen. xix. 18-20), and speaks to Lot as
God (Gen. xix. 21, 22), and acts as God ((Jen. xix. 24). The Mas-
"
orite marking of the word "
in Gen. xix. 2, as "profane,"
i.e., to be taken in the human sense, would favor the first supposition. The interchange of the singular and plural, in the whole
It came to pass, when they had brought
narrative is very striking.
them forth abroad, that he said, escape for thy life. And Lot said
unto them. Oh not so, my Lord : behold now, thy servant hath
found grace in thy sight. And he said unto him, see / have accepted thee; / will not overthrow the city of which thou hast
spoken."

(Gen. xix. 17-21.) W.G.T.S.]

lords

"

2 Ex. iii. 1-6.

3 Rom. ix. 5.

"

He appeared in a flame of fire out of the
bush ? Was it because it was one of many
angels, who by an economy [or arrangement]
bare the person of his Lord ? or was something of the creature assumed by Him in order
to bring about a visible appearance for the
business in hand, and that words might thence
be audibly uttered, whereby the presence of
the Lord might be shown, in such way as was
fitting, to the corporeal senses of man, by
means of the creature made subject?
For if
he was one of the angels, who could easily
affirm whether it was the person of the Son
which was imposed upon him to announce,
or that of the Holy Spirit, or that of God the
Father, or altogether of the Trinity itself, who
is the one and only God, in order that he
I am the God of Abraham, and
might say,
"
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob ?
For we cannot say that the Son of God is the
God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob, and that the Father is not;
nor will any one dare to deny that either the
Holy Spirit, or the Trinity itself, whom we
believe and understand to be the one God, is
the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob.
For he who is not
God, is not the God of those fathers.
Furthermore, if not only the Father is God, as
all, even heretics, admit; but also the Son,
which, whether they will or not, they are compelled to acknowledge, since the apostle says,
" Who is over all, God blessed for ever;
" and
the Holy Spirit, since the same apostle says,
"
Therefore glorify God in your body;-'' when
" Know ye not that your
he had said above,
body is the temple of the Holy Ghost, which
" 4 and these
is in you, which ye have of God ?
three are one God, as catholic soundness beit is not sufficiently apparent which
lieves:
person of the Trinity that angel bare, if he
was one of the rest of the angels, and whether
any person, and not rather that of the Trinity
But if the creature was assumed for
itself.
the purpose of the business in hand, whereby
both to appear to human eyes, and to sound
in human ears, and to be called the Angel of
the Lord, and the Lord, and God; then cannot God here be understood to be the Father,
but either the Son or the Holy Spirit.
Although I cannot call to mind that the Holy
Spirit is anywhere else called an angel, which
yet may be understood from His work; for it
is said of Him, "And He will show you 3
things to come;" 6 and "
angel" in Greek
" 7 in
"
is certainly equivalent to
Latin: but we read most evidently of the
Lord Jesus Christ in the prophet, that He is

messenger

4 1 Cor. vi. 20, 19.
6 John xvi. 13.

5 A nnuntiabit.
7 Nuntiits.

Chap. XV.]

ON THE TRINITY.

" the Angel of Great Counsel," ' while
called
both the Holy Spirit and the Son of God
is God and Lord of the angels.

CHAP. 14.

OF THE APPEARANCE IN THE PILLAR

OF CLOUD AND OF FIRE.

24. Also in the going forth of the children
" And the
of Israel from Egypt it is written,
Lord went before them, by day in a pillar of
cloud to lead them the way, and by night in
a pillar of fire. He took not away the pillar
of the cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by
2 Who nere,
night, from before the people."
too, would doubt that God appeared to the
eyes of mortal men by the corporeal creature
made subject to Him, and not by His own
But it is not similarly apparent
substance ?
whether the Father, or the Son, or the Holy
Spirit, or the Trinity itself, the one God.
Nor is this distinguished there either, in my
" The glory of
judgment, where it is written,
the Lord appeared in the cloud, and the Lord
spake unto Moses, saying, I have heard the
murmurings of the children of Israel," 3 etc.

CHAP. 15.

OF THE APPEARANCE ON SINAI.
WHETHER THE TRINITY SPAKE IN THAT APPEARANCE OR SOME ONE PERSON SPECIALLY.
25. But now of the clouds, and voices, and
lightnings, and the trumpet, and the smoke
" And
on Mount Sinai, when it was said,
Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke,
because the Lord descended upon it in fire,
and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke
of a furnace ; and all the people that was
in the camp trembled; and when the voice
the trumpet sounded long and waxed
of
louder and louder, Moses spake, and God
answered him by a voice.'' 4 And a little
after, when the Law had been given in the ten
" And
commandments, it follows in the text,
all the people saw the thunderings, and the
lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet, and
the mountain smoking." And a little after,
" And [when the people saw it,] they removed and stood afar off, and Moses drew
near unto the thick darkness s where God
was, and the Lord said unto Moses," 6 etc.
What shall I say about this, save that no one
can be so insane as to believe the smoke, and
the fire, and the cloud, and the darkness, and
whatever there was of the kind, to be the
substance of the word and wisdom of God
For
which is Christ, or of the Holy Spirit ?
not even the Arians ever dared to say that
thev were the substance of God the Father.

All these things, then, were wrought through
the creature serving the Creator, and were presented in a suitable economy {dispc?isatio) to
human senses; unless, perhaps, because it is
said, "And Moses drew near to the cloud where
God was," carnal thoughts must needs suppose that the cloud was indeed seen by the
people, but that within the cloud Moses with
the eyes of the flesh saw the Son of God,
whom doting heretics will have to be seen in
His own substance.
Forsooth, Moses may
have seen Him with the eyes of the flesh, if
not only the wisdom of God which is Christ,
but even that of any man you please and
howsoever wise, can be seen with the eyes of
the flesh; or if, because it
is written of the
elders of Israel, that "they saw the place
where the God of Israel had stood," and that
"
there was under His feet as it were a paved
work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the
body of heaven in his clearness," 7 therefore
we are to believe that the word and wisdom
of God in His own substance stood within
the space of an earthly place, who indeed
"
to end, and
reacheth firmly from end
8 and that the
sweetly ordereth all things;"
Word of God, by whom all
things were
made, 9 is in such wise changeable, as now to
contract, now to expand Himself; (may the
Lord cleanse the hearts of His faithful ones
from such thoughts ! )
But indeed all these
visible and sensible things are, as we have
often said, exhibited through the creature
made subject in order to signify the invisible
and intelligible God, not only the Father,
but also the Son and the Holy Spirit, "of
whom are all things, and through whom are
" I0 alall things, and in whom are all things;
though "the invisible things of God, from
the creation of the world, are clearly seen,
being understood by the things
that , are
made, even His eternal power and Godhead.""

But if

26. But as far as concerns our present undertaking, neither on Mount Sinai do I see
how it appears, by all those things which were
fearfully displayed to the senses of mortal
men, whether God the Trinity spake, or the
Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit severis allowable, without rash
ally.
assertion, to venture upon a modest and hesitating conjecture from this passage, if
is
possible to understand it of one person of the
Trinity, why do we not rather understand the
Holy Spirit to be spoken of, since the Law
itself also, which was given there, is said to
have been written upon tables of stone with the

it

it

1 Isa. ix. 6.
3 Ex. xvi. 10-12.
5 Nebitlam.

2 Ex. iii. 21, 22.
4 Ex. xix. 18, 19.
6 Ex. xx. 18, 21.

7 Ex. xxiv. 10.
10 Rom. xi. 36.

8 Wisd. viii. 1.

11 Rom. i. 20.

9 John i. 3.

finger of God, r by which name we know the
Holy Spirit to be signified
in the Gospel.
And fifty days are numbered from the slaying of the lamb and the celebration of the
Passover until the day in which these things
began to be done in Mount Sinai;
just as
after the passion of our Lord fifty days are
numbered from His resurrection, and then
came the Holy Spirit which the Son of God
had promised. And in that very coming of
His, which we read of in the Acts of the
Apostles, there appeared cloven tongues like
as of fire, and it
sat upon each of them: 3
which agrees with Exodus, where it
is written, "And Mount Sinai was altogether on a
smoke, because the Lord descended upon it
in fire;" and a little after, "And the sight
was like
of the glory of the Lord," he says,
devouring fire on the top of the mount in the
eyes of the children of Israel." 4 Or if these
things were therefore wrought because neither
the Father nor the Son could be there presented in that mode without the Holy Spirit,
by whom the Law itself must needs be written; then we know doubtless that God appeared there, not by His own substance,
which remains invisible and unchangeable,
but by the appearance above mentioned of
the creature; but that some special person of
the Trinity
appeared, distinguished by a
proper mark, as far as my capacity of understanding reaches, we do not see.

"

CHAP. l6.

IN WHAT MANNER MOSES SAW GOD.

26. There is yet another difficulty which
troubles most people, viz. that it is written,
"And the Lord spake unto Moses face to
face, as a man speaketh unto his friend;"
whereas a little after, the same Moses says,
" Now therefore, I pray Thee, if I have found
grace in Thy sight, show me now Thyself
plainly, that I may see Thee, that I may find
grace in Thy sight, and that I may consider
that this nation is Thy people;" and a little
" Show
after Moses again said to the Lord,
me Thy glory." What means this then, that
in everytning which was done, as above said,
God was thought to have appeared by His
own substance; whence the Son of God has
been believed by these miserable people to be
visible not by the creature, but by Himself;
and that Moses, entering into the cloud, appeared to have had this very object in entering, that a cloudy darkness indeed might be
shown to the eyes of the people, but that
Moses within might hear the words of God,
as though he beheld His face; and, as it

is

1 Ex. xxi. 18.
3 Acts. ii. 1-4.

2 Luke x:. 20
4 Ex. xxiv. 1

"

[Book II-
" And the Lord spake unto Moses face
"

said,
to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend;
and yet, behold, the same Moses says,
If I
have found grace in Thy sight, show me
Assuredly he knew that
Thyself plainly?"
he saw corporeally, and he sought the true
sight of God spiritually. And that mode of
speech accordingly which was wrought in
words, was so modified, as if it were of a friend
Yet who sees God the
speaking to a friend.
Father with the eyes of the body ? And that
Word, which was in the beginning, the Word
which was with God, the Word which was
who
God, by which all things were made, 5
sees Him with the eyes of the body ? And
the spirit of wisdom, again, who sees with the
Yet what is, "Show me
eyes of the body?
now Thyself plainly, that I may see Thee,"
unless, Show me Thy substance ?
But if
Moses had not said this, we must indeed
have borne with those foolish people as we
could, who think that the substance of God
was made visible to his eyes through those
things which, as above mentioned, were said
But when it is here demonstrated
or done.
most evidently that this was not granted to
him, even though he desired it; who will dare
to say, that by the like forms which had appeared visibly to him also, not the creature
serving God, but that itself which is God,
appeared to the eyes of a mortal man ?

28. Add, too, that which the Lord after-
" Thou canst not see
ward said to Moses,
my face: for there shall no man see my face,
and live. And the Lord said, Behold, there
is a place by me, and thou shall stand upon
a rock: and it shall come to pass, while my
glory passeth by, that I will put thee into a
watch-tower 6 of the rock, and will cover thee
with my hand while I pass by: and I will take
away my hand, and thou shalt see my back
parts; but my face shall not be seen." 7

CHAP. 17. HOW THE BACK PARTS OF GOD WERE
THE FAITH OF THE RESURRECTION OF
SEEN.
CHRIST. THE CATHOLIC CHURCH ONLY IS THE
PLACE FROM WHENCE THE BACK PARTS OF GOD
THE BACK PARTS OF GOD WERE
ARE SEEN.
IT IS A RASH OPINSEEN BY THE ISRAELITES.
ION TO THINK THAT GOD THE FATHER ONLY
WAS NEVER SEEN BY THE FATHERS.
Not unfitly is

it commonly understood to
be prefigured from the person of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that His "back parts" are to
be taken to be His flesh, in which He was

5 John i. 1, 3.
A. V.
6 Clift

Spelunca is one reading in S. Aug., but the
Benedictines read specula = watch-tower, which the context
proves to be certainly right.

7 Ex. xxxiii. 11-23.

Chap. XVII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

is

"

"

"

"

"

altogether

5 we shall see

6 as the apostle says

born of the Virgin, and died, and rose again;
1 on acwhether they are called back parts
count of the posteriority of mortality, or because it was almost in the end of the world,
2 that He deigned
that is, at a late period,
to take it: but that His
was that form
face
of God, in which He "
thought it not robbery
to be equal with God," 3 which no one certainly can see and live; whether because after
this life, in which we are absent from the
Lord, 4 and where the corruptible body presseth down the soul,
face to
(for it is said in
face/'
the Psalms, of this life, "Verily every man
vanity;" 7 and again,
living
" For in Thy sight shall no man living be
8 and in this life also, according to
justified;"
It doth not yet appear what we shall
John,
that when He
be, but we know," he says,
shall appear, we shall be like Him, for we
shall see Him as He is,''
9 which he certainly
intended to be understood as after this life,
when we shall have paid the debt of death,
and shall have received the promise of the
or whether that even now, in
resurrection);
whatever degree we spiritually understand
the wisdom of God, by which all things were
made, in that same degree we die to carnal
affections, so that, considering this world
dead to us, we also ourselves die to this
' The
world, and say what the apostle says,
world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
For it was of this death that he
world." 10
also says, "Wherefore, if ye be dead with
Christ, why as though living in the world are
ye subject to ordinances?" 11 Not therefore
without cause will no one be able to see the
"
face,'' that is, the manifestation itself of
the wisdom of God, and live.
For it is this
very appearance, for the contemplation of
which every one sighs who strives to love
God with all his heart, and with all his soul,
and with all his mind; to the contemplation
of which, he who loves his neighbor, too, as
himself builds up his neighbor also as far as
he may; on which two commandments hang
12 And this is
all the law and the prophets.
signified also in Moses himself.
For when
he had said, on account of the love of God
with which he was specially inflamed,
If I
have found grace in thy sight, show me now
Thyself plainly, that I may find grace in Thy
he immediately subjoined, on account
sight;
of the love also of his neighbor, "And that I

"

"

'

1 Posteriora.
3 Phil. ii. 6.
5 Wisd. ix. 15.
7 Ps. xxxix. 5.
9 1 John iii. 2.
11 Col. ii. 20.
12 Matt. xxii. 37-40.

2 Posterius.
4 2 Cor. v. 6.
6 1 Cor. xiii. 12.
8 Ps. cxliii. 2.
10 Gal. vi. 14.

Viventes de hoc inimdo decei-nitis.

"

"

appearance

may know that this nation is Thy people."
which hurIt is therefore that
ries away ever)'- rational soul with the desire
of it, and the more ardently the more pure
that soul is; and it is the more pure the more
it rises to spiritual things; and it rises the
more to spiritual things the more it dies to
But whilst we are absent from
carnal things.
the Lord, and walk by faith, not by sight,
we ought to see the
of Christ,
that is His flesh, by that very faith, that is,
standing on the solid foundation of faith,
14 and beholding it
which the rock signifies,
from such a safe watch-tower, namely in the
Catholic Church, of which it is said, "And
upon this rock I will build my Church." 15
For so much the more certainly we love that
face of Christ, which we earnestly desire to
see, as we recognize in His back parts how
much first Christ loved us.

" back parts

"

"

"

" l6 and again,

29. But in the flesh itself, the faith in His
resurrection saves and justifies us.
If
For,
thou shalt believe," he says,
in thine heart,
that God hath raised Him from the dead,
" Who was
thou shalt be saved;
delivered," he says, "for our offenses, and was
So that
raised again for our justification."
the reward of our faith is the resurrection of
the body of our Lord. 18 For even His enemies
believe that that flesh died on the cross of
His passion, but they do not believe it to
Which we believing most
have risen again.
firmly, gaze upon it as from the solidity of a
rock: whence we wait with certain hope for
the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our
body; 19 because we hope for that in the members of Christ, that is, in ourselves, which by
a sound faith we acknowledge to be perfect
in Him as in our Head.
Thence it is that
He would not have His back parts seen, unless as He passed by, that His resurrection
For that which is Pascha
may be believed.
in Hebrew, is translated Passover. 20 Whence
Before the
John the Evangelist also says,
feast of the Passover, when Jesus knew that
His hour was come, that He should pass out
of this world unto the Father." 21

"

30. But they who believe this, but believe
it not in the Catholic Church, but in some
schism or in heresy, do not see the back parts
of the Lord from "
the place that is by Him."
For what does that mean which the Lord says,
"
Behold, there is a place by me, and thou

1 3 2 Cor. v. 6, 7.
M [Augustin here gives the Protestant interpretation of the
word "rock," in the passage, "on this rock I will build my
church."

'7 Rom. iv. 25.
l6 Rom. x. g.
l i Matt. xvi. 18.
18 [The meaning seems to be, that the vivid realization that
Christ's body rose from the dead is the reward of a Christian's faith.
The unbeliever has no such reward. W.G.T.S.]

W.G.T.S.]

z 9 Rom. viii. 23.
20 Transilus = passing by.

2I John xiii. 1.

[Book II.

"

shalt stand upon a rock?" What earthly
place is "by" the Lord, unless that is "by
Him" which touches Him spiritually ?
For
what place is not "by" the Lord, who
"
reacheth from one end to another mightily,
and sweetly doth order all things," 'and of
" Heaven is His throne, and
whom it is said,
and who said,
earth is His
footstool;"
" Where is the house that ye build unto me,
For has
and where is the place of my rest ?
Eut
not my hand made all those things?"
manifestly the Catholic Church itself is unthe place by Him," wherein
derstood to be
one stands upon a rock, where he healthfully
" Pascha Domini," that
the
sees the
"Passing by" 3 of the Lord, and His back
parts, that is, His body, who believes in His
resurrection. "And thou shalt stand," He
says, "upon a rock while my glory passeth
For in reality, immediately after the
by."
majesty of the Lord had passed by in the
glorification of the Lord, in which He rose
again and ascended to the Father, we stood
firm upon the rock. And Peter himself then
stood firm, so that he preached Him with
confidence, whom, before he stood firm, he
had thrice from fear denied; 4 although, indeed, already before placed in predestination
upon the watch-tower of the rock, but with
the hand of the Lord still held over him that
For he was to see His
he might not see.
back parts, and the Lord had not yet
passed
by," namely, from death to life; He had not
yet been glorified by the resurrection.

is,

"

"

31. For as to that, too, which follows in
I will cover thee with mine hand
Exodus,
while I pass by, and I will take away my
"
hand and thou shalt see my back parts;
many Israelites, of whom Moses was then a
figure, believed in the Lord after His resurrection, as if His hand had been taken off
from their eyes, and they now saw His back
And hence the evangelist also menparts.
" Make the
tions that prophesy of Isaiah,
heart of this people fat, and make their ears
heavy, and shut their eyes." 5
Lastly, in
the Psalm, that is not unreasonably under-
" For day
stood to be said in their person,
and night Thy hand was heavy upon me."
"By day," perhaps, when He performed
manifest miracles, yet was not acknowledged
by night," when He died in
by them; - but
suffering, when they thought still more certainly that, like any one among men, He
was cut off and brought to an end.
But
since, when He had already passed by, so
that His back parts were seen, upon the

"

1 Wisd. viii. 1.
3 Transitus.
5 Isa. vi. 10; Matt. xiii. 15.

2 Isa. lxvi. 1, 2.
4 Matt. xxvi. 70-74.

"

"

" My moisture," he says,

preaching to them by the Apostle Peter that
it behoved Christ to suffer and rise again,
they were pricked in their hearts with the
6 that that might come to
grief of repentance,
pass among the baptized which is said in the
Blessed are they
beginning of that Psalm,
whose transgressions are forgiven, and whose
sins are covered;" therefore, after it had
Thy hand is heavy upon me,"
been said,
the Lord, as it were, passing by, so that now
He removed His hand, and His back parts
were seen, there follows the voice of one who
grieves and confesses and receives remission
of sins by faith in the resurrection of the
is turned
Lord:
into the drought of summer. I acknowledged
my sin unto Thee, and mine iniquity have I
I will confess my transnot hid.
gressions unto the Lord, and Thou forgavest
For we ought not
the iniquity of my sin." 7
to be so wrapped up in the darkness of the
flesh, as to think the face indeed of God to
be invisible, but His back visible, since both
appeared visibly in the form of a servant;
but far be it from us to think anything of the
kind in the form of God; far be it from us to
think that the Word of God and the Wisdom
of God has a face on one side, and on the
other a back, as a human body has, or is at
all changed either in place or time by any
appearance or motion. 8

I said,

"

32. Wherefore, if in those words which
were spoken in Exodus, and in all those corporeal appearances, the Lord Jesus Christ
was manifested; or if in some cases Christ
was manifested, as the consideration of this
in others the Holy
passage persuades us,
Spirit, as that which we have said above admonishes us; at any rate no such result follows, as that God the Father never appeared
For many
in any such form to the Fathers.
such appearances happened in those times,
without either the Father, or the Son, or the
Holy Spirit being expressly named and designated in them; but yet with some intimations
given through certain very probable interpretations, so that it would be too rash to say
that God the Father never appeared by any
visible forms to the fathers or the prophets.
For they gave birth to this opinion who were
not able to understand in respect to the unity of
" Now unto the King
the Trinity such texts as,
eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise
" Whom no man hath seen, nor
God;

" 9 and,

7 Ps. xxxii. 4, 5.

6 Acts ii. 37, 41.
8 [This explanation of the "back parts" of Christ to mean his
resurrection, and of " the place that is by him," to mean the
church, is an example of the fanciful exegesis into which Augnstin, with the fathers generally, sometimes falls. The reasoning,
here, unlike that in the preceding chapter, is not from the immediate context, and hence extraneous matter is read into the text.

W. G. T. S.]

9 1 Tim. i. 17.

Chap. XVIII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

Which texts are understood by
can see." 1
a sound faith in that substance itself, the
highest, and in the highest degree divine and
unchangeable, whereby both the Father and
the Son and the Holy Spirit is the one and
But those visions were wrought
only God.
through the changeable creature, made subject to the unchangeable God, and did not
manifest God properly as He is, but by intimations such as suited the causes and times
of the several circumstances.

CHAP. 1 8.

THE VISION OF DANIEL.

"

33.

- 1 do not know in what manner these
men understand that the Ancient of Days
appeared to Daniel, from whom the Son of
man, which He deigned to be for our sakes,
is understood to have received the kingdom;
namely, from Him who says to Him in the
" Thou art my Son; this day have I
Psalms,
begotten Thee; ask of me, and I shall give
Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance;" 3
and who has "put all things under His
If, however, both the Father giving
feet." 4
the kingdom, and the Son receiving it, appeared to Daniel in bodily form, how can
those men say that the Father never appeared
to the prophets, and, therefore, that He only
ought to be understood to be invisible whom
no man has seen, nor can see ?
For Daniel
has told us thus:
I beheld," he says, "till
5 and the Ancient of
the thrones were set,
Days did sit, whose garment was white as
snow, and the hair of His head like the pure
wool: His throne was like the fiery flame,
and His wheels as burning fire; a fiery stream
issued and came forth from before Him:
thousand thousands ministered unto Him,
and ten thousand times ten thousand stood
before Him: the judgment was set, and the
books were opened," etc. And a little after,
"I saw," he says, "in the night visions,
and behold, one like the Son of man came
with the clouds of heaven, and came to the
Ancient of Days, and they brought Him near
And there was given Him
before Him.
dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all
peoples, nations, and languages should serve
Him: His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and His kingdom that which shall not be destroyed."
Behold the Father giving, and the Son receiving, an eternal kingdom ; and both are in

1 1 Tim. vi. 16.
2 [The original has an awkward anacoluthon in the opening
sentence of this chapter, which has been removed by omitting
"'quaviquat/i," and substituting
erev."- -W. G.
T. S.]

" autem" for "

i Ps. ii. 7, 8.
5 Cast down A. V.

4 Ps. viii. 8.
6 Dan. vii. 9-14.

the sight of him who prophesies, in a visible
form.
is not, therefore, unsuitably believed that God the Father also was wont to
appear in that manner to mortals.

It

34. Unless, perhaps, some one shall say,
that the Father is therefore not visible, because He appeared within the sight of one
who was dreaming; but that therefore the
Son and the Holy Spirit are visible, because
Moses saw all those things being awake; as
if, forsooth, Moses saw the Word and the
Wisdom of God with fleshly eyes, or that
even the human spirit which quickens that
flesh can be seen, or even that corporeal thing
which is called wind; how much less can
that Spirit of God be seen, who transcends
the minds of all men, and of angels, by the
ineffable excellence of the divine substance?
Or can any one fall headlong into such an
error as to dare to say, that the Son and the
Holy Spirit are visible also to men who are
awake, but that the Father is not visible except to those who dream ? How, then, do
they understand that of the Father alone,
"Whom no man hath seen, nor can see."?
When men sleep, are they then not men ?
Or cannot He, who can fashion the likeness
of a body to signify Himself through the
visions of dreamers, also fashion that same
bodily creature to signify Himself to the eyes
Whereas His own
of those who are awake ?
very substance, whereby He Himself is that
which He is, cannot be shown by any bodily
likeness to one who sleeps, or by any bodily
appearance to one who is awake; but this not
of the Father only, but also of the Son and
of the Holy Spirit. And certainly, as to
those who are moved by the visions of waking men to believe that not the Father, but
only the Son, or the Holy Spirit, appeared to
to omit the
the corporeal sight of men,
great extent of the sacred pages, and their
manifold interpretation, such that no one of
sound reason ought to affirm that the person
of the Father was nowhere shown to the eyes
of waking men by any corporeal appearance;
but, as I said, to omit this, what do they
say of our father Abraham, who was certainly
awake and ministering, when, after Scripture
" The Lord appeared unto
had premised,
Abraham," not one, or two, but three men
appeared to him; no one of whom- is said to
have stood prominently above the others, no
one more than the others to have shone with
greater glory, or to have acted more authoritatively ? 7

35. Wherefore, since in that our threefold

division we determined to

inquire,

first,

7 oen. xvm. 1.

8 See above, chap. vii.

[Book II.

whether the Father, or the Son, or the Holy
or whether sometimes the Father,
Spirit;
sometimes the Son, sometimes the
HolySpirit; or whether, without any distinction of
persons, as it is said, the one and only God,
that is, the Trinity itself, appeared to the
fathers through those forms of the creature:
now that we have examined, so far as appeared to be sufficient, what places of the
Holy Scriptures we could, a modest and
cautious consideration of divine mysteries
leads, as far as I can judge, to no other conclusion, unless that we may not rashly affirm
which person of the Trinity appeared to this
or that of the fathers or the prophets in some

body or likeness of body, unless when the
context attaches to the narrative some probable intimations on the subject.
For the
nature itself, or substance, or essence, or by
whatever other name that very thing, which
is God, whatever it be, is to be called, cannot
be seen corporeally: but we must believe
that by means of the creature made subject
to Him, not only the Son, or the Holy Spirit,
but also the Father, may have given intimations of Himself to mortal senses by a corporeal form or likeness. And since the case
stands thus, that this second book may not
extend to an immoderate length, let us consider what remains in those which follow.

BOOK III.
THE QUESTION IS DISCUSSED WITH RESPECT TO THE APPEARANCES OF GOD SPOKEN OF IN THE
PREVIOUS BOOK, WHICH WERE MADE UNDER BODILY FORMS, WHETHER ONLY A CREATURE
WAS FORMED, FOR THE PURPOSE OF MANIFESTING GOD TO HUMAN SIGHT IN SUCH WAY AS HE
AT EACH TIME JUDGED FITTING; OR WHETHER ANGELS, ALREADY EXISTING, WERE SO SENT
AS TO SPEAK IN THE PERSON OF GOD; AND THIS, EITHER BY ASSUMING A BODILY APPEARANCE FROM THE BODILY CREATURE, OR BY CHANGING THEIR OWN BODIES INTO WHATEVER
FORMS THEY WOULD, SUITABLE TO THE PARTICULAR ACTION, ACCORDING TO THE POWER
GIVEN TO THEM BY THE CREATOR; WHILE THE ESSENCE ITSELF OF GOD WAS NEVER SEEN IN
ITSELF.

PREFACE.

WHY AUGUSTIN WRITES OF THE
TRINITY. WHAT HE CLAIMS FROM READERS.
WHAT HAS BEEN SAID IN THE PREVIOUS BOOK.

i.

I would have them believe, who are
willing to do so, that I had rather bestow
labor in reading, than in dictating what others
But let those who will not bemay read.
lieve this, but are both able and willing to
make the trial, grant me whatever answers
may be gathered from reading, either to my
own inquiries, or to those interrogations of
others, which for the character I bear in the
service of Christ, and for the zeal with which
I burn that our faith may be fortified against
the error of carnal and natural men, 1 I must
needs bear with; and then let them see how
easily I would refrain from this labor, and
with how much even of joy I would give my
But if what we have read
pen a holiday.
upon these subjects is either not sufficiently
set forth, or is not to be found at all, or at
any rate cannot easily be found by us, in the
Latin tongue, while we are not so familiar
with the Greek tongue as to be found in any
way competent to read and understand therein the books that treat of such topics, in which
class of writings, to judge by the little which
has been translated for us, I do not doubt
that everything is contained that we can profit-

1 [The English translator renders " animalium '
"

"
cal," to agree with i|/vxikos in i Cor. ii. 14. The rendering
of the A. V. is more familiar. W, G. T. S.]
ural

by

psychi-
" nat-

while yet I cannot resist my
ably seek;
brethren when they exact of me, by that law
by which I am made their servant, that I
should minister above all to their praiseworthy
studies in Christ by my tongue and by my
pen, of which two yoked together in me, Love
is the charioteer; and while I myself confess
that I have by writing learned many things
which I did not know: if this be so, then this
my labor ought not to seem superfluous to
any idle, or to any very learned reader; while
it is needful in no small part, to many who
are busy, and to many who are unlearned,
and among these last to myself.
Supported,
then, very greatly, and aided by the writings
we have already read of others on this subject, I have undertaken to inquire into and
to discuss, whatever it seems to my judgment can be reverently inquired into and discussed, concerning the Trinity, the one supreme and supremely good God; He himself
exhorting me to the inquiry, and helping me
in the discussion of it; in order that, if there
are no other writings of the kind, there may
be something for those to have and read who

2 [This is an important passage with reference to Augustin's
learning. From it, it would appear that he had not read the
Greek Trinitarians in the original, and that only "a little
' of these
had been translated, at the time when he was composing this
treatise. As this was from A.D. 400 to A.D. 416
, the treatises of
Athanasius(d. 373), Basil (d. 379), Gregory of Nyssa (d. 400?), and
Gregory of Nazianzum (d. 390 ?) had been composed and were curThat Augustin thought out this prorent in the Eastern church.
found scheme of the doctrine of the Trinity by the close study of
Scripture alone, and unassisted by the equally profound trimtarianism of the Greek church, is an evidence of the depth and strength
of his remarkable intellect. W. G. T. S.]

are willing and capable; but if any exist already, then it may be so much the easier to
find some such writings, the more there are
of the kind in existence,

2. Assuredly, as in all my writings I desire
not only a pious reader, but also a free corrector, so I especially desire this in the present
inquiry, which is so important that I would
there were as many inquirers as there are obBut as I do not wish my reader to
jectors.
be bound down to me, so I do not wish my
corrector to be bound down to himself.
Let
not the former love me more than the catholic faith, let not the latter love himself more
As I say to the forthan the catholic verity.
mer, Do not be willing to yield to my writings
as to the canonical Scriptures; but in these,
when thou hast discovered even what thou
didst not previously believe, believe it unhesitatingly; while in those, unless thou hast understood with certainty what thou didst not
before hold as certain, be unwilling to hold it
fast: so I say to the latter, Do not be willing
to amend my writings by thine own opinion or
disputation, but from the divine text, or by
If thou apprehendest
unanswerable reason.
anything of truth in them, its being there
does not make it mine, but by understanding
and loving it, let it be both thine and mine;
but if thou convictest anything of falsehood,
though it have once been mine, in that I was
guilty of the error, yet now by avoiding it
let it be neither thine nor mine.

"

3. Let this third book, then, take its beginning at the point to which the second had
For after we had arrived at this,
reached.
that we desired to show that the Son was not
therefore less than the Father, because the
Father sent and the Son was sent; nor the
Holy Spirit therefore less than both, because
we read in the Gospel that He was sent both
by the one and by the other; we undertook
then to inquire, since the Son was sent thither,
where He already was, for He came into the
" * since also
world, and
was in the world;
the Holy Spirit was sent thither, where He
already was, for "the Spirit of the Lord filleth
the world, and that which containeth all things
" 2 whether the
hath knowledge of the voice;
Lord was therefore "sent" because He was
born in the flesh so as to be no longer hidden,
and, as it were, came forth from the bosom of
the Father, and appeared to the eyes of men
in the form of a servant; and the Holy Spirit
sent," because He too
also was therefore
was seen as a dove in a corporeal form, 3 and
4 so that, to
in cloven tongues, like as of fire;

"

[Book III.
be sent, when spoken of them, means to go
forth to the sight of mortals in some corporeal form from a spiritual hiding-place; which,
because the Father did not, He is said only
Our next
to have sent, not also to be sent.
inquiry was, Why the Father also is not sometimes said to be sent, if He Himself was manifested through those corporeal forms which
But if
appeared to the eyes of the ancients.
the Son was manifested at these times, why
should He be said to be" sent" so long after,
when the fullness of time was come that He
should be born of a woman; 5 since, indeed,
He was sent before also, viz., when He appeared corporeally in those forms ? Or if He
"
were not rightly said to be
sent," except
when the Word was made flesh;
6 why should
the Holy Spirit be read of as "sent," of
whom such an incarnation never took place ?
But if neither the Father, nor the Son, but
the Holy Spirit was manifested through these
ancient appearances; why should He too be
now, when He was also sent
said to be
Next we
before in these various manners ?
subdivided the subject, that it might be handled most carefully, and we made the question
threefold, of which one part was explained in
the second book, and two remain, which I
For we have
shall next proceed to discuss.
already inquired and determined, that not only
the Father, nor only the Son, nor only the
Holy Spirit appeared in those ancient corporeal forms and visions, but either indifferently the Lord God, who is understood to be the
Trinity itself, or some one person of the Trinity, whichever the text of the narrative might
signify, through intimations supplied by the
context.

sent

"

"

CHAP. I. WHAT IS TO BE SAID THEREUPON.
4. Let us, then, continue our inquiry now
For under the second head in that
in order.
division the question occurred, whether the
creature was formed for that work only, wherein God, in such way as He then judged it to
be fitting, might be manifested to human
or whether angels, who already exsight;
isted, were so sent as to speak in the person
of God, assuming a corporeal appearance from
the corporeal creature for the purpose of their
ministry; or else changing and turning their
own body itself, to which they are not subject,
but govern it as subject to themselves, into
whatever forms they would, that were appropriate and fit for their actions, according to
the power given to them by the Creator. And
when this part of the question shall have been
investigated, so far as God permit, then, last-

1 John i. 10.
3 Matt. iii. 16.

2 Wisd. i. 7.
4 Acts ii. 3.

5 Gal. iv. 4.

6 John i. 14.

Chap. II.]

ON THE TRINITY.

"

"

sent

]y, we shall have to see to that question with
which we started, viz., whether the Son and
before; and
the Holy Spirit were also
if it be so, then what difference there is between that sending and the one of which we
read in the Gospel; or whether neither of
them were sent, except when either the Son
was made of the Virgin Mary, or when the
Holy Spirit appeared in a visible form, whether
as a dove or in tongues of fire. *

5.

1 confess, however, that it reaches further than my purpose can carry me to inquire
whether the angels, secretly working by the
spiritual quality of their body abiding still in
them, assume somewhat from the inferior and
more bodily elements, which, being fitted to
themselves, they may change and turn like a
garment into any corporeal appearances they
will, and those appearances themselves also
real, as real water was changed by our Lord
or whether they transform
into real wine;
their own bodies themselves into that which
they would, suitably to the particular act.
But it does not signify to the present question
And although I be not
which of these it is.
able to understand these things by actual experience, seeing that I am a man, as the
angels do who do these things, and know
them better than I know them, viz., how far
my body is changeable by the operation of
my will; whether it be by my own experience of
myself, or by that which I have gathered from
is not necessary here to say
others; yet it
which of these alternatives I am to believe
upon the authority of the divine Scriptures,
lest I be compelled to prove it, and so my
discourse become too long upon a subject
which does not concern the present question.
6. Our present inquiry then is, whether the
angels were then the agents both in showing
those bodily appearances to the eyes of men,
and in sounding those words in their ears,
when the sensible creature itself, serving the
Creator at His beck, was turned for the time
into whatever was needful; as it
is written in
" For the creature that
the book of Wisdom,
serveth Thee, who art the Maker, increaseth
his strength against the unrighteous for their
punishment, and abateth his strength for the
benefit of such as put their trust in Thee.
Therefore, even then was it altered into all
fashions, and was obedient to Thy grace, that
nourisheth all things according to the desire
of them that longed for Thee." 3
For the
power of the will of God reaches through the
spiritual creature even to visible and sensible
For where
effects of the corporeal creature.
does not the wisdom of the omnipotent God

1 See above, Book ii. chap. vii. n. 13.
2 John ii. g.

3 Wisd. xvi. 24, 25.

work that which He wills, which "
reacheth
from one end to another mightily, and sweetly doth order all things"? 4

CHAP. 2.

THE WILL OF GOD IS THE HIGHER
THIS IS

CAUSE OF ALL CORPOREAL CHANGE.
SHOWN BY AN EXAMPLE.

the

7. But there is one kind of natural order
conversion and changeableness of
in
bodies, which, although itself also serves the
bidding of God, yet by reason of its unbroken
continuity has ceased to cause wonder; as is
the case, for instance, with those things which
are changed either in very short, or at any
rate not long, intervals of time, in heaven, or
earth, or sea; whether it be in rising, or in
setting, or in change of appearance from time
to time; while there are other things, which,
although arising from that same order, yet
are less familiar on account of longer interAnd these things, although the
vals of time.
many stupidly wonder at them, yet are understood by those who inquire into this present world, and in the progress of generations
become so much the less wonderful, as they
are the more often repeated and known by
more people.
Such are the eclipses of the
sun and moon, and some kinds of stars, appearing seldom, and earthquakes, and unnatural births of living creatures, and other similar things; of which not one takes place without the will of God;
is so, is to
And so the vanity
most people not apparent.
of philosophers has found license to assign
these things also to other causes, true causes
perhaps, but proximate ones, while they are not
able to see at all the cause that is higher than
all others, that is, the will of God; or again to
false causes, and to such as are not even put
forward out of any diligent investigation of
corporeal things and motions, but from their
own guess and error.

yet, that it

8.

I will bring forward an example, if I can,
There is, we know,
that this may be plainer.
in the human body, a certain bulk of flesh and
an outward form, and an arrangement and distinction of limbs, and a temperament of health ;
and a soul breathed into it governs this body,
and that soul a rational one; which, therefore,
although changeable, yet can be partaker of
that unchangeable wisdom, so that
it may
" 5 as
partake of that which is in and of itself;

"

4 Wisd. viii. 1.
5 [The original is:

" ut sit fiarticifiatio ejus in idipsum." The
English translator renders: " So that it may partake thereof in itself." The thought of Augustin is, that the believing soul though
mutable partakes of the immutable; and he designates the immutable as the iti idipsum: the self-existent. In that striking passage
in the Confessions, in which he describes the spiritual and extatic
meditations of himself and his mother, as they looked out upon
the Mediterranean from the windows at Ostia a scene well known
from Ary Schefer's painting he denominates God the idipsum: the

[Book III.

"

it is written in the Psalm concerning all saints,
of whom as of living stones is built that Jerusalem which is the mother of us all, eternal in
For so it is sung,
the heavens.
Jerusalem
is builded as a city, that is partaker of that
which is in and of itself." 1 For "in and of itis understood of that
self," in that place,
chiefest and unchangeable good, which is
To
God, and of His own wisdom and will.
whom is sung in another place, "Thou shalt
change them, and they shall be changed; but
Thou art the same." 2

CHAP. 3.

OF THE SAME ARGUMENT.

Let us take, then, the case of a wise man,
such that his rational soul is already partaker
of the unchangeable and eternal truth, so
that he consults it about all his actions, nor
does anything at all, which he does not by it
know ought to be done, in order that by being subject to it and obeying it he may do
Suppose now that this man, upon
rightly.
counsel with the highest reason of the divine
righteousness, which he hears with the ear of
his heart in secret, and by its bidding, should
in some office of
weary his body by toil
mercy, and should contract an illness; and
upon, consulting the physicians, were to be
told by one that the cause of the disease was
overmuch dryness of the body, but by another that it was overmuch moisture; one of
the two no doubt would allege the true cause
and the other would err, but both would pronounce concerning proximate causes only,
But if the cause of
that is, corporeal ones.
that dryness were to be inquired into, and
found to be the self-imposed toil, then we
should have come to a yet higher cause,
which proceeds from the soul so as to affect
Yet neither
the body which the soul governs.
would this be the first cause, for that doubtless was a higher cause still, and lay in the
unchangeable wisdom itself, by serving which
in love, and by obeying its
ineffable commands, the soul of the wise man had undertaken that self-imposed toil; and so nothing
else but the will of God would be found most
truly to be the first cause of that illness.
But suppose now in that office of pious toil
this wise man had employed the
help of
others to co-operate in the good work, who
did not serve God with the same will as himself, but either desired to attain the reward
shunned
of
desires, or
merely carnal unpleasantnesses ;
suppose,
too, he had employed beasts of burden, if the

their own carnal

self same" (Confessions IX. x).

"
Augustin refers to the same absolute immutability of God, in this place. By faith, man is "a
partaker of a divine nature," (2 Pet. i. 4.) -W.G.T.S."]

1 Ps. cxxii. 3. Vulg.

2 Ps. cii. 26, 27.

completion of the work required such a provision, which beasts of burden would be certainly irrational animals, and would not therefore move their limbs under their burdens
because they at all thought of that good
work, but from the natural appetite of their
own liking, and for the avoiding of annoyance;
suppose, lastly, he had employed bodily
things themselves that lack all sense, but
were necessary for that work, as e.g. corn,
and wine, and oils, clothes, or money, or a
book, or anything of the kind;
certainly, in
all these bodily things thus employed in this
work, whether animate or inanimate, whatever took place of movement, of wear and
tear, of reparation, of destruction, of renewal
or of change in one way or another, as
places and times affected them; pray, could
there be, I say, any other cause of all these
visible and changeable facts, except the invisible and unchangeable will of God, using all
these, both bad and irrational souls, and
lastly bodies, whether such as were inspired
and animated by those souls, or such as
lacked all sense, by means of that upright
soul as the seat of His wisdom, since primarily that good and holy soul itself employed
them, which His wisdom had subjected to
itself in a pious and religious obedience ?

CHAP. 4.

GOD USES ALL CREATURES AS HE
WILL, AND MAKES VISIBLE THINGS FOR THE
MANIFESTATION OF HIMSELF
9. What, then, we have alleged by way of
example of a single wise man, although of
one still bearing a mortal body and still seeing only in part, may be allowably extended
also to a family, where there is a society of
such men, or to a city, or even to the whole
world, if the chief rule and government of
human affairs were in the hands of the wise,
and of those who were piously and perfectly
subject to God; but because this is not the
case as yet (for it behoves us first to be exercised in this our pilgrimage after
mortal
fashion, and to be taught with stripes by
force of gentleness and patience), let us turn
our thoughts to that country itself that is
above and heavenly, from which we here are
For there the will of God, "who
pilgrims.
maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers
a flaming fire,"
3 presiding among spirits
which are joined in perfect peace and friendship, and combined in one will by a kind of
spiritual fire of charity, as it were in an elevated and holy and secret seat, as in its own
house and in its own temple, thence diffuses
itself through all things by certain most per-

3 Ps. civ. 4.

Chap. V.]

ON THE TRINITY.

fectly ordered movements of the creature;
first spiritual, then corporeal; and uses all
according to the unchangeable pleasure of its
own purpose, whether incorporeal things or
things corporeal, whether rational or irrational spirits, whether good by His grace or
evil through their own will.
But as the more
gross and inferior bodies are governed in due
order by the more subtle and powerful ones,
so all bodies are governed by the living spirit;
and the living spirit devoid of reason, by the
reasonable living spirit; and the reasonable
living spirit that makes default and sins, by
the living and reasonable spirit that is pious
and just; and that by God Himself, and so
the universal creature by its Creator, from
whom and through whom and in whom it
is
And so it
also created and established. *
comes to pass that the will of God is the first
and the highest cause of all corporeal appearances and motions.
For nothing is done
visibly or sensibly, unless either by command
or permission from the interior palace, invisible and intelligible, of the supreme Governor,
according to the unspeakable justice of rewards and punishments, of favor and retribution, in that far-reaching and boundless
commonwealth of the whole creature.
10. If, therefore, the Apostle

Paul, although he still bare the burden of the body,
which is subject to corruption and presseth
down the soul,
- and although he still saw
only in part and in an enigma, 3 wishing to
depart and be with Christ, 4 and groaning
within himself, waiting for the adoption, to
wit, the redemption of his body, 5 yet was
able to preach the Lord Jesus Christ significantly, in one way by his tongue, in another
by epistle, in another by the sacrament of
His body and blood (since, certainly, we do
not call either the tongue of the apostle, or
the parchments, or the ink, or the significant
sounds which his tongue uttered, or the alphabetical signs written on skins, the body
and blood of Christ; but that only which we
take of the fruits of the earth and consecrate
by mystic prayer, and then receive duly to
our spiritual health in memory of the passion
of our Lord for us: and this, although it
brought by the hands of men to that visible
form, yet is not sanctified to become so great
a sacrament, except by the spirit of God
since God works everyworking invisibly;
thing that is done in that work through corin motion
poreal movements, by setting
primarily the invisible things of His servants,
whether the souls of men, or the services of

is

Himself):

hidden spirits subject to
what
wonder if also in the creature of heaven and
earth, of sea and air, God works the sensible
and visible things which He wills, in order
to signify and manifest Himself in them, as
He Himself knows it to be fitting, without
any appearing of His very substance itself,
whereby He is, which
unchangeable, and more inwardly and secretly
exalted than all spirits whom He has created?

altogether

is

CHAP. 5. WHY MIRACLES ARE NOT USUAL
WORKS.

11. For since the divine power administers the whole spiritual and corporeal creature,
the waters of the sea are summoned and
poured out upon the face of the earth on
But when this
certain days of every year.
was done at the prayer of the holy Elijah;
because so continued and long a course of
fair weather had gone before, that men were
famished; and because at that very hour, in
which the servant of God prayed, the air itself had not, by any moist aspect, put forth
signs of the coming rain; the divine power
was apparent in the great and rapid showers
that followed, and by which that miracle was
granted and dispensed.
In like manner,
God works ordinarily through thunders and
lightnings: but because these were wrought
in an unusual manner on Mount Sinai, and
those sounds were not uttered with a confused
noise, but so that it appeared by most sure
proofs that certain intimations were given by
them, they were miracles. 7 Who draws up
the sap through the root of the vine to the
bunch of grapes, and makes the wine, except
God; who, while man plants and waters,
Himself giveth the increase ?
But when, at
the command of the Lord, the water was
turned into wine with an extraordinary quickness, the divine power was made manifest,
by the confession even of the foolish. 9 Who
ordinarily clothes the trees with leaves and
flowers except God ?
Yet, when the rod of
Aaron the priest blossomed, the Godhead in
some way conversed with doubting humanAgain, the earthy matter certainly
serves in common to the production and formation both of all kinds of wood and of the
flesh of all animals: and who makes these
things, but He who said, Let the earth bring
them forth;
11 and who governs and guides by
the same word of His, those things which He
Yet, when He changed the
has created ?
same matter out of the rod of Moses into the
flesh of a serpent, immediately and quickly,

ity.

s

1 Col. i. 16.
4 Phil. i. 23.

- Wisd. ix. 15.
5 Rom. viii. 23.

3 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

6 1 Kings xviii. 45.
9 John ii. 9.

7 Ex. xix. 6.
10 Num. xvii.

8 1 Cor. iii. 7.
11 Gen. i. 24.

6o

[Book III.

that change, which was unusual, although of a
thing which was changeable, was a miracle. *
But who is it that gives life to every living
thing at its birth, unless He who gave life to
that serpent also for the moment, as there
was need. 2

CHAP. 6.

DIVERSITY ALONE MAKES A MIRACLE.
And who is it that restored to the corpses
their proper souls when the dead rose again, 3
unless He who gives life to the flesh in the
mother's womb, in order that they may come
But when
into being who yet are to die?
such things happen in a continuous kind of
river of ever-flowing succession, passing from
the hidden to the visible, and from the visible
to the hidden, by a regular and beaten track,
then they are called natural; when, for the
admonition of men, they are thrust in by an
unusual changeableness, then they are called
miracles.

CHAP. 7.

GREAT

MIRACLES WROUGHT

BY

MAGIC ARTS.
12. I see here what may occur to a weak
judgment, namely, why such miracles are
wrought also by magic arts; for the wise men
of Pharaoh likewise made serpents, and did
Yet it is still more a matother like things.
ter of wonder, how it was that the power of
those magicians, which was able to make serpents, when it came to very small flies, failed
For the lice, by which third
altogether.
people of Egypt were
plague the proud
smitten, are very short-lived little flies; yet
there certainly the magicians failed, saying,
"This is the ringer of God." 4 And hence
it is given us to understand that not even
those angels and powers of the air that transgressed, who have been thrust down into that
lowest darkness, as into a peculiar prison,
from their habitation in that lofty ethereal
purity, through whom magic arts have whatever power they have, can do anything except
by power given from above. Now that power
is given either to deceive the deceitful, as it
was given against the Egyptians, and against
the magicians also themselves, in order that
in the seducing of those spirits they might
seem admirable by whom they were wrought,
but to be condemned by the truth of God; or

1 Ex. iv. 3.
2 [One chief reason why a miracle is incredible for the skeptic, is
If the miracle were easy of execution
the difficulty of working it.
for man who for the skeptic is the measure of power his disbelief
of it would disappear.
In reference to this objection, Augustin
calls attention to the fact, that so far as difficulty of performance
is concerned, the products of nature are as impossible to man as
supernatural products. Aaron could no more have made an almond
rod blossom and fructuate on an almond tree, than off it.
That a
miracle is difficult to be wrought is, consequently, no good reason
for disbelieving its reality. W.G.T.S.]

3 Ezek. xxxvii. 1-10.

4 Ex. vii. and viii.

for the admonishing of the faithful, lest they
should desire to do anything of the kind as
though it were a great thing, for which reason
they have been handed down to us also by
the authority of Scripture; or lastly, for the
exercising, proving, and manifesting of the
For it was not by
patience of the righteous.
any small power of visible miracles that Job
lost all that he had, and both his children
and his bodily health itself. 5

CHAP. 8.

GOD ALONE CREATES THOSE THINGS

WHICH ARE CHANGED BY MAGIC ART.

13. Yet it

is not on this account to be
thought that the matter of visible things is
subservient to the bidding of those wicked
angels; but rather to that of God, by whom
this power is given, just so far as He, who is
unchangeable, determines in His lofty and
spiritual abode to give it.
For water and fire
and earth are subservient even to wicked men,
who are condemned to the mines, in order
that they may do therewith what they will,
but only so far as is permitted.
Nor, in
truth, are those evil angels to be called creators, because by their means the magicians,
withstanding the servant of God, made frogs
and serpents; for it was not they who created
But, in truth, some hidden seeds of
them.
all things that are born corporeally and visibly, are concealed in the corporeal elements
For those seeds that are visiof this world.
ble now to our eyes from fruits and living
things, are quite distinct from the hidden
seeds of those former seeds; from which, at
the bidding of the Creator, the water produced the first swimming creatures and fowl,
and the earth the first buds after their kind,
and the first living creatures after their kind. 6
For neither at that time were those seeds so
drawn forth into products of their several
kinds, as that the power of production was
exhausted in those products; but oftentimes,
suitable combinations of circumstances are
wanting, whereby they may be enabled to
burst forth and complete their species.
For,
consider, the very least shoot is a seed; for,
if fitly consigned to the earth, it produces a
But of this shoot there is a yet more
tree.
subtle seed in some grain of the same species,
and this is visible even to us.
But of this
grain also there is further still a seed, which,
although we are unable to see it with our
eyes, yet we can conjecture its existence from
our reason; because, except there were some
such power in those elements, there would
not so frequently be produced from the earth
things which had not been sown there; nor

5 Job i. and ii.

6 Gen. i. 20-25.

Chap. VIII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

yet so many animals, without any previous
commixture of male and femalej whether on
the land, or in the water, which yet grow,
and by commingling bring forth others, while
themselves sprang up without any union of
And certainly bees do not conceive
parents.
the seeds of their young by commixture, but
gather them as they lie scattered over the
For the Creator of
earth with their mouth. 1
these invisible seeds is the Creator of all
things Himself; since whatever comes forth
to our sight by being born, receives the first
beginnings of its course from hidden seeds,
and takes the successive increments of its
proper size and its distinctive forms from
As therefore
these as it were original rules.
we do not call .parents the creators of men,
nor farmers the creators of corn,
although
it is by the outward application of their actions
that the power 2 of God operates within for
so it is not right
the creating these things;
to think not only the bad but even the good
angels to be creators, if, through the subtilty
of their perception and body, they know the
seeds of things which to us are more hidden,
and scatter them secretly through fit temperings of the elements, and so furnish opportunities of producing things, and of accelerating
But neither do the good
their increase.
angels do these things, except as far as God
commands, nor do the evil ones do them
wrongfully, except as far as He righteously
For the malignity of the wicked
permits.
one makes his own will wrongful; but the
power to do so,
he
rightfully,
whether for his own punishment, or, in the
case of others, for the punishment of the
wicked, or for the praise of the good.

receives

14. Accordingly, the Apostle Paul, distinguishing God's creating and forming within,
from the operations of the creature which are
applied from without, and drawing a similitude from agriculture,
I planted,
inApollos watered;
As, therefore, in the case of spircrease." 3
itual life itself, no one except God can work

but God gave the

says,

"

'

"

scientist,

1 [Augustin is not alone in his belief that the bee is an exception to the dictum; otnne animal ex ovo. As late as 1744, Thorley,
said that " the manner in which bees proan English
pagate their species is entirely hid from the eyes of all men; and
the most strict, diligent, and curious observers and inquisitors have
It is a secret, and will remain a mysnot been able to discover it.
Dr. Butler says that they do not copulate as other living
tery.
(Thorley : Melisselogia. Section viii.) The obsercreatures do."
vations of Huber and others have disproved this opinion. Some
infer that ignorance of physics proves ignorance of philosophy and
theology. The difference between matter and mind is so great,
that erroneous opinions in one province are compatible with correct
It does not follow that because Augustin had
ones in the other.
wrong notions about bees, and no knowledge at all of the steam engine and telegraph, his knowledge of God and the soul was inferior
to that of a modern materialist. W.G.T.S.]

2 [The English translator renders " virtus

in its secondary
Augustin employs it here, in its primary

"

sense of "goodness."
sense of "

energy,"

"

3 1 Cor. iii. 6.

force." W.G.T.S.]

righteousness in our minds, yet men also are
able to preach the gospel as an outward
means, not only the good in sincerity, but
also the evil in pretence; 4 so in the creation
of visible things it is God that works from
within; but the exterior operations, whether
of good or bad, of angels or men, or even of
any kind of animal, according to His own
absolute power, and to the distribution of
faculties, and the several appetites for things
pleasant, which He Himself has imparted,
are applied by Him to that nature of things
wherein He creates all things, in like manWherefore
ner as agriculture is to the soil.
I can no more call the bad angels, evoked
by magic arts, the creators of the frogs and
serpents, than I can say that bad men were
creators of the corn crop, which I see to have
sprung up through their labor.

15. Just as Jacob, again, was not the creator of the colors in the flocks, because he
placed the various colored rods for the several
mothers, as they drank, to look at in conYet neither were the cattle themceiving. 5
selves creators of the variety of their own
offspring, because the variegated image, impressed through their eyes by the sight of
the varied rods, clave to their soul, but could
affect the body that was animated by the
spirit thus affected only through sympathy
with this commingling, so far as to stain with
color the tender beginnings of their offspring.
For that they are so affected from themselves,
whether the soul from the body, or the body
from the soul, arises in truth from suitable
reasons, which immutably exist in that highest wisdom of God Himself, which no extent
of place contains; and which, while it is itself
unchangeable, yet quits not one even of those
things which are changeable, because there is
not one of them that is not created by itself.
For it was the unchangeable and invisible
reason of the wisdom of God, by which all
things are created, which caused not rods,
but cattle, to be born from cattle; but that
the color of the cattle conceived should be in
any degree influenced by the variety of the
rods, came to pass through the soul of the
pregnant cattle being affected through their
eyes from without, and so according to its
own measure drawing inwardly within itself
the rule of formation, which it received from
the innermost power of its own Creator. How
great, however, may be the power of the soul
in affecting and changing corporeal substance
(although certainly it cannot be called the
creator of the body, because every cause of
changeable and sensible substance, and all its

4 Phil.

5 Gen. xxx. 41.

[Book III.

measure and number and weight, by which
are brought to pass both its being at all and
its being of such and such a nature, arise
from the intelligible and unchangeable life,
which is above all things, and which reaches
even to the most distant and earthly things),
is a very copious subject, and one not now
But I thought the act of Jacob
necessary.
about the cattle should be noticed, for this
reason, viz. in order that it might be perceived that, if the man who thus placed those
rods cannot be called the creator of the colors
in the lambs and kids; nor yet even the souls
themselves of the mothers, which colored the
seeds conceived in the flesh by the image of
variegated color, conceived through the eyes
of the body, so far as nature permitted it;
much less can it be said that the creators of
the frogs and serpents were the bad angelo,
through whom the magicians of Pharaoh then
made them.

CHAP. 9.

THE ORIGINAL CAUSE OF ALL THINGS

IS FROM GOD.
16. For it is one thing to make and administer the creature from the innermost and
highest turning-point of causation, which He
alone does who is God the Creator; but quite
another thing to apply some operation from
without in proportion to the strength and
faculties assigned to each by Him, so that
what is created may come forth into being at
this time or at that, and in this or that way.
For all these things in the way of original
and beginning have already been created in
a kind of texture of the elements, but they
come forth when they get the opportunity.
For as mothers are pregnant with young, so
the world itself is pregnant with the causes of
things that are born; which are not created
in it, except from that highest essence, where
nothing either springs up or dies, either beBut the applying from
gins to be or ceases.
without of adventitious causes, which, although
they are not natural, yet are to be applied
according to nature, in order that those things
which are contained and hidden in the secret
bosom of nature may break forth and be outwardly created in some way by the unfolding
of the proper measures and numbers and
weights which they have received in secret
from Him "who has ordered all things in

1 [This is the same as the theological distinction between sub-
" The former," says Howe, " are
stances and their modifications.
the proper object of creation strictly taken; the modifications of
things are not properly created, in the strictest sense of creation,
but are educed and brought forth out of those substantial things
that were themselves created, or made out of nothing.
' Germs
are originated ex nihilo, and fall under creation proper; their evolution and development takes place according to the nature and inherent force of the germ, and falls under providence, in distinction
from creation.
See the writer's Theological Essays, 115-137. W.
G. T. S.]

measure and number and weight:" 2 this is
not only in tlje power of bad angels, but also
of bad men, as I have shown above by the
example of agriculture.

17. But lest the somewhat different condition of animals should trouble any one, in
that they have the breath of life with the
sense of desiring those things that are according to nature, and of avoiding those things
that are contrary to it; we must consider also,
how many men there are who know from what
herbs or flesh, or from what juices or liquids
you please, of whatever sort, whether so
placed or so buried, or so bruised or so
mixed, this or that animal is commonly born;
yet who can be so foolish as to dare to call
himself the creator of these animals ?
Is it,
therefore, to be wondered at, if just as any,
the most worthless of men, can know whence
such or such worms and flies are produced;
so the evil angels in proportion to the subtlety
of their perceptions discern in the more hidden seeds of the elements whence frogs and
serpents are produced, and so through certain
and known opportune combinations applying
these seeds by secret movements, cause them
to be created, but do not create them ?
Only
men do not marvel at those tilings that are
usually done by men.
But if any one chance
to wonder at the quickness of those growths,
in that those living beings were so quickly
made, let him consider how even this may be
brought about by men in proportion to the
measure of human capability.
For whence is
it that the same bodies generate worms more
quickly in summer than in winter, or in hotter than in colder places ?
Only these things
are applied by men with so much the more
difficulty, in proportion as their earthly and
sluggish members are wanting in subtlety of
perception, and in rapidity of bodily motion.
And hence it arises that in the case of any
kind of angels, in proportion as it is easier for
them to draw out the proximate causes from
the elements, so much the more marvellous
is their rapidity in works of this kind.

18. But He only is the creator who is the
chief former of these things.
Neither can
any one be this, unless He with whom primarily rests the measure, number, and weight of
all things existing; and He is God the one
Creator, by whose unspeakable power it comes
to pass, also, that what these angels were able
to do if they were permitted, they are therefore not able to do because they are not perFor there is no other reason why they
mitted.
who made frogs and serpents were not able
to make the most minute flies, unless because

2 Wisd. xi. 20.

Chap. X.]

ON THE TRINITY.

"

This is the finger of God." 1

the greater power of God was present prohibiting them, through the Holy Spirit; which
even the magicians themselves confessed, sayBut what
ing,
they are able to do by nature, yet cannot do,
because they are prohibited; and what the
very condition of their nature itself does not
suffer them to do; it is difficult, nay, impossible, for man to search out, unless through
that gift of God which the apostle mentions
" To another the discerning of
when he says,
For we know that a man can walk,
spirits."
yet that he cannot do so if he is not permitted ;
but that he cannot fly, even if he be permitted.
So those angels, also, are able to do certain
things if they are permitted by more powerful angels, according to the supreme commandment of God; but cannot do certain other
things, not even if they are permitted by them;
because He does not permit from whom they
have received such and such a measure of
natural powers : who, even by His angels,
does not usually permit what He has given
them power to be able to do.

19. Excepting, therefore, those corporeal
things which are done in the order of nature
in a perfectly usual series of times, as e.g.,
the rising and setting of the stars, the generations and deaths of animals, the innumerable
diversities of seeds and buds, the vapors and
the clouds, the snow and the rain, the lightnings and the thunder, the thunderbolts and
the hail, the winds and the fire, cold and heat,
and all like things; excepting also those which
in the same order of nature occur rarely, such
as eclipses, unusual appearances of stars, and
monsters, and earthquakes, and such like;
all these, I say, are to be excepted, of which
indeed the first and chief cause is only the
will of God; whence also in the Psalm, when
some things of this kind had been mentioned,
"Fire and hail, snow and vapor, stormy wind,"
lest any one should think those to be brought
about either by chance or only from corporeal
causes, or even from such as are spiritual,
but exist apart from the will of God, it is
added immediately,

fulfilling His word." 3

"

CHAP. IO.

IN HOW MANY WAYS THE CREATURE
THE

IS TO BE TAKEN BY WAY OF SIGN.
EUCHARIST.

Excepting, therefore, all these things as I
just now said, there are some also of another
kind; which, although from the same corporeal substance, are yet brought within reach
of our senses in order to announce something
from God, and these are properly called mira-

"

" 5

is premised,

cles and signs; yet is not the person of God
Himself assumed in all things which are announced to us by the Lord God.
When, however, that person is assumed, it is sometimes
made manifest as an angel; sometimes in that
form which is not an angel in his own proper
being, although it is ordered and ministered
Again, when it
by an angel.
is assumed in
that form which is not an angel in his own
proper being; sometimes in this case it is a
body itself already existing, assumed afte"
some kind of change, in order to make that
message manifest; sometimes it
is one that
comes into being for the purpose, and that
being accomplished, is discarded.
Just as,
also, when men are the messengers, sometimes
they speak the words of God in their own per-
" The Lord
son, as when it
said," or, "Thus saith the Lord," 4 or any
other such phrase, but sometimes without any
such prefix, they take upon themselves the
very person of God, as e.g.:
I will instruct
thee, and teach thee in the way wherein thou
so, not only in word, but also in
shalt go:
act, the signifying of the person of God is
imposed upon the prophet, in order that he
may bear that person in the ministering of
the prophecy; just as he, for instance, bore
that person who divided his garment into
twelve parts, and gave ten of them to the servant of King Solomon, to the future king of
Sometimes, also, a thing which was
Israel.
not a prophet in his own proper self, and which
existed already among earthly things, was assumed in order to signify this; as Jacob, when
he had seen the dream, upon waking up did
with the stone, which when asleep he had
Sometimes a thing is made
under his head. 7
in the same kind, for the mere purpose; so
as either to continue a little while in existence, as that brazen serpent was able to do
which was lifted up in the wilderness,
8 and as
written records are able to do likewise; or so
as to pass away after having accomplished its
ministry, as the bread made for the purpose
is consumed in the receiving of the sacrament.
20. But because these things are known to
men, in that they are done by men, they may
well meet with reverence as being holy things,
but they cannot cause wonder as being miracles. And therefore those things which are
done by angels are the more wonderful to us,
in that they are more difficult and more unknown; but they are known and easy to them
as being their own actions. An angel speaks
I am
in the person of God to man, saying,
the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,

"

1 Ex. vii. 12, and viii. 7, 18, 19.
3 Ps. cxlviii. 8.

2 1 Cor. xii. 10.

4 Jer. xxxi. 1, 2.
6 1 Kings xi. 30, 31.
s Num. xxi. 9.

5 Ps. xxxii. 8.
7 Gen. xxviii. iE

<M

[Book III.

"

and the God of Jacob;
the Scripture having
" The angel of the Lord apsaid just before,
peared to him." I And a man also speaks in
"
Hear. O my
the person of God, saying,
people, and I will testify unto thee, O Israel:
1 am the Lord thy God." 2 A rod was taken
to serve as a sign, and was changed into a serpent by angelical power; 3 but although that
power is wanting to man, yet a stone was taken
also by man for a similar sign.
There is a
wide difference between the deed of the angel
The former is both
and the deed of the man.
to be wondered at and to be understood, the
That which is
latter only to be understood.
understood from both, is perhaps one and the
same; but those things from which it is underJust as if the name of
stood, are different.
God were written both in gold and in ink; the
former would be the more precious, the latter
the more worthless; yet that which is signified
And although
in both is one and the same.
the serpent that came from Moses' rod signified the same thing as Jacob's stone, yet
Jacob's stone signified something better than
did the serpents of the magicians. For as the
anointing of the stone signified Christ in the
flesh, in which He was anointed with the oil
of gladness above His fellows; 5 so the rod of
Moses, turned into a serpent, signified Christ
Himself made obedient unto death, even the
'* And
death of the cross. 6 Whence it is said,
as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted
up, that whosoever believeth in Him should
not perish, but have everlasting life;
just
as by gazing on that serpent which was lifted
up in the wilderness, they did not perish by
our old man
the bites of the serpents.
is crucified with Him, that the body of sin
For by the serpent
might be destroyed."
death is understood, which was wrought by
the serpent in paradise, 9 the mode of speech
Thereexpressing the effect by the efficient.
fore the rod passed into the serpent, Christ
into death; and the serpent again into the rod,
whole Christ with His body into the resurrection; which body is the Church; 10 and this
shall be in the end of time, signified by the
tail, which Moses held, in order that it might
return into a rod." But the serpents of the
magicians, like those who are dead in the
world, unless by believing in Christ they shall
12 and
have been as it were swallowed up by,
have entered into, His body, will not be able
to rise again in Him.
Jacob's stone, therefore, as I said, signified something better than
did the serpents of the magicians; yet the

For "

" 7

1 Ex. iii. 6, 2.
4 Gen. xxviii. 18.
7 John iii. 14, 15.

Col. i. 24.

" Ps. lxxxi. 8, ro.
5 Ps. xlv. 7.
8 Rom. vi. 6.
11 Ex. iv. 4.

3 Ex. vii. 10.
6 Phil. ii. 9.
9 Gen. iii.
12 Ex. vii. 12.

deed of the magicians was much more wonBut these things in this way are no
derful.
hindrance to the understanding of the matter;
just as if the name of a man were written in
gold, and that of God in ink.

corporeal

21. What man, again, knows how the angels
made or took those clouds and fires in order
to signify the message they were bearing, even
if we supposed that the Lord or the Holy Spirit
was manifested in those
forms ?
Just as infants do not know of that which is
placed upon the altar and consumed after the
performance of the holy celebration, whence
or in what manner it is made, or whence it is
taken for religious use. And if they were
never to learn from their own experience or
that of others, and never to see that species of
thing except during the celebration of the sacrament, when it is being offered and given;
and if it were told them by the most weighty
authority whose body and blood it
is; they
will believe nothing else, except that the Lord
absolutely appeared in this form to the eyes
of mortals, and that that liquid actually flowed
13 which resembled
from the piercing of a side,
But it is certainly a useful caution to
this.
myself, that I should remember what my own
powers are, and admonish my brethren that
they also remember what theirs are, lest human infirmity pass on beyond what is safe.
For how the angels do these things, or rather,
how God does these things by His angels, and
how far He wills them to be done even by the
bad angels, whether by permitting, or commanding, or compelling, from the hidden seat
of His own supreme power; this I can neither
penetrate by the sight of the eyes, nor make
clear by assurance of reason, nor be carried
on to comprehend it by reach of intellect, so
as to speak thereupon to all questions that
may be asked respecting these matters, as certainly as if I were an angel, or a prophet, or
" For the thoughts of mortal
an apostle.
men are miserable, and our devices are but
For the corruptible body presseth
uncertain.
down the soul, and the earthly tabernacle
weigheth down the mind, that museth upon
And hardly do we guess aright
many things.
at things that are upon earth, and with labor
do we find the things that are before us; but
in heaven, who hath
are
the
But because it goes onto
searched out ?
say, "And Thy counsel who hath known, except Thou give wisdom, and send Thy Holy
Spirit from above;" 14 therefore we refrain indeed from searching out the things which are
in heaven, under which kind are contained
both angelical bodies according to their proper

things that
"

J 3 John xix. 34.

14 Wisd. ix. 14-17.

Chap. 1 1. J

ON THE TRINITY.

dignity, and any corporeal action of those
bodies; yet, according to the Spirit of God
sent to us from above, and to His grace imparted to our minds, I dare to say confidently,
that neither God the Father, nor His Word,
nor His Spirit, which is the one God, is in any
way changeable in regard to that which He is,
and whereby He is that which He is; and
much less
Since
there are no doubt some things changeable,
yet not visible, as are our thoughts, and memories, and wills, and the whole incorporeal
creature; but there is nothing that is visible
that is not also changeable.

in this regard visible.

is

CHAP. II.

THE ESSENCE OF GOD NEVER APDIVINE APPEARANCES TO
PEARED IN ITSELF.
THE FATHERS WROUGHT BY THE MINISTRY OF
AN OBJECTION DRAWN FROM THE
ANGELS.
THAT THE APMODE OF SPEECH REMOVED.
PEARING OF GOD TO ABRAHAM HIMSELF, JUST
AS THAT TO MOSES, WAS WROUGHT BY ANTHE SAME THING IS PROVED BY THE
GELS.
LAW BEING GIVEN TO MOSES BY ANGELS.
WHAT HAS BEEN SAID IN THIS BOOK, AND
WHAT REMAINS TO BE SAID IN THE NEXT.

Wherefore the substance, or, if it is better
so to say, the essence of God, 1 wherein we
understand, in proportion to our measure, in
however small a degree, the Father, the Son,
is in no way
and the Holy Spirit,
changeable, can in no way in its proper self be
visible.

since it

is

to

22. It

suitable

manifest, accordingly, that all
those appearances to the fathers, when God
was presented to them according to His own
times, were
the
dispensation,
And if we
wrought through the creature.
cannot discern in what manner He wrought
them by ministry of angels, yet we say that
they were wrought by angels; but not from
our own power of discernment, lest we should
seem to any one to be wise beyond our measure, whereas we are wise so as to think soberly,
as God hath dealt to us the measure of faith;
For
and we believe, and therefore speak. 3
the authority is extant of the divine Scriptures, from which our reason ought not to turn
aside; nor by leaving the solid support of the
divine utterance, to fall headlong over the
precipice of its own surmisings, in matters
wherein neither the perceptions of the body
rule, nor the clear reason of the truth shines
is written most
forth.
clearly in the Epistle to the Hebrews, when

Now, certainly,

it

1 [" Substance," from sul> stans, is a passive term, denoting laEssence," from esse, is an active
tent and potential being.
term, denoting energetic being. The schoolmen, as Augustin does
here, preferred the latter term to the former, though employing
both to designate the divine nature. W. G. T. S.]

"

- Rom. xii. 3.

32 Cor. iv. 13,

the dispensation of the New Testament was to
be distinguished from the dispensation of the
Old, according to the fitness of ages and of
times, that not only those visible things, but
also the word itself, was wrought by angels.
is said thus: "But to which of the
For it
angels said He at any time, Sit on my right
hand, until I make thine enemies thy footAre they not all ministering spirits,
stool ?
sent forth to minister for them who shall be
" 4 Whence it appears that
heirs of salvation ?
all those things were not only wrought by
angels, but wrought also on our account, that
is, on account of the people of God, to whom
is promised the inheritance of eternal life. As
" Now all
it is written also to the Corinthians,
these things happened unto them in a figure:
and they are written for our admonition, upon
whom the ends of the world arecome." 5 And
then, demonstrating by plain consequence that
as at that time the word was spoken by the
angels, so now by the Son;
Therefore," he
" we ought to give the more earnest heed
says,
to the things which we have heard, lest at any
time we should let them slip.
For if the
word spoken by angels was steadfast, and
every transgression and disobedience received
a just recompense of reward; how shall we
escape, if we neglect so great salvation?"
And then, as though you asked, What salvain order to show that he is now speaktion ?
ing of the New Testament, that is, of the word
which was spoken not by angels, but by the
Lord, he says, "Which at the first began to
be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto
us by them that heard Him; God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders,
and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy
Ghost, according to His own will." 6

"

23. But some one may say, Why then is it
written, "The Lord said to Moses;" and
not, rather, The angel said to Moses ? Because, when the crier proclaims the words of
the judge, it
is not usually written in the
record, so and so the crier said, but so and
In like manner also, when the
so the judge.
holy prophet speaks, although we say, The
prophet said, we mean nothing else to be understood than that the Lord said; and if we
were to say, The Lord said, we should not
put the prophet aside, but only intimate who
And, indeed, these Scripspake by him.
tures often reveal the angel to be the Lord,
is from time to time
of whose speaking it
said, "the Lord said," as we have shown alBut on account of those who, since
ready.
the Scripture in that place specifies an angel,
will have the Son of God Himself and in

4 Heb. i. 13, 14.

5 1 Cor. x. 11.

6 Heb. ii. 1-4.

[Book III.

Himself to be understood, because He is
called an angel by the prophet, as announcing
the will of His Father and of Himself; I have
therefore thought fit to produce a plainer
testimony from this epistle, where it is not
"
said by an angel, but

by angels."

Moses.

24. For Stephen, too, in the Acts of the
Apostles, relates these things in that manner
in which they are also written in the Old
Testament: "Men, brethren, and fathers,
hearken,'-' he says; "The God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham, when he
But lest any one
was in Mesopotamia." 1
should think that the God of glory appeared
then to the eyes of any mortal in that which
He is in Himself, he goes on to say that an
" Then fled
angel appeared
Moses," he says, "at that saying, and was
a stranger in the land of Midian, where he
begat two sons. And when forty years were
expired, there appeared to him in the wilderness of mount Sinai an angel of the Lord in
a flame of fire in a bush. When Moses saw
it, he wondered at the sight: and as he drew
near to behold it, the voice of the Lord came
unto him, saying, I am the God of thy
fathers, the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
Then
Moses trembled, and
not
behold.
Then said the Lord to him, Put off thy shoes
from thy feet,"
Here, certainly, he
speaks both of angel and of Lord; and of the
same as the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; as is written
in Genesis.

2 etc.

durst

to

this

reason,

25. Can there be any one who will say that
the Lord appeared to Moses by an angel,
but to Abraham by Himself ?
Let us not
answer this question from Stephen, but from
the book itself, whence Stephen took his
For, pray, because it is written,
narrative.
" 3
"And the Lord God said unto Abraham;
and a little after, "And the Lord God ap-
" 4 were these things,
peared unto Abraham;
not
for
angels?
Whereas it is said in like manner in another
place, "And the Lord appeared to him in the
plains of Mamre, as he sat in the tent door
" and yet it is added
in the heat of the day;
immediately, "And he lift up his eyes and
looked, and, lo, three men stood by him:" 5
of whom we have already spoken.
For how
will these people, who either will not rise
from the words to the meaning, or easily
throw themselves down from the meaning to
how, I say, will they be able to
the words,
explain that God was seen in three men, ex-

done by

cept they confess that they were angels, as
that which follows also shows ? Because it is
not said an angel spoke or appeared to him,
will they therefore venture to say that the
vision and voice granted to Moses was
wrought by an angel because it is so written,
but that God appeared and spake in His own
substance to Abraham because there is no
mention made of an angel ? What of the
fact, that even in respect to Abraham an
For when his
angel is not left unmehtioned ?
son was ordered to be offered up as a sacrifice, we read thus: "And it came to pass
after these things that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he
And He said,
said, Behold, here I am.
Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac,
whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land
of Moriah; and offer him there for a burntoffering upon one of the mountains that I will
Certainly God is here mentell thee of."
tioned, not an angel.
But a little afterwards
thus: "And Abraham
Scripture hath it
stretched forth his hand, and took the knife
to slay his son. And the angel of the Lord
called unto him out of heaven, and said,
Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I.
And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the
lad, neither do thou anything unto him."
What can be answered to this ?
Will they
say that God commanded that Isaac should
be slain, and that an angel forbade it ? and
further, that the father himself, in opposition
to the decree of God, who had commanded
that he should be slain, obeyed the angel,
who had bidden him spare him ?
Such an
interpretation is to be rejected as absurd.
Yet not even for it, gross and abject as it is,
does Scripture leave any room, for it imme-
' For now I know that thou
diately adds:
fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld
thy son, thine only son, on account of me." 5
What is "on account of me," except on account of Him who had commanded him to be
slain? Was then the God of Abraham the
same as the angel, or was it not rather God
by an angel ?
Here,
certainly, already an angel has been most
clearly spoken of; yet notice the context:
"And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked,
and behold behind him a ram caught in a
thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and
took the ram, and offered him up for a
And
burnt-offering in the stead of his son.
Abraham called the name of that place, The
Lord saw: 7 as it is said to this day, In the
mount the Lord was seen." 8
Just as that

Consider what follows.

1 Acts vii. 2.
" Ex. ii. 15 and iii. 7, and Acts vii. 29-33.
3 Gen. xii. 1.

4 Gen. xvii. 1.

5 Gen. xviii. 1, 2.

6 Propter urc.
8 Dominus visus est.

7 Domimis vidit.

Chap. XL]

ON THE TRINITY.

6 7

which a little before God said by an angel,
"For now I know that thou fearest God;"
not because it was to be understood that God
then came to know, but that He brought it
to pass that through God Abraham himself
came to know what strength of heart he had
to obey God, even to the sacrificing of his
only son: after that mode of speech in which
the effect is signified by the efficient,
as cold
is said to be sluggish, because it makes men
so that He was therefore said to
sluggish;
know, because He had made Abraham himself to know, who might well have not discerned the firmness of his own faith, had it
So here,
not been proved by such a trial.
too, Abraham called the name of the place
"The Lord saw," that is, caused Himself to
For he goes on immediately to
be seen.
say, "As it is said to this day, In the mount
Here you seethe same
the Lord was seen."
angel is called Lord: wherefore, unless beBut if
cause the Lord spake by the angel ?
we pass on to that which follows, the angel
altogether speaks as a prophet, and reveals
expressly that Godj is speaking by the angel.
"And the angel of the Lord," he says,
"called unto Abraham out of heaven the
second time, and said, By myself I have
sworn, saith the Lord; for because thou hast
done this thing, and hast not withheld thy
son, thine only son, on account of me," 1 etc.
Certainly these words, viz. that he by whom
" Thus saith the
the Lord speaks should say,
Lord/' are commonly used by the prophets
also. Does the Son of God say of the Father,
" The Lord saith," while He Himself is that
Angel of the Father ? What then ? Do they
not see how hard pressed they are about these
three men who appeared to Abraham, when
" The Lord appeared
it had been said before,
to him?" Were they not angels because
they are called men ? Let them read Daniel,
" Behold the man Gabriel." 2
saying,

26. But why do we delay any longer to
stop their mouths by another most clear and
most weighty proof, where not an angel in
the singular nor men in the plural are spoken
of, but simply angels; by whom not any particular word was wrought, but the Law itself
is most distinctly declared to be given; which
certainly none of the faithful doubts that God
gave to Moses for the control of the children
of Israel, or yet, that it was given by angels.
So Stephen speaks: "Ye stiff-necked," he
" and uncircumcised in heart and ears,
says,
ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: as your
Which of the prophets
fathers did, so do ye.
have not your fathers persecuted ? and they

1 Gen. xxii.

- Dan. ix. 21.

"

have slain them which showed before of the
coming of the Just One; of whom ye have
been now the betrayers and murderers: who
have received the Law by the disposition of
angeis, 3 and have not kept it." 4 What is
more evident than this ? What more strong
than such an authority ? The Law, indeed,
was given to that people by the disposition of
angels; but the advent of our Lord Jesus
Christ was by it prepared and pre-announced;
and He Himself, as the Word of God, was in
some wonderful and unspeakable manner in
the angels, by whose disposition the Law
itself was given. And hence He said in the
For had ye believed Moses, ye
Gospel,
would have believed me; for he wrote of
me." 3
Therefore then the Lord was speaking by the angels; and the son of God, who
was to be the Mediator of God and men,
from the seed of Abraham, was preparing
His own advent by the angels, that He might
find some by whom He would be received,
confessing themselves guilty, whom the Law
unfulfilled had made transgressors. And
hence the apostle also says to the Galatians,
"
Wherefore then serveth the Law? It was
added because of transgressions, till the seed
should come to whom the promise was made,
which [seed] was ordered 6
through angels in
the hand of a mediator;" 7 that is, ordered
For He
through angels in His own hand.
was not born in limitation, but in power.
But
you learn in another place that he does not
mean any one of the angels as a mediator,
but the Lord Jesus Christ Himself, in so far
as He deigned to be made man: "
For there
" and one Mediator
is one God," he says,
between God and man, the man Christ
8 Hence that passover in the killing
Jesus."
of the lamb: 9 hence all those things which are
figuratively spoken in the Law, of Christ to
come in the flesh, and to suffer, but also to
rise again, which Law was given by the disposition of angels; in which angels, were certainly the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Spirit; and in which, sometimes the Father,
sometimes the
Son, sometimes the Holy
Spirit, and sometimes God, without any distinction of person, was figuratively signified
by them, although appearing in visible and
sensible forms, yet by His own creature, not
by His substance, in order to the seeing of
which, hearts are cleansed through all those
things which are seen by the eyes and heard
by the ears.

27. But now, as I think, that which we had
this book has been

undertaken to show in

3 In cdictis angclorum.
5 John v. 46.
8 1 Tim. ii. 5.

*

6 Disposition.
9 Ex. xii.

4 Acts vii. 51-53.
7 Gal. iii. 19.

Book III.

sufficiently discussed and demonstrated, according to our capacity; and it has been established, both by probable reason, so far as
a man, or rather, so far as I am able, and by
strength of authority, so far as the divine declarations from the Holy Scriptures have been
made clear, that those words and bodily appearances which were given to these ancient
fathers of ours before the incarnation of the
Saviour, when God was said to appear, were
wrought by angels: whether themselves speaking or doing something in the person of God,
as we have shown that the prophets also were
wont to do, or assuming from the creature
that which they themselves were not, wherein
God might be shown in a figure to men;
which manner of showing also, Scripture
teaches by many examples, that the prophets,
It remains, therefore, now
too, did not omit.
since both in the Lord
for us to consider,
as born of a virgin, and in the Holy Spirit descending in a corporeal form like a dove. J

1 Matt. iii. 16.

and in the tongues like as of fire, which appeared with a sound from heaven on the day
of Pentecost, after the ascension of the Lord,
it was not the Word of God Himself by His
own substance, in which He is equal and coeternal with the Father, nor the Spirit of the
Father and of the Son by His own substance,
in which He Himself also is equal and coeternal with both, but assuredly a creature,
such as could be formed and exist in these
corporeal and
fashions, which appeared to
mortal senses,
it remains, I say, to consider
what difference there is between these manifestations and those which were proper to the
Son of God and to the Holy Spirit, although
wrought by the visible creature; 3 which subject we shall more conveniently begin in another book.

2 Acts ii. 1-4.
3 [The reference here is to the difference between a theophany.
and an incarnation; already alluded to, in the note on p. 149. W.
G. T. S.]

BOOK IV.

EXPLAINS FOR WHAT THE SON OF GOD WAS SENT, VIZ. THAT BY CHRIST'S DYING FOR SINNERS, WE
WERE TO BE CONVINCED HOW GREAT IS GOD'S LOVE FOR US, AND ALSO WHAT MANNER OF
MEN WE ARE WHOM HE LOVED.
THAT THE WORD CAME IN THE FLESH, TO THE PURPOSE
THAT
ALSO OF ENABLING US TO BE SO CLEANSED AS TO CONTEMPLATE AND CLEAVE TO GOD.
AND HEREOUR DOUBLE DEATH WAS ABOLISHED BY HIS DEATH, BEING ONE AND SINGLE.
UPON IS DISCUSSED, HOW THE SINGLE OF OUR SAVIOUR HARMONIZES TO SALVATION WITH
OUR DOUBLE; AND THE PERFECTION IS TREATED AT LENGTH OF THE SENARY NUMBER, TO
THAT ALL ARE GATHERED
WHICH THE RATIO ITSELF OF SINGLE TO DOUBLE IS REDUCIBLE.
TOGETHER FROM MANY INTO ONE BY THE ONE MEDIATOR OF LIFE, VIZ. CHRIST, THROUGH
WHOM ALONE IS WROUGHT THE TRUE CLEANSING OF THE SOUL.
FURTHER IT IS DEMONSTRATED THAT THE SQN OF GOD, ALTHOUGH MADE LESS BY BEING SENT, ON ACCOUNT OF
THE FORM OF A SERVANT WHICH HE TOOK, IS NOT THEREFORE LESS THAN THE FATHER ACCORDING TO THE FORM OF GOD, BECAUSE HE WAS SENT BY HIMSELF: AND THAT THE SAME
ACCOUNT IS TO BE GIVEN OF THE SENDING OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.

PREFACE.

THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD IS TO BE

SOUGHT FROM GOD.

regard to

that which, without

i. The knowledge of things

terrestrial
and celestial is commonly thought much of
Yet those doubtless judge better
by men.
who prefer to that knowledge, the knowledge
of themselves; and that mind is more praiseworthy which knows even its own weakness,
than
this,
searches out, and even comes to know, the
ways of the stars, or which holds fast such
knowledge already acquired, while ignorant
of the way by which itself to enter into its
own proper health and strength.
But if any
one has already become awake towards God,
kindled by the warmth of the Holy Spirit,
and in the love of God has become vile in
his own eyes; and through wishing, yet not
having strength to come in unto Him, and
through the light He gives, has given heed
to himself, and has found himself, and has
learned that his own filthiness cannot mingle
with His purity; and feels it sweet to weep
and to entreat Him, that again and again He
will have compassion, until he have put off
all his wretchedness; and to pray confidently,

as having already received of free gift the
pledge of salvation through his only Saviour
and Enlightener of man:
such an one, so acting, and so lamenting, knowledge does not puff
1 for he has preup, because charity edifieth;
ferred knowledge to knowledge, he has preferred to know his own weakness, rather than
to know the walls of the world, the foundations of the earth, and the pinnacles of
And by obtaining this knowledge,
heaven.
he has obtained also sorrow; 2 but sorrow for
straying away from the desire of reaching his
own proper country, and the Creator of it,
And if among men
his own blessed God.
such as these, in the family of Thy Christ,
O Lord my God, I groan among Thy poor,
give me out of Thy bread to answer men who
do not hunger and thirst after righteousness,
but are sated and abound. 3 But it is the vain
image of those things that has sated them,
not Thy truth, which they have repelled and
shrunk from, and so fall into their own vanI certainly know how many figments
the human heart gives birth to. And what
is my own heart but a human heart ?
But I

ity.

1 i Cor. viii. i.

2 Eccles. i. 18.

3 Matt. v. 6.

ro

[Book IV.

pray the God of my heart, that I may not
vomit forth (eructuem) into these writings any
of these figments for solid truths, but that
there may pass into them only what the breath
of His truth has breathed into me; cast out
though I am from the sight of His eyes,
1 and
striving from afar to return by the way which
the divinity of His only-begotten Son has
And this truth,
made by His humanity.
changeable though I am, I so far drink in, as
far as in it I see nothing changeable: neither
in place and time, as is the case with bodies;
nor in time alone, and in a certain sense
place, as with the thoughts of our own spirits;
nor in time alone, and not even in any semblance of place, as with some of the reasonings of our own minds.
For the essence of
God, whereby He is, has altogether nothing
changeable, neither in eternity, nor in truth,
nor in will; since there truth is eternal, love
eternal; and there love is true, eternity true;
and there eternity is
loved.

loved, and truth

is

CHAP. I. WE ARE MADE PERFECT BY ACKNOWLTHE IN-

EDGEMENT OF OUR OWN WEAKNESS.
CARNATE WORD DISPELS OUR DARKNESS.

2. But since we are exiled from the unchangeable joy, yet neither cut off nor torn
away from it so that we should not seek
eternity, truth, blessedness, even in those
changeable and temporal things (for we wish
neither to die, nor to be deceived, nor to be
troubled); visions have been sent to us from
heaven suitable to our state of pilgrimage, in
order to remind us that what we seek is not
here, but that from this pilgrimage we must
return thither, whence unless we originated
we should not here seek these things. And
first we have had to be persuaded how much
God loved us, lest from despair we should not
And we needed
dare to look up to Him.
to be shown also what manner of men we are
whom He loved, lest being proud, as if of
our own merits, we should recede the more
from Him, and fail the more in our own
And hence He so dealt with us,
strength.
that we might the rather profit by His strength,
and that so in the weakness of humility the
And
virtue of charity might be perfected.
this is intimated in the Psalm, where it
said, "Thou, O God, didst send a spontaneous rain, whereby Thou didst make Thine
inheritance perfect, when it was weary." 2
For by "spontaneous rain
nothing else is
meant than grace, not rendered to merit, but
3 whence also it is called grace;
given freely,

"

is

for He gave it, not because we were worthy,,
but because He willed.
And knowing this,
we shall not trust in ourselves; and this is to
be made " weak." But He Himself makes us
perfect, who says also to the Apostle Paul,
' My grace is
sufficient for thee, for my
strength is made perfect
in weakness." 4
Man, then, was to be persuaded how much
God loved us, and what manner of men we
were whom He loved; the former, lest we
should despair; the latter, lest we should be
proud. And this most necessary topic the apos-
" But God commendeth,"
tle thus explains:
" His love towards us, in that, while
he says,
we were yet sinners, Christ died
us.
Much more then, being now justified by His
blood, we shall be saved from wrath through
For if, when we were enemies, we
Him.
were reconciled to God by the death of His
Son; much more, being reconciled, we shall
be saved by His life.
Also in another
" shall we then say
place:
If God be for us, who can
to these things ?
be against us ? He that spared not His own
Son, but delivered Him up for us all, how
has He not with Him also freely given us all
6 Now that which is declared to
things?"
us as already done, was shown also to the
ancient righteous as about to be done; that
through the same faith they themselves also
might be humbled, and so made weak; and
might be made weak, and so perfected.

What," he says,

" 5

for

"

3. Because therefore the Word of God is
One, by which all things were made, which is
the unchangeable truth, all things are simultaneously therein, potentially and unchangeably; not only those things which are now in
this whole creation, but also those which have
been and those which shall be. And therein
they neither have been, nor shall be, but
only arc; and all things are life, and all
things are one; or rather it is one being and
For all things were so made by
one life.
Him, that whatsoever was made in them was
not made in Him, but was life
in Him.
Since," in the beginning," the Word was not
the Word was with God, and the
made, but
Word was God, and all things were made by
neither had all things been made by
Him;
Him, unless He had Himself been before all
things and not made.
But in those things
which were made by Him, even body, which
is not life, would not have been made by
Him, except it had been life in Him before it
For "that which was made was
was made.
" and not life of any
already life in Him;
kind soever: for the soul also is the life of
the body, but this too is made, for it
is

"

"

1 PS. XXXI. 22.
3 Gratis.

2 Ps. lxviii. 9. Pluviam voluntariam.

4 2 Cor. xii. 0.
6 Rom. viii. 31

32.

5 Rom. v. 8-10.

Dona'jit.

Chap. III.]

ON THE TRINITY

"

changeable; and by what was it made, except
by the unchangeable Word of God ?
For
"all things were made by Him; and without
Him was not anything made that was made."
"
What, therefore, was made was already life
" and not any kind of life, but
the
in Him;
life [which] was the light of men;" the light
certainly of rational minds, by which men
differ from beasts, and therefore are men.
Therefore not corporeal light, which is the
light of the flesh, whether it shine from
heaven, or whether it be lighted by earthly
fires; nor that of human flesh only, but also
that of beasts, and down even to the minutest
that
of worms.
light: but that' life was the light of men; nor
is it far from any one of us, for in it "we
live, and move, and have our being."

For all these things see

x

CHAP. 2.

HOW WE ARE RENDERED APT FOR
THE PERCEPTION OF TRUTH THROUGH THE
INCARNATE WORD.

"

"

darkness

4. But "the light shineth in darkness, and
Now
the darkness comprehended it not."
is the foolish minds of men,
the
made blind by vicious desires and unbelief.
And that the Word, by whom all things were
made, might care for these and heal them,
" The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among
For our enlightening is the partaking
us."
of the Word, namely, of that life which is the
But for this partaking we were
light of men.
utterly unfit, and fell short of it, on account
Therefore we
of the uncleanness of sins.
were to be cleansed. And further, the one
cleansing of the unrighteous and of the proud
is the blood of the Righteous One, and the
humbling of God Himself; 2 that we might
be cleansed through Him, made as He was
what we are by nature, and what we are not
by sin, that we might contemplate God,
For by nature
which by nature we are not.
we are not God: by nature we are men, by
Wherefore God,
sin we are not righteous.
made a righteous man, interceded with God
for man the sinner.
For the sinner is not
congruous to the righteous, but man is conBy joining therefore to us
gruous to man.
the likeness of His humanity, He took away
the unlikeness of our unrighteousness; and
by being made partaker of our mortality, He
made us partakers of His divinity.
For the
death of the sinner springing from the necessity of comdemnation is deservedly abolished
by the death of the Righteous One springing
from the free choice of His compassion, while
His single [death and resurrection] answers

1 Acts xvii. 27, 28.

2 John i. 1, 14.

better,

perhaps,

to our double [death and resurrection].
3 For
this congruity, or suitableness, or concord, or
consonance, or whatever more appropriate
word there may be, whereby one is [united]
to two, is of great weight in all compacting,
or
co-adaptation, of the
For (as it just occurs to me) what
creature.
I mean is precisely that co-adaptation which
However this is not
the Greeks call app-ovia.
the place to set forth the power of that consonance of single to double which is found
especially in us, and which is naturally so
implanted in us (and by whom, except by
Him who created us?), that not even the ignorant can fail to perceive it, whether when
For
singing themselves or hearing others.
by this it is that treble and bass voices are in
harmony, so that any one who in his note
departs from it, offends extremely, not only
trained skill, of which the most part of men
are devoid, but the very sense of hearing.
To demonstrate this, needs no doubt a long
discourse; but any one who knows it, may
make it plain to the very ear in a rightly ordered monochord.

CHAP. 3.

THE ONE DEATH AND RESURRECTION
OF THE BODY OF CHRIST HARMONIZES WITH
OUR DOUBLE DEATH AND RESURRECTION OF
BODY AND SOUL, TO THE EFFECT OF SALVAIN WHAT WAY THE SINGLE DEATH OF
TION.
CHRIST IS BESTOWED UPON OUR DOUBLE
DEATH.
5. But for our present need we must discuss, so far as God gives us power, in what
manner the single of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ answers to, and is, so to say, in
harmony with our double to the effect of salvation. We certainly, as no Christian doubts,
are dead both in soul and body: in soul,
because of sin; in body, because of the punishment of sin, and through this also in body
because of sin. And to both these parts of
ourselves, that is, both to soul and to body,
there was need both of a medicine and of resurrection, that what had been changed for the
worse might be renewed for the better. Now
the death of the soul is ungodliness, and the
death of the body is corruptibility, through
which comes also a departure of the soul from
For as the soul dies when God
the body.
leaves it, so the body dies when the soul
leaves it; whereby the former becomes foolFor the soul is raised
ish, the latter lifeless.
up again by repentance, and the renewing of
life is begun in the body still mortal by faith,
by which men believe on Him who justi-

3 [This singleness and doubleness is explained in chapter 3.

W. G. T. S.]

[Book IV.

"

"

1 and it is increased and
fies the ungodly;
strengthened by good habits from day to day,
as the inner man is renewed more and more. 2
But the body, being as it were the outward
man, the longer this life lasts is so much the
more corrupted, either by age or by disease,
or by various afflictions, until it come to that
last affliction which all call death. And its
resurrection is delayed until the end; when
also our justification itself shall be perfected
For then we shall be like Him,
ineffably.
for we shall see Him as He is. 3
But now, so
long as the corruptible body presseth down
4 and human life upon earth is all
the soul,
temptation, 5 in His sight shall no man living
6 in comparison of the righteousbe justified,
ness in which we shall be made equd with
the angels, and of the glory which shall be
But why mention more proofs
revealed in us.
respecting the difference between the death
of the soul and the death of the body, when
the Lord in one sentence of the Gospel has
made either death easily distinguishable by
any one from the other, where He says,
Let
? 7 For burial was
the dead bury their dead
But by
the fitting disposal of a dead body.
those who were to bury it He meant those
who were dead in soul by the impiety of unbelief, such, namely, as are awakened when
it is said, "Awake thou that sleepest, and
arise from the dead, and Christ shall, give
And there is a death which
thee light."
the apostle denounces, saying of the widow,
"But she that liveth in pleasure is dead
while she liveth." 9
soul,
which was before ungodly and is now godly,
is said to have come alive again from the
dead and to live, on account of the righteousBut the body is not only said
ness of faith.
to be about to die, on account of that departure of the soul which will be; but on account
of the great infirmity of flesh and blood it is
even said to be now dead, in a certain place
in the Scriptures, namely, where the apostle
the body is dead because of sin,
says, that
life because of righteousbut the spirit is
ness." 10 Now this life is wrought by faith,
"
But
" But if the spirit of Him that
what follows ?
raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you,
He that raised up Christ from the dead shall
also quicken your mortal bodies by His Spirit
which dwelleth in you."

since the just shall live by faith,"

Therefore the

6. Therefore on this double death of ours
our Saviour bestowed His own single death;

"

"

"

and to cause both our resurrections, He appointed beforehand and set forth in mystery
For He
and type His own one resurrection.
was not a sinner or ungodly, that, as though
dead in spirit, He should need to be renewed
in the inner man, and to be recalled as it were
to the life of righteousness by repentance;
but being clothed in mortal flesh, and in that
alone dying, in that alone rising again, in
that alone did He answer to both for
us;
since in it was wrought a mystery as regards
the inner man, and a type as regards the
For it was in a mystery as regards
outer.
our inner man, so as to signify the death of
our soul, that those words were uttered, not
only in the Psalm, but also on the cross:
" My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken
" I3 To which words the apostle agrees,
me ?
Knowing this, that our old man is
saying,
crucified with Him, that the body of sin might
be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
serve sin;" since by the crucifixion of the
inner man are understood the pains of repentance, and a certain wholesome agony
of self-control, by which death the death of
ungodliness is destroyed, and in which death
God has left us. And so the body of sin is
destroyed through such a cross, that now we
should not yield our members as instruments
of unrighteousness unto sin. 14
Because, if
even the inner man certainly is renewed day
by day/5 yet undoubtedly it is old before it is
For that is done inwardly of which
renewed.
the same apostle speaks: "Put off the old
man, and put on the new;" which he goes
on to explain by saying,
Wherefore, putting
away lying, speak every man truth.
But
where is lying put away, unless inwardly, that
he who speaketh the truth from his heart may
inhabit the holy hill of God ? 17 But the resurrection of the body of the Lord is shown to
belong to the mystery of our own inner resurrection, where, after He had risen, He says
" Touch me not, for I am not
to the woman,
yet ascended to my Father;" 18 with which
mystery the apostle's words agree, where he
says, "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek
those things which are above, where Christ
sitteth on the right hand of God; set your
thoughts 19 on things above." 20
For not to
touch Christ, unless when He had ascended
to the Father, means not to have thoughts
of Christ after a fleshly manner.
Again, the
death of the flesh of our Lord contains a type
of the death of our outer man, since it is by
such suffering most of all that He exhorts

" l6

"

1 Rom. iv. 5.
3 1 John iii. 1.
S Job. vii. 1.
7 Matt. viii. 22.
9 1 Tim. v. 6.
Rom. i. 17.

2 2 Cor. iv. 16.
4 Wisd. ix. 15.
6 Ps. cxliii. 2.
8 Eph. v. 14.
10 Rom. viii. 10.
12 Rom. viii. 10,

'3 Ps. xxii. 1, and Matt, x.xvii. 46.
J 4 Rom. vi. 6, 13.
16 Eph. iv. 22-25.
18 Tohn xx. 17.
20 Col. iii. 1, 2.

J 5 2 Cor. iv. 16.
I7 Ps. xv. 1, 3.
19 Sapite.
2I Sapere.

Chap. IV.]

ON THE TRINITY.

/ 3

is

not

His servants that they should not fear those
who kill the body, but are not able to kill the
" That I
Wherefore the apostle says,
soul. 1
may fill up that which is behind of the afflicAnd the
tions of Christ in my flesh."-
Tesurrection of the body of the Lord is found
to contain a type of the resurrection of our
outward man, because He says to His disci-
" Handle me, and see; for a spirit hath
ples,
not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." 3
And one of the disciples also, handling His
" My Lord and my God! ''*
scars, exclaimed,
And whereas the entire integrity of that flesh
was apparent, this was shown in that which
He had said when exhorting His disciples:
" There shall
of your head
a

hair
For how comes it that first

perish.''
said, "Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father;" 6 and how comes it
that before He ascends to the Father, He
actually is touched by the disciples; unless
because in the former the mystery of the
inner man was intimated, in the latter a type
was given of the outer man ? Or can any one
possibly be so without understanding, and so
turned away from the truth, as to dare to say
that He was touched by men before He ascended, but by women when He had asIt was on account of this type,
cended ?
which went before in the Lord, of our future
resurrection in the body, that the apostle
Christ the first-fruits; afterward they
says,
For it was the resurrecthat are Christ's." 7
tion of the body to which this place refers,
on account of which he also says, "Who has
changed our vile body, that it may be fash8 The
ioned like unto His glorious body."
one death therefore of our Saviour brought
salvation to our double death, and His one
resurrection wrought for us two resurrections;
since His body in both cases, that is, both in
His death and in His resurrection, was ministered to us by a kind of healing suitableness, both as a mystery of the inner man,
and as a type of the outer.

"

CHAP. 4.

THE RATIO OF THE SINGLE TO THE
DOUBLE COMES FROM THE PERFECTION OF THE
THE PERFECTION OF THE
SENARY NUMBER.
SENARY NUMBER IS COMMENDED IN THE
THE YEAR ABOUNDS IN THE
SCRIPTURES.
SENARY NUMBER.
7. Now this ratio of the single to the double
arises, no doubt, from the ternary number,
since one added to two makes three; but the
whole which these make reaches to the senary,

1 Matt. x. 28.
3 Luke xxiv. 39.
5 Luke xxi. 18.
7 1 Cor. xv. 23.

2 Col. i. 24.
4 John xx. 28.
6 John. xx. 17.
8 Phil. iii. 21.

for one and two and three make six. And
this number is on that account called perfect,
because it is completed in its own parts:
for
it has these three, sixth, third, and half; nor
is there any other part found in it, which we
The sixth part of
can call an aliquot part.
it, then, is one; the third part, two; the half,
But one and two and three complete
three.
And Holy Scripture comthe same six.
mends to us the perfection of this number,
especially in this, that God finished His works
in six days, and on the sixth day man was
made in the image of God. 9 And the Son of
God came and was made the Son of man,
that He might re-create us after the image of
God, in the sixth age of the human race.
For that is now the present age, whether a
thousand years apiece are assigned to each
age, or whether we trace out memorable and
remarkable epochs or turning-points of time
in the divine Scriptures, so that the first age
is to be found from Adam until Noah, and the
second thence onwards to Abraham, and then
next, after the division of Matthew the evangelist, from Abraham to David, from David to
the carrying away to Babylon, and from thence
10 which three ages
to the travail of the Virgin,
joined to those other two make five. Accordingly, the nativity of the Lord began the sixth,
which is now going onwards until the hidden
end of time. We recognize also in this senary
number a kind of figure of time, in that
threefold mode of division, by which we
compute one portion of time before the Law;
a second, under the Law; a third, under
In which last time we have received
grace.
the sacrament of renewal, that we may be
renewed also in the end of time, in every
part, by the resurrection of the flesh, and so
may be made whole from our entire infirmity,
And
not only of soul, but also of body.
thence that woman is understood to be a type
of the church, who was made whole and upright by the Lord, after she had been bowed
by infirmity through the binding of Satan.
For those words of the Psalm lament such
hidden enemies: "They bowed down my
soul." 11 And this woman had her infirmity
eighteen years, which is thrice six. And the
months of eighteen years are found in number to be the cube of six, viz. six times six
Nearly, too, in the same place in
times six.
the Gospel is that fig tree, which was convicted also by the third year of its miserable
But intercession was made for
barrenness.
it, that it might be let alone that year, that
it bore fruit, well; if otherwise,
year, that if
it should be cut down. 12 For both three years

9 Gen. i. 27.
" Ps. lvii. 6.

10 Matt. i. 17.
12 Luke xiii. 6-17.

[Book IV.

belong to the same threefold division, and
the months of three years make the square
of six, which is six times six.

8. A single year also, if the whole twelve
months are taken into account, which are
made up of thirty days each (for the month
that has been kept from of old is that which
the moon determines),
the revolution of
abounds in the number six.
For that which
six is, in the first order of numbers, which
consists of units up to ten, that sixty is in
the second order, which consists of tens up
Sixty days, then, are a sixth
to a hundred.
Further, if that which
part of the year.
stands as the sixth of the second order is
multiplied by the sixth of the first order,
then we make six times sixty, i.e. three hundred and sixty days, which are the whole
But since, as the revolution
twelve months.
of the moon determines the month for men,
so the year is marked by the revolution of
the sun; and five days and a quarter of a day
remain, that the sun may fulfill its course and
end the year; for four quarters make one
day, which must be intercalated
in every
fourth year, which they call bissextile, that
the order of time may not be disturbed: if
we consider, also, these five days and a quarter themselves, the number six prevails in
First, because, as it is usual to comthem.
pute the whole from a part, we must not call
it five days, but rather six, taking the quarter
days for one day.
Next, because five days
themselves are the sixth part of a month;
while the quarter of a day contains six hours.
For the entire day, i.e. including its night, is
twenty-four hours, of which the fourth part,
which is a quarter of a day, is found to be six
So much in the course of the year
hours.
does the sixth number prevail.

CHAP. 5.

THE NUMBER SIX IS ALSO COMMENDED IN THE BUILDING UP OF THE BODY OF
CHRIST AND OF THE TEMPLE AT JERUSALEM.
9. And not without reason is the number
six understood to be put for a year in the
building up of the body of the Lord, as a
figure of which He said that He would raise
up in three days the temple destroyed by the
"
Forty and six years
Jews.
And six
was this temple in building."
forty-six makes two hundred and
times
seventy-six. And this number of days completes nine months and six days, which are
reckoned, as it were, ten months for the
travail of women; not because all come to the
sixth dry after the ninth month, but because
the perfection itself of the body of the Lord

For they said,

is found to have been brought in so many
days to the birth, as the authority of the
church maintains upon the tradition of the
For He is believed to have been
elders.
conceived on the 25th of March, upon which
day also He suffered; so the womb of the
Virgin, in which He was conceived, where
no one of mortals was begotten, corresponds
to the new grave in which He was buried,
wherein was never man laid,
2 neither before
But He was born, according to
nor since.
tradition, upon December the 25th.
If, then
you reckon from that day to this you find two
hundred and seventy- six days which is fortysix times six. And in this number of years
the temple was built, because in that number
of sixes the body of the Lord was perfected;
which being destroyed by the suffering of
death, He raised again on the third day.
" He spake this of the temple of His
For
body," 3 as is declared by the most clear and
solid testimony of the Gospel; where He said,
"
For as Jonas was three days and three
nights in the whale's belly, so shall the Son
of man be three days and three nights in the
heart of the earth." 4

CHAP. 6.

THE THREE DAYS OF THE RESURRECTION, IN WHICH ALSO THE RATIO OF SINGLE
TO DOUBLE IS APPARENT.

again

witnesses

10. Scripture

that the
space of those three days themselves was
not whole and entire, but the first day is
counted as a whole from its last part, and the
third day is itself also counted as a whole
from its first part; but the intervening day,
i.e. the second day, was absolutely a whole
with its twenty-four hours, twelve of the day
For He was cruciand twelve of the night.
fied first by the voices of the Jews in the third
hour, when it was the sixth day of the week.
Then He hung on the cross itself at the sixth
hour, and yielded up His spirit at the ninth
But He was buried, "now when the
hour. 5
even was come," as the words of the evan6 which means, at the end
gelist express it;
of the day.
even if some other explanation can be given,
so as not to contradict the Gospel of John, 7
but to understand that He was suspended on
still you cannot
the cross at the third hour,
make the first day an entire day.
It will be
reckoned then an entire day from its
last
For
part, as the third from its first part.
the night up to the dawn, when the resurrection of the Lord was made known, belongs to
the third day; because God (who commanded

Wheresoever then you begin,

John ii. 20.

2 John xix. 41, 42.
5 Matt, xxvii. 23-50.

3 John il. 19-21.
6 Mark xv. 42-46.

4 Matt. xii. 40.
7 John xix. 14.

Chap. VIII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

to shine out of darkness, 1 that
the light
through the grace of the New Testament and
the partaking of the resurrection of Christ the
" For ye were
words might be spoken to us
sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in
the Lord "
-) intimates to us in some way that
the day takes its beginning from the night.
For as the first days of all were reckoned
from light to night, on account of the future
so these on account of the
fall of man; 3
restoration of man, are reckoned from darkFrom the hour, then, of His
ness to light.
death to the dawn of the resurrection are forty
hours, counting in also the ninth hour itself.
And with this number agrees also His life
upon earth of forty days after His resurrection. And this number is most frequently
used in Scripture to express the mystery of
For the
perfection in the fourfold world.
number ten has a certain perfection, and that
But from
multiplied by four makes forty.
the evening of the burial to the dawn of the
resurrection are thirty-six hours which is six
And this is referred to that ratio
squared.
of the single to the double wherein there is
the greatest consonance of co-adaptation.
For twelve added to twenty-four suits the
ratio of single added to double and makes
thirty-six: namely a whole night with a whole
day and a whole night, and this not without
the mystery which I have noticed above.
For not unfitly do we liken the spirit to the
For the body
day and the body to the night.
of the Lord in His death and resurrection
was a figure of our spirit and a type of our
In this way, then, also that ratio of
body.
the single to the double is apparent in the
thirty-six hours, when twelve are added to
As to the reasons, indeed, why
twenty-four.
these numbers are so put in the Holy Scriptures, other people may trace out other reasons, either such that those which I have
given are to be preferred to them, or such as
are equally probable with mine, or even more
probable than they are; but there is no one
surely so foolish or so absurd as to contend
that they are so put in the Scriptures for no
purpose at all, and that there are no mystical
reasons why those numbers are there menBut those reasons which I have here
tioned.
given, I have either gathered from the authority of the church, according to the tradition of our forefathers, or from the testimony of the divine Scriptures, or from the
nature itself of numbers and of similitudes.
No sober person will decide against reason,
no Christian against the Scriptures, no peaceable person against the church.

1 2 Cor. iv. 6.
3 Gen. i. 4, 5.

2 Eph. v. 8.

CHAP. 7.

IN WHAT MANNER WE ARE GATHERED
FROM MANY INTO ONE THROUGH ONE MEDIATOR.

11. This mystery, this sacrifice, this priest,
this God, before He was sent and came, being made 0$ a woman of Him, all those
things which appeared to our fathers in a
sacred and mystical way by angelical miracles, or which were done by the fathers themselves, were similitudes; in order that every
creature by its acts might speak in some way
of that One who was to be, in whom there
was to be salvation in the recovery of all from
For because by the wickedness of
death.
ungodliness we had recoiled and fallen away
in discord from the one true and supreme
God, and had in many things become vain,
being distracted through many things and
cleaving fast to many things; it was needful,
by the decree and command of God in His
mercy, that those same many things should
join in proclaiming the One that should come,
and that One should come so proclaimed by
these many things, and that these many
things should join in witnessing that this One
had come; and that so, freed from the burden of these many things, we should come
to that One, and dead as we were in our souls
by many sins, and destined to die in the flesh
ove that
on account of sin
One who, without
flesh for
us; and by believing in Him now raised again,
and by rising again with Him in the spirit
through faith, that we should be justified by
being made one in the one righteous One;
and that we should not despair of our own
resurrection in the flesh itself, when we consider that the one Head had gone before us
the rrftny members; in whom, being now
cleansed through faith, and then renewed by
sight, and through Him as mediator reconciled to God, we are to' cleave to the One, to
feast upon the One, to continue one.

, that we should
sin, died in the

CHAP.

8.

IN WHAT MANNER CHRIST WILLS

THAT ALL SHALL BE ONE IN HIMSELF.

12. So the Son of God Himself, the Word
of God, Himself also the Mediator between
God and men, the Son of man, 4 equal to the
Father through the unity of the Godhead,
and partaker with us by the taking upon
Him of humanity, interceding for us with the
Father in that He was man, 5 yet not concealing that He was God, one with the Father,
'Neither
among other things speaks thus:
pray I for these alone," He says, "but for
them also which shall believe on me through
their word; that they all may be one; as

4 1 Tim. ii. 5.

5 Rom. viii. 34.

[Book IV.

Thou, Father, art in me, and I in Thee, that
they also may be one in us: that the world
may believe that Thou hast sent me. And
glory which Thou gavest me I have
the
given them; that they may be one, even as
we are one."'

),

with

THE SAME ARGUMENT CONTINUED.
CHAP. 9.
He did not say, I and they are one thing;
although, in that He is the head of the church,
which is His body, 3 He might have said, I
and they are, not one thing,
4 but one person, 5 because the head and the body is one
Christ; but in order to show His own Godhead consubstantial
the Father (for
which reason He says in another place, "I
and my Father are one " 6
in His own kind,
that is, in the consubstantial parity of the
same nature, He wills His own to be one, 7
but in Himself; since they could not be so in
themselves, separated as they are one from
pleasures and desires
another by divers
and uncleannesses of sin; whence they are
cleansed
through the Mediator, that they
may be one 8 in Him, not only through the
same nature in which all become from mortal
men equal to the angels, but also through
the same will most harmoniously conspiring
to the same blessedness, and fused in some
way by the fire of charity into one spirit.
" That they may
For to this His words come,
be one, even as we are one;
namely, that
as the Father and Son are one, not only in
equality of substance, but also in will, so
those also may be one, between whom and
God the Son is mediator, not only in that
they are of the same nature, but also through
And then He goes
the same union of love.
on thus to intimate the truth itself, trrat He
is the Mediator, through whom we are reconI in them, and
ciled to God, by saying,
Thou in me, that they may be made perfect
in one." 9

"

''

CHAP. IO.

AS CHRIST IS THE MEDIATOR OF LIFE,

SO THE DEVIL IS THE MEDIATOR OF DEATH.

13. Therein is our true peace and firm
bond of union with our Creator, that we
should be purified and reconciled through
the Mediator of life, as we had been polluted
and alienated, and so had departed from
For
Him, through the mediator of death.
as the devil through pride led man through
pride to death; so Christ through lowliness
led back man through obedience to
life.

1 John xvii. 20-22.
3 Eph. i. 22, 23.
5 Units.
7 Una m.
9 John xvii. 23.

2 Utiuin.
4 Unit 711.
6 John x. 30; unuin.
8 Unit in.

Since, as the one fell through being lifted up,
and cast down [man] also who consented to
him; so the other was raised up through being abased, and lifted up [man] also who believed in Him.
For because the 'devil had
not himself come thither whither he had led
the way (inasmuch as he bare indeed in his
ungodliness the death of the spirit, but had
not undergone the death of the flesh, because he had not assumed the covering of the
flesh), he appeared to man to be a mighty
chief among the legions of devils, through
whom he exercises his reign of deceits; so
puffing up man the more, who is eager for
power more than righteousness, through the
pride of elation, or through false philosophy;
or else entangling him through sacrilegious
rites, in which, while casting down headlong
by deceit and illusion the minds of the more
curious and prouder sort, he holds him captive also to magical trickery; promising too
the cleansing of the soul, through those initiazzXzzai, by transformtions which they call
ing himself into an angel of light,
through
divers machinations in signs and prodigies of
lying.

CHAP. II.

MIRACLES WHICH ARE DONE BY DE-

MONS ARE TO BE SPURNED.

earthly

14. For it

is easy for the most worthless
spirits to do many tilings by means of aerial
bodies, such as to cause wonder to
souls
which are weighed down by earthly bodies,
even though they be of the better inclined.
themselves, when
For if
bodies
trained by a certain skill and practice, exhibit to men so great marvels in theatrical
spectacles, that they who never saw such
things scarcely believe them when told; why
should it be hard for the devil and his angels
to make out of corporeal elements, through
their own aerial bodies, things at which the
flesh marvels; or even by hidden inspirations
to contrive fantastic appearances to the deluding of men's senses, whereby to deceive
them, whether awake or asleep, or to drive
them into frenzy?
But just as it may happen that one who is better than they in life
and character may gaze at the most worthless
of men, either walking on a rope, or doing
by various motions of the body many things
difficult of belief, and yet he may not at all
desire to do such things, nor think those men
on that account to be preferred to himself;
so the faithful and pious soul, not only if it
sees, but even if on account of the frailty of
the flesh it shudders at, the miracles of demons, yet will not for that either deplore its
own want of power to do such things, or judge

10 2 Cor. xi. 14.

Chap. XIII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

them on this account to be better than itself;
especially since it is in the company of the
holy, who, whether they are men or good
angels, accomplish, through the power of God,
to whom all
things are subject, wonders
which are far greater and the very reverse of
deceptive.

CHAP. 12.

THE DEVIL THE MEDIATOR OF

DEATH, CHRIST OF LIFE.

15. In no wise therefore are souls cleansed
and reconciled to God by sacrilegious imitations, or curious arts that are impious, or
magical incantations; since the false mediator does not translate them to higher things,
but rather blocks and cuts off the way thither
through the affections, malignant in proportion as they are proud, which he inspires into
those of his own company; which are not
able to nourish the wings of virtues so as to
fly upwards, but rather to heap up the weight
of vices so as to press downwards; since the
fall down the more heavily, the
soul will
more it seems to itself to have been carried
Accordingly, as the Magi did
upwards.
when warned of God, J whom the star led to
adore the low estate of the Lord; so we also
ought to return to our country, not by the
way by which we came, but by another way
which the lowly King has taught, and which
the proud king, the adversary of that lowly
For to us, too, that
King, cannot block up.
we may adore the lowly Christ, the " heavens
have declared the glory of God, when their
sound went into all the earth, and their words
to the ends of the world." 2 A way was made
for us to death through sin in Adam.
For,
"
By one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin; and so death passed upon all
men, in whom all have sinned." 3 Of this
way the devil was the mediator, the persuader
to sin, and the caster down into death.
For
he, too, applied his one death to work out
our double death.
Since he indeed died in
the spirit through ungodliness, but certainly
did not die in the flesh: yet both persuaded
us to ungodliness, and thereby brought it to
pass that we deserved to come into the death
of the flesh. We desired therefore the one
through wicked persuasion, the other followed
us by a just condemnation; and therefore it
" God made not death," 4 since He
is written,
was not Himself the cause of death; but yet
death was inflicted on the sinner, through
His most just retribution.
Just as the judge
inflicts punishment on the guilty; yet it is not
the justice of the judge, but the desert of the

crime, which is the cause of the punishment.
Whither, then, the mediator of death caused
us to pass, yet did not come himself, that is,
to the death of the flesh, there our Lord God
introduced for us the medicine of correction,
which He deserved not, by a hidden and exceeding mysterious decree of divine and profound justice. In order, therefore, that as by
one man came death, so by one man might
come also the resurrection of the dead; 5 because men strove more to shun that which
they could not shun, viz. the death of the
flesh, than the death of the spirit, i.e. punishment more than the desert of punishment
(for not to sin is a thing about which either men
are not solicitous or are too little solicitous;
but not to die, although it be not within reach
of attainment, is yet eagerly sought after);
the Mediator of life, making it
plain that
death is not to be feared, which by the condition of humanity cannot now be escaped, but
rather ungodliness, which can be guarded
against through faith, meets us at the end to
which we have come, but not by the way by
which we came.
For we, indeed, came to
death through sin; He through righteousness:
and, therefore, as our death is the punishment of sin, so His death was made a sacrifice for sin.

CHAP. 13.

THE DEATH OF CHRIST VOLUNTARY. HOW THE MEDIATOR OF LIFE SUBDUED
THE MEDIATOR OF DEATH. HOW THE DEVIL
LEADS HIS OWN TO DESPISE THE DEATH OF
CHRIST.

16. Wherefore, since the spirit is to be preferred to the body, and the death of the
spirit means that God has left it, but the
death of the body that the spirit has left it;
and since herein lies the punishment in the
death of the body, that the spirit leaves the
body against its will, because it left God willingly; so that, whereas the spirit left God
because it would, it leaves the body although
it would not; nor leaves it when it would,
unless it has offered violence to itself, whereby the body itself is slain: the spirit of the
Mediator showed how it was through no
punishment of sin that He came to the death
of the flesh, because He did not leave it
against His will, but because He willed, when
He willed, as He willed.
For because He is
so commingled [with the flesh] by the Word
of God as to be one, He says:
I have power
to lay down my life, and I have power to take
it again. No man taketh it from me, but I
lay down my life that I might take it again."
And, as the Gospel tells us, they who were

"

1 Matt. ii. 12.
3 Rom. v. 12

in quo.

2 Ps. xix. 1, 4
4 Wisd. i. 13.

5 1 Cor. xv. 21, 22.

6 John x. 17, 18.

7*

[Book IV.

present were most astonished at this, that
after that [last] word, in which He set forth
the figure of our sin, He immediately gave
For they who are hung on
up His spirit.
the cross are commonly tortured by a proWhence it was that the legs
longed death.
of the thieves were broken, in order that they
might die directly, and be taken down from
the cross before the Sabbath. And that He
was found to be dead already, caused wonder. And it was this also, at which, as we
read, Pilate marvelled, when the body of the
Lord was asked of him for burial. 1
17. Because that deceiver then,

who was
a mediator to death for man, and feignedly
puts himself forward as to life, under the
name of cleansing by sacrilegious rites and
sacrifices, by which the proud are led away,
can neither share in our death, nor rise
again from his own: he has indeed been able
to apply his single death to our double one;
but he certainly has not been able to apply a
single resurrection, which should be at once
a mystery of our renewal, and a type of that
waking up which is to be in the end. He
then who being alive in the spirit raised again
His own flesh that was dead, the true Mediator of life, has cast out him, who is dead in
the spirit and the mediator of death, from
the spirits of those who believe in Himself,
so'that he should not reign within, but should
assault from without, and yet not prevail.
And to him, too, He offered Himself to be
tempted, in order that He might be also a
mediator to overcome his temptations, not
But
only by succor, but also by example.
when the devil, from the first, although striving through every entrance to creep into His
inward parts, was thrust out, having finished
all his alluring temptation in the wilderness
because, being dead in the
after the baptism;
spirit, he forced no entrance into Him who
was alive in the spirit, he betook himself,
through eagerness for the death of man in
any way whatsoever, to effecting that death
which he could, and was permitted to effect
it upon that mortal element which the living
Mediator had received from us. And where
he could do anything, there in every respect
he was conquered; and wherein he received
outwardly the power of slaying the Lord in
the flesh, therein his inward power, by which
he held ourselves, was slain.
For it was
brought to pass that the bonds of many sins
in many deaths were loosed, through the one
death of One which no sin had preceded.
Which death, though not due, the Lord therefore rendered for us, that the death which

For He
was due might work us no hurt.
was not stripped of the flesh by obligation of
any authority, but He stripped Himself.
For
doubtless He who was able not to die, if He
would not, did die because He would: and
so He made a show of principalities and
powers, openly triumphing over them in HimFor whereas by His death the one
self. 3
and most real sacrifice was offered up for us,
whatever fault there was, whence principalities
and powers held us fast as of right to pay
its penalty, He cleansed, abolished, extinguished; and by His own resurrection He also
called us whom He predestinated to a new
life; and whom He called, them He justified;
and whom He justified, them He glorified.
And so the devil, in that very death of the
flesh, lost man, whom he was possessing as
by an absolute right, seduced as he was by
his own consent, and over whom he ruled,
himself impeded by no corruption of flesh
and blood, through that
frailty of man's
mortal body, whence he was both too poor
and too weak; he who was proud in proportion as he was, as it were, both richer and
stronger, ruling over him who was, as it were,
both clothed in rags and full of troubles.
For whither
he drove the sinner to fall,
himself not following, there by following he
compelled the Redeemer to descend. And
so the Son of God deigned to become our
friend in the fellowship of death, to which
because he came not, the enemy thought
himself to be better and greater than ourT
For our Redeemer says, "Greater
selves.
love hath no man than this, that a man lay
down his life for his friends." 5
Wherefore
also the devil thought himself superior to the
Lord Himself, inasmuch as the Lord in His
sufferings yielded to him; for of Him, too, is
For
understood what is read in the Psalm,
Thou hast made Him a little lower than the
" 6 so that He, being Himself put to
angels:
death, although innocent, by the unjust one
acting against us as it were by just right,
might by a most just right overcome him, and
so might lead captive the captivity wrought
through sin, 7 and free us from a captivity
that was just on account of sin, by blotting
out the handwriting, and redeeming us who
were to be justified although sinners, through
His own
unrighteously
poured out.

righteous

blood

18. Hence also the devil mocks those who
are his own until this very day, to whom he
presents himself as a false mediator, as though
they would be cleansed or rather entangled
and drowned by his rites, in that he very

"

1 Mark xv. 37, 39, 43, 44, and John xix. 30-34.
- Matt. iv. i-ii.

3 Col. ii. 15.
6 Ps. viii. 5.

4 Rom. viii. 30.
7 Eph. iv. 8.

5 John xv. 1 j.

Chap. XV.]

ON THE TRINITY.

"

For wisdom "

easily persuades the proud to ridicule and
despise the death of Christ, from which the
more he himself is estranged, the more is he
believed by them to be the holier and more
Yet those who have remained with
divine.
him are very few, since the nations acknowledge and with pious humility imbibe the price
paid for themselves, and in trust upon it
abandon their enemy, and gather together
For the devil does not
to their Redeemer.
know how the most excellent wisdom of God
makes use of both his snares and his fury to
bring about the salvation of His own faithful
ones, beginning from the former end, which
is the beginning of the spiritual creature, even
to the latter end, which is the death of the
body, and so
reaching from the one end to
the other, mightily and sweetly ordering all
passeth and goeth
things."
through all things by reason of her pureness,
and no defiled thing can fall into her." 2
And since the devil has nothing to do with
the death of the flesh, whence comes his exceeding pride, a death of another kind is prepared in the eternal fire of hell, by which not
only the spirits that have earthly, but also
those who have aerial bodies, can be torBut proud men, by whom Christ is
mented.
because He died, wherein He
despised,
3 both bring
bought us with so great a price,
back the former death, and also men, to that
miserable condition of nature, which is derived from the first sin, and will be cast down
-into the latter death with the devil. And
they on this account preferred the devil to
Christ, because the former cast them into
that former death, whither he himself fell not
through the difference of his nature, and
whither on account of them Christ descended
through His great mercy: and yet they do
not hesitate to believe themselves better than
the devils, and do not cease to assail and denounce them with every sort of malediction,
while they know them at any rate to have
nothing to do with the suffering of this kind
of death, on account of which they despise
Neither will they take into account
Christ.
that the case may possibly be, that the Word
of God, remaining in Himself, and in Himself in no way changeable, may yet, through
the taking upon Him of a lower nature, be
able to suffer somewhat of a lower kind, which
the unclean spirit cannot suffer, because he
And so, whereas
has not an earthly body.
they themselves are better than the devils,
yet, because they bear a body of flesh, they
can so die, as the devils certainly cannot
die, who do not bear such a body.
They

presume much on the deaths of their own
sacrifices, which they do not perceive that
they sacrifice to deceitful and proud spirits;
or if they have come to perceive it, think their
friendship to be of some good to themselves,
treacherous and envious although they are,
whose purpose is bent upon nothing else except to hinder our return.

CHAP. 14.

CHRIST THE MOST PERFECT VICTIM
FOR CLEANSING OUR FAULTS.
IN EVERY SACRIFICE FOUR THINGS ARE TO BE CONSIDERED.
19. They do not understand, that not even
the proudest of spirits themselves could rejoice in the honor of sacrifices, unless a true
sacrifice was due to the one true God, in
whose stead they desire to be worshipped:
and that this cannot be rightly offered except
by a holy and righteous priest; nor unless
that which is offered be received from those
for whom it is offered; and unless also it be
without fault, so that it may be offered for
This at least all desire
cleansing the faulty.
who wisn sacrifice to be offered for themselves
to God. Who then is so righteous and holy
a priest as the only Son of God, who had no
need to purge His own sins by sacrifice,
sins, nor those which are
neither original
added by human life ? And what could be
so fitly chosen by men to be offered for them
as human flesh ? And what so fit for this
immolation as mortal flesh? And what so
iclean for cleansing the faults of mortal men
as the flesh born in and from the womb of a
virgin, without any infection of carnal concupiscence ? And what could be so acceptably offered and taken, as the flesh of our sacrifice, made the body of our priest?
In such
wise that, whereas four things are to be considered in every sacrifice,
is
offered, by whom it is offered, what is offered,
for whom it is offered,
the same One and true
Mediator Himself, reconciling us to God by
the sacrifice of peace, might remain one with
Him to whom He offered, might make those
one in Himself for whom He offered, Himself might be in one both the offerer and the
offering.

to whom it

CHAP. 15.

THEY ARE PROUD WHO THINK THEY
ARE ABLE, BY THEIR OWN RIGHTEOUSNESS,
TO BE CLEANSED SO AS TO SEE GOD.
20. There are, however, some who think
themselves capable of being cleansed by their
own righteousness, so as to contemplate God,
and to dwell in God; whom their very pride
For there is no
itself stains above all others.

1 Wisd. viii. i.

; Wisd. vii. 24, 25.

3 1 Cor. vi. 20.

4 Heb. vii.

So

[Book IV.

sin to which the divine law is more opposed,
and over which that proudest of spirits, who
is a mediator to things below, but a barrier
against things above, receives a greater right
of mastery: unless either his secret snares be
avoided by going another way, or if he rage
openly by means of a sinful people (which
Amalek, being interpreted, means), and forbid by fighting the passage to the land of
promise, he be overcome by the cross of the
Lord, which is prefigured by the holding out
For these persons
of the hands of Moses. 1
promise themselves cleansing by their own
righteousness for this reason, because some
of them have been able to penetrate with the
eye of the mind beyond the whole creature,
and to touch, though it be in ever so small
a part, the light of the unchangeable truth; a
thing which they deride many Christians for
being not yet able to do, who, in the meanBut of what use is
time, live by faith alone.
it for the proud man, who on that account is
ashamed to embark upon the ship of wood, 2
to behold from afar his country beyond the
sea? Or how can it hurt the humble man
not to behold it from so great a distance,
when he is actually coming to it by that wood
upon which the other disdains to be borne ?

CHAP. 1 6.

THE OLD PHILOSOPHERS ARE NOT
TO BE CONSULTED CONCERNING THE RESURRECTION AND CONCERNING THINGS TO COME.

21. These people also blame us for believ*
ing the resurrection of the flesh, and rather
wish us to believe themselves concerning these
As though, because they have been
things.
able to understand the high and unchangeable
substance by the things which are made, 3 for
this reason they had a claim to be consulted
concerning the revolutions of mutable things,
or concerning the connected order of the
For pray, because they dispute most
ages.
truly, and persuade us by most certain proofs,
that all things temporal are made after a
science that is eternal, are they therefore
able to see clearly in the matter of this
science itself, or to collect from it, how many
kinds of animals there are, what are the seeds
of each in their beginnings, what measure in
their increase, what numbers run through
their
settings;
what motions in desiring things according to
their nature, and in avoiding the contrary ?
Have they not sought out all these things,
not through that unchangeable wisdom, but

conceptions,

births,

ages,

i Ex. xvii. 8-16.
2 [The wood of the cross is meant. One of the ancient symbols

of the church was a ship. W. G. T. S.

3 Rom. i. 20.]

through the actual history of places and times,
or have trusted the written experience of
Wherefore it is the less to be wonothers ?
dered at, that they have utterly failed
in
searching out the succession of more lengthened ages, and in finding any goal of that
course, down which, as though down a river,
the human race is sailing, and the transition
thence of each to its own appropriate end.
For these are subjects which historians could
not describe, inasmuch as they are far in the
future, and have been experienced and related
Nor have those philosophers,
by no one.
who have profited better than others in that
high and eternal science, been able to grasp
such subjects with the understanding; otherwise they would not be inquiring as they
could into past things of the kind, such as
are in the province of historians, but rather
would foreknow also things future; and those
who are able to do this are called by them
soothsayers, but by us prophets:

CHAP. 17.

IN HOW MANY WAYS THINGS FUTURE ARE FOREKNOWN.
NEITHER PHILOSOPHERS, NOR THOSE WHO WERE DISTINGUISHED AMONG THE ANCIENTS, ARE TO BE CONSULTED CONCERNING THE RESURRECTION OF
THE DEAD.

22.

although the name of prophets, too,
is not altogether foreign to their writings.
But it makes the greatest possible difference,
whether things future are conjectured by experience of things past (as physicians also
have committed many things to writing in
the way of foresight, which they themselves
have noted by experience; or as again husbandmen, or sailors, too, foretell many things;
for if such predictions are made a long while
before, they are thought to be divinations),
or whether such things have already started
on their road to come to us, and being seen
coming far off, are announced in proportion
to the acuteness of the sense of those who
see them, by doing which the aerial powers
are thought to divine (just as if a person
from the top of a mountain were to see far
off some one coming, and were to announce
it beforehand to those who dwelt close by in
the plain); or whether they are either foreannounced to certain men, or are heard by
them and again transmitted to other men, by
means of holy angels, to whom God shows
those things by His Word and His Wisdom,
wherein both things future and things past
consist; or whether the minds of certain men
themselves are so far borne upwards by the
Holy Spirit, as to behold, not through the
angels, but of themselves, the immoveable

Chap. XVIII.

ON THE TRINITY.

8l

causes of things future, in that very highest
pinnacle of the universe itself.
[And I say,
behold,] for the aerial powers, too, hear these
things, either by message through angels, or
through men; and hear only so much as He
judges to be fitting, to whom all things are
Many things, too, are foretold by
subject.
a kind of instinct and inward impulse of such
as know them not: as Caiaphas did not know
what he said, but being the high priest, he
prophesied. 1

concerning

23. Therefore,

the
neither
successions of ages, nor concerning the resurrection of the dead, ought we to consult
those philosophers, who have understood as
much as they could the eternity of the Creator, in whom "we live, and move, and have
Since, knowing God through
our being.''
those things which are made, they have not
glorified Him as God, neither were thankful;
but professing themselves wise, they became
fools. 3 And whereas they were not fit to fix
the eye of the mind so firmly upon the
eternity of the spiritual and unchangeable
nature, as to be able to see, in the wisdom
itself of the Creator and Governor of the universe, those revolutions of the ages, which in
that wisdom were already and were always,
but here were about to be so that as yet they
were not; or, again, to see therein those
changes for the better, not of the souls only,
but also of the bodies of men, even to the
perfection of their proper measure; whereas
then, I say, they were in no way fit to see
these things therein, they were not even
judged worthy of receiving any announcement of them by the holy angels; whether
externally through the senses of the body, or
by interior revelations exhibited in the spirit;
as these things actually were manifested to
our fathers, who were gifted with true piety,
and who by foretelling them, obtaining credence either by present signs, or by events
close at hand, which turned out as they had
foretold, earned authority to be believed respecting things remotely future, even to the
end of the world.
But the proud and deceitful powers of the air, even if they are found
to have said through their soothsayers some
things of the fellowship and citizenship of the
saints, and of the true Mediator, which they
heard from the holy prophets or the angels,
did so with the purpose of seducing even the
faithful ones of God, if they could, by these
alien truths, to revolt to their own proper
But God did this by those who
falsehoods.
knew not what they said, in order that the
truth might sound abroad from all sides, to

1 John xi. 51.

- Acts xvii. 28.

3 Rom. i. 21, 22.

aid the faithful, to be a witness against the
ungodly.

CHAP. 18.

THE SON OF GOD BECAME INCARNATE IN ORDER THAT WE BEING CLEANSED
BY FAITH MAY BE RAISED TO THE UNCHANGEABLE TRUTH.

24. Since, then, we were not fit to take
hold of things eternal, and since the foulness
of sins weighed us down, which we had contracted by the love of temporal things, and
which were implanted in us as it were naturally, from the root of mortality, it was needful that we should be cleansed.
But cleansed
we could not be, so as to be tempered together
with things eternal, except it were through
things temporal, wherewith we were already
tempered together and held fast.
For health
is at the opposite extreme from disease; but
the intermediate process of healing does not
lead us to perfect health, unless it has some
Things temcongruity with the disease.
poral that are useless merely deceive the
sick; things temporal that are useful take up
those that need healing, and pass them on
healed, to things eternal. And the rational
mind, as when cleansed it owes contemplation
to things eternal; so, when needing cleansOne
ing, owes faith to things temporal.
even of those who were formerly esteemed
wise men among the Greeks has said. The
truth stands to faith in the same relation in
which eternity stands to that which has a beAnd he is no doubt right in saying
ginning.
For what we call temporal, he describes
so.
as having had a beginning. And we also
ourselves come under this kind, not only in
respect to the body, but also in respect to the
For that is not
changeableness of the soul.
properly called eternal which undergoes any
degree of change.
Therefore, in so far as
we are changeable, in so far we stand apart
But life eternal is promised
from eternity.
to us through the truth, from the clear
knowledge of which, again, our faith stands
as far apart as mortality does from eternity.
We then now put faith in things done in time
on our account, and by that faith itself' we
are cleansed; in order that when we have
come to
sight, as truth follows faith, so
And
eternity may follow upon- mortality.
therefore, since our faith will become truth,
when we have attained to that which is promised to us who believe: and that which is
promised us is eternal life; and the Truth
(not that which shall come to be according as
our faith shall be, but that truth which is althe Truth
ways, because in it is eternity,
" And this is life eternal, that
then) has said,

[Book IV.

they might know Thee the only true God, and
" x when
Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent:
our faith by seeing shall come to be truth,
then eternity shall possess our now changed
And until this shall take place,
mortality.
because
and in order that it may take place,
we adapt the faith of belief to things which
have a beginning, as in things eternal we hope
for the truth of contemplation, lest the faith
of mortal life should be at discord with the
the Truth itself, cotruth of eternal life,
eternal with the Father, took a beginning
2 when the Son of God so came as
from earth,
to become the Son of man, and to take to
Himself our faith, that He might thereby lead
us on to His own truth, who so undertook our
mortality, as not to lose His own eternity.
For truth stands to faith in the relation in
which eternity stands to that which has a beTherefore, we must needs so be
ginning.
cleansed, that we may come to have such a
beginning as remains eternal, that we may
not have one beginning in faith, and another
Neither could we pass to things
in truth.
eternal from the condition of having a beginning, unless we were transferred, by union of
the eternal to ourselves through our own beginning,' to His own eternity.
Therefore our
faith has, in some measure, now followed
thither, whither He in whom we have believed
has ascended; born, 3 dead, risen again, taken
Of these four things, we knew the first
up.
For we know that men
two in ourselves.
But the reboth have a beginning and die.
maining two, that is, to be raised, and to be
taken up, we rightly hope will be in us, because we have believed them done in Him.
Since, therefore, in Him that, too, which had
a beginning has passed over to eternity, in
ourselves also it will so pass over, when faith
For to those who
shall have arrived at truth.
thus believe, in order that they might remain
in the word of faith, and being thence led on
to the truth, and through that to eternity,
might be freed from death, He speaks thus:
"
If ye continue in my word, then are ye my
disciples indeed." And as though they would
ask, With what fruit? He proceeds to say,
"And ye shall know the truth." And again,
as though they would say, Of what good is
truth to mortal men? "And the truth," He
says, "shall make you free." 4 From what,
except from death, from corruption, from
Since truth remains imchangeableness ?
But true
mortal, incorrupt, unchangeable.
immortality, true incorruptibility, true unchangeableness, is eternity itself.

CHAP. 19.

IN WHAT MANNER THE SON WAS
SENT AND PROCLAIMED BEFOREHAND. HOW
IN THE SENDING OF HIS BIRTH IN THE FLESH
HE WAS MADE LESS WITHOUT DETRIMENT TO
HIS EQUALITY WITH THE FATHER.
25. Behold, then, why the Son of God was
sent; nay, rather behold what it
is for the
Son of God to be sent.
Whatever things they
were which were wrought in time, with a
view to produce faith, whereby we might be
cleansed so as to contemplate truth, in things
that have a beginning, which have been put
forth from eternity, and are referred back to
eternity: these were either testimonies of this
mission, or they were the mission itself of the
But some of these testimonies
Son of God.
announced Him beforehand as to come, some
testified that He had come already.
For that
He was made a creature by whom the whole
creation was made, must needs find a witness
For except one were
in the whole creation.
preached by the sending of many [witnesses]
one would not be bound to, the sending away
of many. And unless there were such testimonies as should seem to be great to those
who are lowly, it would not be believed, that
He being great should make men great, who
as lowly was sent to the lowly.
For the
heaven and the earth and all things in them
are incomparably greater works of the Son of
God, since all things were made by Him, than
the signs and the portents which broke forth
But yet men, in order
in testimony of Him.
that, being lowly, they might believe these
great things to have been wrought by Him,
trembled at those lowly things, as if they had
been great.

"

26.

made;

When, therefore, the fullness of time
was come, God sent forth His Son, made of
" 5 to such a
a woman, made under the Law;
degree lowly, that He was "
in this
way therefore sent, in that He was made.
If, therefore, the greater sends the less, we
too, acknowledge Him to have been made
less; and in so far less, in so far as made;
For
and in so far made, in so far as sent.
" He sent forth His Son made of a woman."
And yet, because all things were made by
Him, not only before He was made and sent,
but before all things were at all, we confess
the same to be equal to the sender, whom we
In what way,
call less, as having been sent.
then, could He be seen by the fathers, when
certain angelical visions were shown to them,
before that fullness of time at which it was
fitting He should be sent, and so before He
was sent, at a time when not yet sent He was
seen as He is equal with the Father?
For

"

1 John xvii. 3.
3 Onus.

2 Ps. lxxxv. II.
4 John viii. 31. 32.

S Gal. iv. 4.

Chap. XX.]

ON THE TRINITY.

8 o

how does He say to Philip, by whom He was
certainly seen as by all the rest, and even by
those by whom He was crucified in the flesh,
"Have I been so long time with you, and
yet hast thou not known me, Philip ? he that
hath seen me, hath seen the Father also;''
unless because He was both seen and yet not
seen ? He was seen, as He had been made
in being sent; He was not seen, as by Him
Or how does He say
all things were made.
" He that hath my commandments,
this too,
and keepeth them, he it
is that loveth me;
and he that loveth me shall be loved of my
Father, and I will love him, and will manifest
myself to him," 1 at a time when He was
manifest before the eyes of men; unless because He was offering that flesh, which the
Word was made in the fullness of time, to
be accepted by our faith; but was keepingback the Word itself, by whom all things
were made, to be contemplated in eternity by
the mind when cleansed by faith ?

CHAP. 20.

THE SENDER AND THE SENT EQUAL.
WHY THE SON IS SAID TO BE SENT BY THE
OF THE MISSION OF THE HOLY
FATHER.
SPIRIT. HOW AND BY WHOM HE WAS SENT.
THE FATHER THE BEGINNING OF THE WHOLE
GODHEAD.

27. But if the Son is said to be sent by the
Father on this account, that the one is the
Father, and the other the Son, this does not
in any manner hinder us from believing the
Son to be equal, and consubstantial, and coeternal with the Father, and yet to have been
sent as Son by the Father.
Not because the
one is greater, the other less; but because
the one is Father, the other Son; the one begetter, the other begotten; the one, He from
whom He is who is sent; the other, He who
is from Him who sends.
For the Son is
from the Father, not the Father from the
And according to this manner we can
Son.
now understand that the Son is not only said
to have been sent because "the Word was
made flesh,"
2 but therefore sent that the
Word might be made flesh, and that He
might perform through His bodily presence
those things which were written; that is, that
not only is He understood to have been sent
as man, which the Word was made but the
Word, too, was sent that it might be made
man; because He was not sent in respect to
any inequality of power, or substance, or anything that in Him was not equal to the Father;
but in respect to this, that the Son is from
the Father, not the Father from the Son; for
the Son is the Word of the Father, which is

it

"

"

called

His wisdom.

For the words,

What wonder,
also
therefore, if He is sent, not because He is
unequal with the Father, but because He is
" a pure emanation (manatid) issuing from
the glory of the Almighty God ?
For there,
that which issues, and that from which it
issues, is of one and the same substance.
For it does not issue as water issues from an
aperture of earth or of stone, but as light
For she
issues from light.
is the brightness of the everlasting light/'
what else are they than, she is light of everFor what is the brightness of
lasting light ?
light, except light itself ? and so co-eternal,
with the light, from which the light is.
But
is preferable to say, "the brightness of
light," rather than" the light of light;" lest
that which issues should be thought to be
darker than that from which it issues.
For
when one hears of the brightness of light as
is more easy to believe
being light itself, it
that the former shines by means of the latter,
But because
than that the latter shines less.
there was no need of warning men not to
think that light to be less, which begat the
other (for no heretic ever dared say this,
neither is it to be believed that any one will
dare to do so), Scripture meets that other
issues
thought, whereby that
might seem darker than that from which it
issues; and it has removed this surmise by
saying, "It is the brightness of that light,"
namely, of eternal light, and so shows it to
For if it were less, then it would
be equal.
be its darkness, not its brightness; but if it
were greater, then it could not issue from
it, for it could not surpass that from which it
Therefore, because it issues
is
from it, it is not greater than it is; and because it is not its darkness, but its brightness,
it is not less than it is: therefore it is equal.
Nor ought this to trouble us, that it is called
a pure emanation issuing from the glory of
the Almighty God, as if itself were not omnipotent, but an emanation from the Omnipois said of it, "And
tent;
But
being but one, she can do all things." 3
who is omnipotent, unless He who can do all
things? It is sent,therefore,by Him from whom
it issues; for so she is sought after by him who
" Send her," he
loved and desired
her.
says, "out of Thy holy heavens, and from
the throne of Thy glory, that, being present,
she may labor with me;" 4 that is, may teach
me to labor [heartily] in order that I may
For her labors are
not labor [irksomely].
But she is sent in one way that she
virtues.
may be with man; she has been sent in another way that she herself may be man.
For,

for soon after it

light .which

educed.

1 John xiv. 9, 21.

2 John i. 3, 18, 14.

3 Wisd, vii. 25-27,

4 Wisd. ix. 10.

[Book IV.

"entering into holy souls, she maketh them
friends of God and prophets;" 1 so she also
fills the holy angels, and works all things
But
fitting: for such ministries bv them. -
when the fullness of time was come, she was
sent, 3 not to fill angels, nor to be an angel,
except in so far as she announced the counsel
of the Father, which was her own also; nor,
again, to be with men or in men, for this too
took place before, both in the fathers and in
the prophets; but that the Word itself should
be made flesh, that is, should be made man.
In which future mystery, when revealed, was
to be the salvation of those wise and holy
men also, who, before He was born of the
Virgin, were born of women; and in which,
when done and made known, is the salvation
of all who believe, and hope, and love.
For
is "the great mystery of godliness,
this
which 4 was manifest in the flesh, justified in
the Spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the
Gentiles, believed on in the world, received
up into glory." 5

28. Therefore the Word of God is sent by
Him, of whom He is the Word; He is sent
by Him, from whom He was begotten {gemtum); He sends who begot, That is
sent
which is begotten. And He is then sent to
each one, when He is apprehended and perceived by each, in so far as He can be apprehended and perceived, in proportion to the
comprehension of the rational soul, either
advancing towards God, or already perfect in
God. The Son, therefore, is not properly said
to have been sent in that He is begotten of
the Father; but either in that the Word made
flesh appeared to the world, whence He says,
"
I came forth from the Father, and am
" 6 or in that from time
come into the world;
to time, He is perceived by the mind of each,
" Send her, that,
according to the
saying,
being present with me, she may labor with
What then is born (natum) from
me." 7
" for it is the brightness
eternity is eternal,
of the everlasting light;" but what is sent
from time to time, is that which is appreBut when the Son of God
hended by each.
was made manifest in the flesh, He was sent
into this world in the fullness of time, made
" For after that, in the wisdom
of a woman.
of God, the world by wisdom knew not God "
the light shineth in darkness, and
not"), it
pleased God by the foolishness of preach8 and that the

(since
the darkness comprehended it
"
ing to save them that believe ,"

"

Word should be made flesh, and dwell among
But when from time to time He comes
us. 9
forth and is perceived by the mind of each,
He is said indeed to be sent, but not into
this world; for He does not appear sensibly,
that is, He does not present Himself to the
For we ourselves, too, are
corporeal senses.
not in this world, in respect to our grasping
with the mind as far as we can that which is
eternal; and the spirits of all the righteous
are not in this world, even of those who are
still living in the flesh, in so far as they have
discernment in things divine.
But the Father
is not said to be sent, when from time to
time He is apprehended by any one, for He
has no one of whom to be, or from whom to
proceed; since Wisdom says,
I came out of
the mouth of the Most High," 10 and it is said
" He proceedeth from the
of the Holy Spirit,
Father,"" but the Father is from no one.

"

29. As, therefore, the Father begat, the
Son is begotten; so the Father sent, the Son was
But in like manner as He who begat and
sent.
He who was begotten, so both He who sent and
He who was sent, are one, since the Father and
the Son are one. 12
So also the Holy Spirit is
one with them, since these three are one.
For as to be born, in respect to the Son r
means to be from the Father; so to be sent,
in respect to the Son, means to be known to
be from the Father. And as to be the gift
of God in respect to the Holy Spirit, means
to proceed from the Father; so to be sent,
is to be known to proceed from the Father.
Neither can we say that the Holy Spirit does
not also proceed from the Son, for the same
Spirit is not without reason said to be the
Spirit both of the Father and of the Son. IJ
Nor do I see what else He intended to signify, when He breathed on the face of the
"
disciples, and said,
Receive ye the Holy
For that bodily breathing, proGhost.
ceeding from the body with the feeling of
bodily touching, was not the substance of the
Holy Spirit, but a declaration by a fitting
sign, that the Holy Spirit proceeds not only
For
from the Father, but also from the Son.
the veriest of madmen would not say, that it
was one Spirit which He gave when He
breathed on them, and another which Fie
For the Spirit of
sent after His ascension. 13
God is one, the Spirit of the Father and of
the Son, the Holy Spirit, who worketh all in
But that He was given twice was certainly a significant economy, which we will

" M

all.

1 Wisd. vii. 27.
- [The allusion is to the Wisdom of Proverbs, and of the Book of
Wisdom, which Augustin regards as canonical, as his frequent citations show. W. G. T. S.J

3 Gal. iv. 4.
5 1 Tim. iii. 16.
7 Wisd. ix. 10.

4 Quod, scil. sacramentum.
6 John xvi. 28.
1 Cor. i. 21.

'4 John xx. 22.
10 1 Cor. xii. 6.

9 John i. 5, 14.
10 Kcclus. xxiv. 3.
,2 John x. 30.
'3 [Augustin here, as in previous instances, affirms the procession

Iz John xv. 26.

of the Spirit from the Father and Son. W. (',. T.S.]

'5 Aits ii. 1-4.

Chap. XXL]

ON THE TRINITY.

discuss in its place, as far as the Lord may
That then which the Lord says,
grant.
" Whom I
will send unto you from
the
shows the Spirit to be both of the
Father," 1
Father and of the Son; because, also, when
" Whom the Father will send,"
He had said,
Yet He
He added also, "in my name." 2
did not say, Whom the Father will send from
" Whom / will send unto
me, as He said,
you from the Father,"
showing, namely,
that the Father is the beginning (principium)
of the whole divinity, or if it is better so exHe, therefore, who proceeds
pressed, deity.
from the Father and from the Son, is referred back to Him from whom the Son was
born {natus). And that which the evangelist
" For the Holy Ghost was not yet given,
says,
because that Jesus was not yet glorified;" 4
how is this to be understood, unless because
the special giving or sending of the Holy
Spirit after the glorification of Christ was to
For it
be such as it had never been before ?
was not previously none at all, but it had not
For if the Holy Spirit
besn such as this.
was not given before, wherewith were the
prophets who spoke filled ?
Whereas the
Scripture plainly says, and shows in many
places, that they spake by the Holy Spirit.
Whereas, also, it is said of John the Baptist,
''And he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost,
And his
even from his mother's womb."
father Zacharias is found to have been filled
with the Holy Ghost, so as to say such things
of him. And Mary, too, was filled with the
Holy Ghost, so as to foretell such things of
Lord, whom she was bearing in her
the
womb. 5 And Simeon and Anna were filled
with the Holy Spirit, so as to acknowledge
the greatness of the little child Christ. 6 How,
then, was " the Spirit not yet given, since
Jesus was not yet glorified," unless because
that giving, or granting, or mission of the
Holy Spirit was to have a certain speciality
of its own in its very advent, such as never
For we read nowhere that men
was before ?
spoke in tongues which they did not know,

2 John xiv. 26.

"

xv. 26.

John
[The

"

begin

3 [The term "beginning" is employed

relatively, and not
" the
according to substance," as Augustin says. The Father is
beginning of the whole deity," with reference to the personal distinctions of Father, Son , and Spirit
the Son being from the Father,
and the Spirit from Father and Son. The trinitarian relations or
"
modes of the essence,
with the first person, not the
second or the third. The phrase "whole deity," in the above
statement, is put for "trinity," not for "essence."
Augustin
would nut say that the Father is the "
beginning (principiutii) of
the divine essence considered abstractly, but only of the essence as
In this sense, Trinitarian writers denominate the Father
trinal.
"fans trinitatis" and sometimes "fans deitatis."
Turrettin
employs this latter phraseology (iii. xxx. i. 8); so does Owen {Communion with Trinity, Ch. iii.): and Hooker (Polity, v. liv.) But in
this case, the guarding clause of Turretin is to be subjoined:
"
fons deitatis, si modus subsistendi spectattti-y The phrase
"
fons trinitatis" or "
principium trinitatis" is less liable to
be misconceived, and more accurate than "fonsdeitatis, or "principum di-itatis."~W. G. T. S.]

4 John vii. 39.

5 Luke i. 15, 41-79.

6 Luke ii. 25-38.

nations constituted

through the Holy Spirit coming upon them;
as happened then, when it was needful that
His coming should be made plain by visible
signs, in order to show that the whole world,
and all
different
tongues, should believe in Christ through
the gift of
the Holy Spirit, to fulfill that
" There is no
which is sung in the Psalm,
speech nor language where their voice is not
heard; their sound is gone out through all
the earth, and their words to the end of the
world." ^

with

30. Therefore man was united, and in
some sense commingled, with the Word of
God, so as to be One Person, when the fullness of time was come, and the Son of God,
made of a woman, was sent into this world,
that He might be also the Son of man for the
And this person
sake of the sons of men.
angelic nature could prefigure beforehand, so
as to pre-announce, but could not appropriate, so as to be that person itself.

CHAP. 2 1.

OF THE SENSIBLE SHOWING OF THE
HOLY SPIRIT, AND OF THE CO-ETERNITY OF
THE TRINITY. WHAT HAS BEEN SAID, AND
WHAT REMAINS TO BE SAID.

But with respect to the sensible showing
of the Holy Spirit, whether by the shape of
8 or by fiery tongues, 9 when the suba dove,
jected and subservient creature by temporal
motions and forms manifested His substance
co-eternal with the Father and the Son, and
alike with them unchangeable, while it was not
united so as to be one person with Him, as
the flesh was which the Word was made; IO I
do not dare to say that nothing of the kind
was done aforetime.
But I would boldly say,
that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, of one
and the same substance, God the Creator, .
the Omnipotent Trinity, work
indivisibly;
but that this cannot be indivisibly manifested
by the creature, which is far inferior, and
least of all by the bodily creature: just as
the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit cannot be
named by our words, which certainly are
bodily sounds, except in their own proper intervals of time, divided by a distinct separation, which intervals the proper syllables of
each word occupy.
Since in their proper
substance wherein they are, the three are
one, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Spirit, the very same, by no temporal motion,
above the whole creature, without any interval of time and place, and at once one and
the same from eternity to eternity, as it were
not without truth
eternity itself, which

is

7 Ps. xix. 3, 4.
9 Acts ii. 3.

8 Matt. iii. 16.
10 John i. 14.

[Book IV.

places

separately invisible

and charity.
But, in my words, the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit are separated, and cannot be named at once, and occupy their own
letters.
proper
And as, when I name my memory, and intellect, and will, each name refers to each severally, but yet each is uttered by all three;
for there is no one of these three names that
is not uttered by both my memory and my
intellect and my will together [by the soul as
a whole]; so the Trinity together wrought
both the voice of the Father, and the flesh of
the Son, and the dove of the Holy Spirit,
while each of these things is referred severally
to each person. And by this similitude it is
in some degree discernible, that the Trinity,
which is inseparable in itself, is manifested
separably by the appearance of the visible
creature; and that the operation of the Trinity is also inseparable in each severally of
those things which are said to pertain properly to the manifesting of either the Father,
or the Son, or the Holy Spirit.

31. If then I am asked, in what manner
either words or sensible forms and appearances were wrought before the incarnation of
the Word of God, which should prefigure it
as about to come, I reply that God wrought
those things by the angels; and this I have
also shown sufficiently, as I think, by testiAnd if I am
monies of the Holy Scriptures.
asked how the incarnation itself was brought
to pass, I reply that the Word of God itself
was made flesh, that is, was made man, yet
not turned and changed into that which was
made; but so made, that there should be
there not only the Word of God and the flesh
of man, but also the rational soul of man, and
that this whole should both be called God on
account of God, and man on account of man.
And if this is understood with difficulty, the
mind must be purged by faith, by more and
more abstaining from sins, and by doing good
works, and by praying with the groaning of
holy desires; that by profiting through the
divine help, it may both understand and love.
And if I am asked, how, after the incarnation
of the Word, either a voice of the Father was
produced, or a corporeal appearance by which
the Holy Spirit was manifested: I do not
doubt indeed that this was done through the
creature; but whether only corporeal and
sensible, or whether by the employment also
of the spirit rational or intellectual (for this
is the term by which some choose to call what

the Greeks name voep6), not certainly so as
to form one person (for who could possibly
say that whatever creature it was by which
the voice of the Father sounded, is in such
sense God the Father; or whatever creature
it was by which the Holy Spirit was manifested in the form of a dove, or in fiery
tongues, is in such sense the Holy Spirit, as
the Son of God is that man who was made of
a virgin ?), but only to the ministry of bringing about such intimations as God judged
needful; or whether anything else is to be
understood: is difficult to discover, and not
Yet I see not how
expedient rashly to affirm.
those things could have been brought to pass
without the rational or intellectual creature.
But it is not yet the proper place to explain,
as the Lord may give me strength, why I so
think; for the arguments of heretics must first
be discussed and refuted, which they do not
produce from the divine books, but from their
own reasons, and by which, as they think,
they forcibly compel us so to understand the
testimonies of the Scriptures which treat of
the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
as they themselves will.

32. But now, as I think, it has been sufficiently shown, that the Son is not therefore lessbecause He is sent by the Father, nor the
Holy Spirit less because both the Father sent
Him and the Son.
For these things are perceived to be laid down in the Scriptures,
either on account of the visible creature; or
rather on account of commending to our
thoughts the emanation [within the God-
* but not on account of inequality, or
head] ;
imparity, or unlikeness of substance; since,
even if God the Father had willed to appear
visibly through the subject creature, yet it
would be most absurd to say that He was sent
either by the Son, whom He begot, or by
the Holy Spirit, who proceeds from Him.
Let this, therefore, be the limit of the present
Henceforth in the rest we shall see,
book.
the Lord helping, of what sort are those
crafty arguments of the heretics, and in what
manner they may be confuted.

1 [The original is:

sending the Son," and "
visible creature

^'propter principi! commendationem"
" On account of commendwhich the English translator renders:
in? to our thoughts the principle [of the Godhead]." The technical use of "principium" is missed. Augustin says that the phrases,
"
sending the Spirit," have reference to
the "
through which in the theophanies each was
" bemanifested; but stdl more, to the fact that the Father is the
"
ginning of the Son, and the Father and Son are the "
of the Spirit. This fact of a "beginning,' or emanation (manatio)
of one from another, is what is commended to our thoughts. W.
G. T. S.]

beginning

"

BOOK V.
PROCEEDS TO TREAT OF THE ARGUMENTS PUT FORWARD BY THE HERETICS, NOT FROM SCRIPTURE, BUT FROM THEIR OWN REASON.
THOSE ARE REFUTED, WHO THINK THE SUBSTANCE
OF THE FATHER AND OF THE SON TO BE NOT THE SAME, BECAUSE EVERYTHING PREDICATED
OF GOD IS, IN THEIR OPINION, PREDICATED OF HIM ACCORDING TO SUBSTANCE ; AND THEREFORE IT FOLLOWS, THAT TO BEGET AND TO BE BEGOTTEN, OR TO BE BEGOTTEN AND UNBEGOTTEN, BEING DIVERSE, ARE DIVERSE SUBSTANCES J WHEREAS IT IS HERE DEMONSTRATED
THAT NOT EVERYTHING PREDICATED OF GOD IS PREDICATED ACCORDING TO SUBSTANCE, IN
SUCH MANNER AS HE IS CALLED GOOD AND GREAT ACCORDING TO SUBSTANCE, OR ANYTHING
ELSE THAT IS PREDICATED OF HIM IN RESPECT TO HIMSELF ; BUT THAT SOME THINGS ARE
ALSO PREDICATED OF HIM RELATIVELY, I. E. NOT IN RESPECT TO HIMSELF, BUT TO SOMETHING NOT HIMSELF, AS HE IS CALLED FATHER IN RESPECT TO THE SON, AND LORD IN RESPECT TO THE CREATURE THAT SERVETH HIM ; IN WHICH CASE, IF ANYTHING THUS PREDICATED RELATIVELY, I. E. IN RESPECT TO SOMETHING NOT HIMSELF, IS EVEN PREDICATED AS
HAPPENING IN TIME, AS E. G. "LORD, THOU HAST BECOME OUR REFUGE," YET NOTHING
HAPPENS TO GOD SO AS TO WORK A CHANGE IN HIM, BUT HE HIMSELF REMAINS ABSOLUTELY
UNCHANGEABLE IN HIS OWN NATURE OR ESSENCE.

CHAP. I. WHAT THE AUTHOR ENTREATS FROM
GOD, WHAT FROM THE READER.
IN GOD
NOTHING IS TO BE THOUGHT CORPOREAL OR
CHANGEABLE.
i. Beginning, as I now do henceforward,
to speak of subjects which cannot altogether
be spoken as they are thought, either by any
man, or, at any rate, not by myself; although
even our very thought, when we think of God
the Trinity, falls (as we feel) very far short
of Him of whom we think, nor comprehends
Him as He is; but He is seen, as it is written,
even by those who are so great as was the
Apostle Paul, "through a glass and in an
I pray to our Lord God
enigma:" 1
Himself, of whom we ought always to think,
and of whom we are
not able to think
worthily, in praise of whom blessing is at all
2 and whom no speech
times to be rendered,
is sufficient to declare, that He will grant me
both help for understanding and explaining
that which I design, and pardon if in anyFor I bear in mind, not only
thing I offend.

first,

1 i Cor. xiii. 12.

2 Ps. xxxiv. i.

my desire, but also my infirmity.
I ask also
of my readers to pardon me, where they may
perceive me to have had the desire rather
than the power to speak, what they either
understand better themselves, or fail to understand through the obscurity of my language, just as I myself pardon them what
they cannot understand through their own
dullness.

2. And we shall mutually pardon one another the more easily, if we know, or at any
rate firmly believe and hold, that whatever is
said of a nature, unchangeable, invisible and
having life absolutely and sufficient to itself,
must not be measured after the custom of
things visible, and changeable, and mortal, or
But although we labor,
not self-sufficient.
and yet fail, to grasp and know even those
things which are within the scope of our corporeal senses, or what we are ourselves in the
inner man; yet it is with no shamelessness
that faithful piety burns after those divine
and unspeakable things which are above:
piety, I say, not inflated by the arrogance of
its own power, but inflamed by the grace of

[Book V.

For with
its Creator and Saviour Himself.
what understanding can man apprehend God,
who does not yet apprehend that very understanding itself of his own, by which he desires
to apprehend Him ? And if he does already
let him carefully consider
apprehend this,
that there is nothing in his own nature better
than it; and let him see whether he can there
see any outlines of forms, or brightness of
colors, or greatness of space, or distance of
parts, or extension of size, or any movements
through intervals of place, or any such thing
Certainly we find nothing of all this
at all.
in that, than which we find nothing better in
our own nature, that is, in our own intellect,
by which we apprehend wisdom according to
What, therefore, we do not
our capacity.
find in that which is our own best, we ought
not to seek in Him who is far better than
that best of ours; that so we may understand
God, if we are able, and as much as we are
able, as good without quality, great without
quantity, a creator though He lack nothing,
ruling but from no position, sustaining all
His
things
wholeness everywhere, yet without place,
eternal without time, making things that are
changeable, without change of Himself, and
Whoso thus thinks of God,
without passion.
although he cannot yet find out in all ways
what He is, yet piously takes heed, as much
as he is able, to think nothing of Him that
He is not.

"having'' them,

without

in

CHAP. 2.

GOD THE ONLY UNCHANGEABLE ES-

"

"

I am that I am;

SENCE.
3. He is, however, without doubt, a subit be better so to call it, an
stance, or, if
For as
essence, which the Greeks call obcia.
wisdom is so called from the being wise, and
knowledge from knowing; so from being 1
comes that which we call essence. And who
is there that is, more than He who said to
His servant Moses,
and,
" Thus shalt thou say unto the children of
Israel, He who is hath sent me unto you?" 2
But other things that are called essences or
substances admit of accidents, whereby a
change, whether great or small, is produced
But there can be no accident of
in them.
this kind in respect to God; and therefore
He who is God is the only unchangeable substance or essence, to whom certainly being
itself, whence comes the name of essence,
most especially and most truly belongs.
For
that which is changed does not retain its own
being; and that which can be changed, although it be not actually changed, is able not

to be that which it had been; and hence that
which not only is not changed, but also cannot at all be changed, alone falls most truly,
without difficulty or hesitation, under the
category of being.

CHAP. 3.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE ARIANS IS
REFUTED, WHICH IS DRAWN FROM THE WORDS
BEGOTTEN AND UNBEGOTTEN.

4. Wherefore,

to being now to answer
the adversaries of our faith, respecting those
things also, which are neither said as they are
thought, nor thought as they really are:
among the many things which the Arians are
wont to dispute against the Catholic faith,
they seem chiefly to set forth this, as their
most crafty device, namely, that whatsoever
is said or understood of God, is said not according to accident, but according to substance: and therefore, to be unbegotten belongs to the Father according to substance,
and to be begotten belongs to the Son according to substance; but to be unbegotten
and to be begotten are different; therefore
the substance of the Father and that of the
Son are different. To whom we reply, If
whatever is spoken of God is spoken according to substance, then that which is said,
and the Father are one," 3 is spoken accordTherefore there is one
ing to substance.
Or if
substance of the Father and the Son.
this is not said according to substance, then
something is said of God not according to
substance, and therefore we are no longer
compelled to understand unbegotten and begotten according to substance.
is also
" He thought it not robbery
said of the Son,
to be equal with God/' 4 We ask, equal acFor if He is not said to
cording to what?
be equal according to substance, then they
admit that something may be said of God not
Let them admit,
according to substance.
then, that unbegotten and begotten are not
spoken according to substance. And if they
do not admit this, on the ground that they
will have all things to be spoken of God according to substance, then the Son is equal
to the Father according to substance.

It

"

CHAP. 4.

THE ACCIDENTAL ALWAYS IMPLIES

SOME CHANGE IN THE THING.
5. That which is accidental commonly implies that it can be lost by some change of
the thing to which it is an accident.
For although some accidents are said to be inseparable, which in Greek are called a-fwpiffra, as
the color black is to the feather of a raven;

1 Esse.

s Ex. iii. 14.

3 John x. 30.

4 Phil. ii. 6.

Chap. VI.]

ON THE TRINITY.

yet the feather loses that color, not indeed so
long as it is a feather, but because the feather
Wherefore the matter itself
is not always.
is changeable; and whenever that animal or
that feather ceases to be, and the whole of
that body is changed and turned into earth,
it loses certainly that color also.
Although
the kind of accident which is called separable
may likewise be lost, not by separation, but
for instance, blackness is
by change; as,
called a separable accident to the hair of
men, because hair continuing to be hair can
grow white; yet, if carefully considered, it is
sufficiently apparent, that it is not as if anything departed by separation away from the
head when it grows white, as though blackness departed thence and went somewhere,
and whiteness came in its place, but that the
quality of color there is turned and changed.
Therefore there
accidental in
God, because there is nothing changeable or
But if you choose to call
that may be lost.
that also accidental, which, although it may
not be lost, yet can be decreased or increased,
as, for instance, the life of the soul: for as
long as it is a soul, so long it lives, and because the soul is always, it always lives; but
because it lives more when it is wise, and less
when it
is foolish, here, too, some change
comes to pass, not such that life is absent,
as wisdom is absent to the foolish, but such
nothing of this kind, either,
that it is less;
happens to God, because He remains altogether unchangeable.

is nothing

CHAP. 5.

NOTHING IS SPOKEN OF GOD ACCORDING TO ACCIDENT, BUT ACCORDING TO
SUBSTANCE OR ACCORDING TO RELATION.
6. Wherefore nothing in Him is said in
respect to accident, since nothing is accidental
to Him, and yet all that is said is not said
For in created and
according to substance.
changeable things, that which is not said according to substance, must, by necessary
alternative, be said according to accident.
For all things are accidents to them, which
can be either lost or diminished, whether
magnitudes or qualities; and so also is that
which is said in
relation to something, as
likefriendships,
nesses, equalities, and anything else of the
kind; so also
places and times, acts and passions.
But in
God nothing is said to be according to accident, because in Him nothing is changeable;
and yet everything that is said, is not said
For it is said in reaccording to substance.
lation to something, as the Father in relation

positions and conditions,

relationships,

services,

*

1 Habitus.

to the Son and the Son in relation to the
Father, which is not accident; because both
the one is always Father, and the other is always Son: yet not "always," meaning from
the time when the Son was born \_natus~\, so
that the Father ceases not to be the Father
because the Son never ceases to be the Son,
but because the Son was always born, and
But if He had
never began to be the Son.
begun to be at any time, or were at any time
to cease to be, the Son, then He would be
But if the
called Son according to accident.
Father, in that He is called the Father, were
so called in relation to Himself, not to the
Son; and the Son, in that He is called the
Son, were so called in relation to Himself,
not to the Father; then both the one would
be called Father, and the other Son, according
But because the Father is not
to substance.
called the Father except in that He has a Son,
and the Son is not called Son except in that
He has a Father, these things are not said
according to substance; because each of them
is not so called in relation to Himself, but
the terms are used reciprocally and in relation each to the other; nor yet according to
accident, because both the being called the
Father, and the being called the Son, is eternal and unchangeable to them.
Wherefore,
although to be the Father and to be the Son
is different, yet their substance is not different; because they are so called, not according to substance, but according to relation,
which relation, however, is not accident, because it is not changeable.

CHAP. 6.

REPLY IS MADE TO THE CAVILS OF
THE HERETICS IN RESPECT TO THE SAME
WORDS BEGOTTEN AND UNBEGOTTEN.

7. But if they think they can answer this
that the Father indeed is so
reasoning thus,
called in relation to the Son, and the Son in relation to the Father, but that they are said to be
unbegotten and begotten in relation to themselves, not in relation each to the other; for
that it is not the same thing to call Him unbegotten as it is to call Him the Father, because there would be nothing to hinder our
calling Him unbegotten even if He had not
begotten the Son; and if any one beget a
son, he is not therefore himself unbegotten, for
men, who are begotten by other men, themselves also beget others; and therefore they
say the Father is called Father in relation to
the Son, and the Son is called Son in relation
to the Father, but unbegotten is said in relation to Himself, and begotten in relation to
Himself; and therefore, if whatever is said
in relation to oneself is said according to sub-

9o

[Book V.

stance, while to be unbegotten and to be begotten are different, then the substance is
if this is what they say, then they
different:
do not understand that they do indeed say
something that requires more careful discussion in respect to the term unbegotten,
because neither is any one therefore a father
because unbegotten, nor therefore unbegotten
because he is a father, and on that account
he is supposed to be called unbegotten, not
in relation to anything else, but in respect to
himself; but, on the other hand, with a wonderful blindness, they do not perceive that
no one can be said to be begotten except in
For he is therefore a
relation to something.
son because begotten; and because a son,
therefore certainly begotten. And as is the
relation of son to father, so is the relation of
the begotten to the begetter; and as is the
relation of father to son, so is the relation of
the begetter to the begotten. And therefore
any one is understood to be a begetter under
one notion, but understood to be unbegotten
For though both are said of
under another.
God the Father, yet the former is said in relation to the begotten, that is to the Son, which,
indeed, they do not deny; but that He is
called unbegotten, they declare to be said in
respect to Himself.
They say then, If anything is said to be a father in respect to itself,
which cannot be said to be a son in respect
to itself, and whatever is said in respect to
self is said according to substance; and He
is said to be unbegotten in respect to Himself, which the Son cannot be said to be;
therefore He is said to be unbegotten according to substance; and because the Son cannot
be so said to be, therefore He is not of the
same substance.
This subtlety is to be answered by compelling them to say themselves
according to what it is that the Son is equal
to the Father; whether according to that
which is said in relation to Himself, or according to that which is said in relation to the
For it is not according to that which
Father.
is said in relation to the Father, since in relation to the Father He is said to be Son, and
the Father is not Son, but Father.
Since
Father and Son are not so called in relation
to each other in the same way as friends and
neighbors are; for a friend is so called relatively to his friend, and if they love each
other equally, then the same friendship is in
both; and a neighbor is so called relatively
to a neighbor, and because they are equally
neighbors to each other (for each is neighbor
to the other, in the same degree as the other
is neighbor to him), there is the same neighBut because the Son is not
borhood in both.
so called relatively to the Son, but to the

is not according to that which is
Father, it
said in relation to the Father that the Son is
equal to the Father; and it remains that He
is equal according to that which is said in reBut whatever is said in
lation to Himself.
relation to self is said according to substance:
it remains therefore that He is equal according to substance; therefore the substance of
But when the Father is
both is the same.
said to be unbegotten, it is not said what He
is, but what He is not; and when a relative
term is denied, it is not denied according to
is not
substance, since the
affirmed according: to substance.

relative

itself

CHAP. 7.

THE ADDITION OF A NEGATIVE DOES

NOT CHANGE THE PREDICAMENT.

"

"

"

"

invicinus

inimicus.

8. This is to be made clear by examples.
And first we must notice, that by the word
begotten is signified the same thing as is sigFor therefore a son,
nified by the word son.
because begotten, and because a son, therefore
certainly begotten. By the word unbegotten,
therefore, it is declared that he is not son. But
begotten and unbegotten are both of them
terms suitably employed; whereas in Latin
we can use the word "
Alius," but the custom
of the language does not allow us to speak
It makes no difference, howof "infilius."
" non
ever, in the meaning if he is called
filius;" just as it is precisely the same thing
non genitus," instead of
if he is called
For so the terms of both
"ingenitus."
neighbor and friend are used relatively, yet
as we can of
we cannot speak of
"
Wherefore, in speaking of this
thing or that, we must not consider what the
usage of our own language either allows or
does not allow, but what clearly appears
to be the meaning of the things themselves.
Let us not therefore any longer call it unbegotten, although it can be so called in Latin;
but instead of this let us call it not begotten,
which means the same.
Is this then anything else than saying that he is not a son ?
Now the prefixing of that negative particle
does not make that to be said according to
substance, which, without it, is
relatively; but that only is denied, which, without it, was affirmed, as in the other predicaments. When we say he is a man, we denote
substance. He therefore who says he is not
a man, enunciates no other kind of predicaAs therefore I
ment, but only denies that.
affirm according to substance in saying he is
a man, so I deny according to substance in
saying he is not a man. And when the question is asked, how large he is ? and I say he
is quadrupedal, that is, four feet in measure,

said

Chap. VIII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

I affirm according to quantity, and he who
says he is not quadrupedal, denies according
I say he is white, I affirm acto quantity.
cording to quality; if I say he is not white,
I say he is
I deny according to quality.
near, I affirm according to relation; if I say
he is not near, I deny according to relation.
I affirm according to position, when I say he
lies down; I deny according to position, when
I say he does not lie down.
I speak accord1 when I say he is armed; I
ing to condition,
deny according to condition, when I say he
is not armed; and it comes to the same thing
as if I should say he is unarmed.
I affirm
according to time, when I say he is of yesterday; I deny according to time, when I say he
And when I say he is
is not of yesterday.
at Rome, I affirm according to place; and I
deny according to place, when I say he is not
at Rome.
I affirm according to the predicament of action, when I say he smites; but if
I say he does not smite, I deny according to
action, so as to declare that he does not so
And when I say he is smitten, I affirm
act.
according to the predicament of passion; and
I deny according to the same, when I say he
And, in a word, there is no
is not smitten.
kind of predicament according to which we
may please to affirm anything, without being
proved to deny according to the same predicament, if we prefix the negative particle.
And since this is so, if I were to affirm according to substance, in saying son, I should
deny according to substance, in saying not
But because I affirm relatively when I
son.
say he is a son, for I refer to the father;
therefore I deny relatively if I say he is not
a son, for I refer the same negation to the
father, in that I wish to declare that he has
But if to be called son is prenot a parent.
cisely equivalent to the being called begotten
(as we said before), then to be called not begotten is precisely equivalent to the being
But we deny relatively when
called not son.
we say he is not son, therefore we deny relatively when we say he is not begotten.
Further, what is unbegotten, unless not begotten ? We do not escape, therefore, from
the relative predicament, when he is called
For as begotten is not said in
unbegotten.
relation to self, but in that he is of a begetter;
so when one is called unbegotten, he is not
so called in relation to himself, but it
is
Both
declared that he is not of a begetter.
turn upon the same
meanings,
predicament, which is called that of relation.
But that which is asserted relatively does not
denote substance, and accordingly, although

however,

1 Habitus.

begotten and unbegotten are diverse, they
do not denote a different substance; because,
as son is referred to father, and not son to
not father, so it follows inevitably that begotten must be referred to begetter, and notbegotten to not-begetter.

CHAP. 8.

WHATEVER IS SPOKEN OF GOD ACCORDING TO SUBSTANCE, IS SPOKEN OF EACH
PERSON SEVERALLY, AND TOGETHER OF THE
ONE ESSENCE IN GOD, AND
TRINITY ITSELF.
THREE, IN GREEK, HYPOSTASES, IN LATIN,
PERSONS.

9. Wherefore let us hold this above all,
that whatsoever is said of that most eminent
and divine loftiness in respect to itself,
is
said in respect to substance, but that which
is said in relation to anything, is not said in
respect to substance, but relatively; and that
the effect of the same substance in Father
and Son and Hoi)'' Spirit is, that whatsoever
is said of each in respect to themselves, is to
be taken of them, not in the plural in sum,
For as the Father is
but in the singular.
God, and the Son is God, and the Holy Spirit
is God, which no one doubts to be said in
respect to substance, yet we do not say that
the very supreme Trinity itself is three Gods,
So the Father is great, the
but one God.
Son great, and the Holy Spirit great; yet not
three greats, but one great.
is not
written of the Father alone, as they perversely suppose, but of the Father and the
Son and the Holy Spirit, "Thou art great:
Thou art God alone." 3 And the Father is
good, the Son good, and the Holy Spirit
good; yet not three goods, but one good, of
is said, "None is good, save one,
whom it
For the Lord Jesus, lest He
that is, God.''
should be understood as man only by him
who said, "Good Master/' as addressing a
man, does not therefore say, There is none
good, save the Father alone; but, "None is
good, save one, that is, God." 4
For the
Father by Himself is declared by the name
of Father; but by the name of God, both
Himself and the Son and the Holy Spirit,
because the Trinity is one God.
But position, and condition, and places, and times,

For it

"

begotten

unbegotten

2 The terms "

" and "
are interchangeable with the terms Father and Son.
'1 his follows from the relation of a substantive to its adjective. In whatever sense a substantive is employed, in the same sense must the adjective formed from
Consequently, if the first person of the Trinity
it be employed.
may be called Father in a sense that implies deity, he may be
called Unbegotten in the same sense. And if the second person
may be called Son in a sense implying deity, he may be called Begotten in the same sense. The Ancient church often employed the
adjective, and spoke of God the Unbegotten and God the Begotten
Clem. Alex. Stromata
(Justin Martyr, AJ>ol. i. 25, 53; ii. 12,
This phraseology sounds strange to the Modern church,
v. xii.).
yet the latter really says the same thing when it speaks of God the
Father, and God the Son. W. G. T. S.]

13.

3 Ps. lxxxvi. 10.

4 Luke xviii. 18, 19.

9 2

[Book V.

"

are not said to be in God properly, but metaFor He
phorically and through similitudes.
is both said to dwell between the cherubims, 1
which is spoken in respect to position; and to
be covered with the deep as with a garment,
which is said in respect to condition; and
*' Thy years shall have no end,''
3 which is
If I ascend up
said in respect of time; and,
into heaven, Thou art there/' 4 which is said
in respect to place. And as respects action
(or making), perhaps it may be said most
truly of God alone, for God alone makes and
Nor is He liable to
Himself is not made.
passions as far as belongs to that substance
whereby He is God.
So the Father is omnipotent, the Son omnipotent, and the Holy
Spirit is omnipotent; yet not three omnipotents, but one omnipotent: 5 "For of Him
are all things, and through Him are all things,
and in Him are all things;
to whom be
Whatever, therefore, is spoken of
glory."
God in respect to Himself, is both spoken
singly of each person, that is, of the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy Spirit; and together of the Trinity itself, not plurally but
For inasmuch as to God it
in the singular.
is not one thing to be, and another thing to
be great, but to Him it is the same thing to
be, as it is to be great; therefore, as we do
not say three essences, so we do not say three
greatnesses, but one essence and one greatI say essence, which in Greek is called
ness.
<>b<ria, and which we call more usually substance.

10. They indeed use also the word hypostasis; but they intend to put a difference, I
know not what, between ubaio. and hypostasis:
so that most of ourselves who treat these
things in the Greek language,
are accustomed to say, fiiav ubffioy, T/)el$ vizoardaeis, or,
in Latin, one essence, three substances. 7

CHAP. 9.

THE THREE PERSONS NOT PROPERLY

SO CALLED [IN A HUMAN SENSE].

But because with us the usage has already
obtained, that by essence we understand the

2 Ps. civ. 6.

1 Ps. lxxx. 1.
4 Ps. cxxxix. 8.
5 [This phraseology appears in the analytical statements of the
so-called Athanasian creed (cap. 11-16), and affords ground for the
opinion that this symbol is a Western one, originating in the school
of Augustin. W. G. T. S.]

3 Ps. cii. 27.

6 Rom. xi. 36.
7 [It is remarkable that Augustin, understanding thoroughly
the distinction between essence and person, should not have
known the difference between ovcria and vir6<TTa<ris.
It would seem
as if his only moderate acquaintance with the Greek language
would have been more than compensated by his profound trinitarian knowledge.
In respect to the term " substantia'' when it was discriminated from "essentia," as it is here by Augustin it corresponds to
In this case, God is one
uTTocrTacrt?, of which it is the translation.
But when " substantia " was identiessence in three substances.
fied with " essentia" then to say that God is one essence in three
substances would be a self-contradiction. The identification of the
two terms led subsequently to the coinage, in the mediaeval Latin,
of the term "
subsistantia," to denote V7rocTTa.(ri.?. W. G. T. S.]

same thing which is understood by substance;
we do not dare to say one essence, three substances, but one essence or substance and
three persons: as many writers in Latin, who
treat of these things, and are of authority, have
said, in that they could not find any other
more suitable way by which to enunciate in
words that which they understood without
For, in truth, as the Father is not
words.
the Son, and the Son is not the Father, and
that Holy Spirit who is also called the gift of
God is neither the Father nor the Son, certainly they are three. And so it is said plurally, "I and my Father are one." 8
For
He has not said, "is one," as the Sabellians
Yet, when the quessay; but,
tion is asked, What three ? human language
altogether under great poverty of
labors
speech. The answer, however, is given, three
"
persons," not that it might be [completely
spoken, but that it might not be left [wholly
unspoken.

are one."

"

CHAP. IO.

THOSE THINGS WHICH BELONG ABSOLUTELY TO GOD AS AN ESSENCE, ARE SPOKEN OF THE TRINITY IN THE SINGULAR, NOT
IN THE PLURAL.

But that

11. As, therefore, we do not say three essences, so we do not say three greatnesses,
or three who are great.
For in things which
are great by partaking of greatness, to which
it is one thing to be, and another to be great,
as a great house, and a great mountain, and
a great mind; in these things, I say, greatness is one thing, and that which is great because of greatness is another, and a great
house, certainly, is not absolute greatness
is absolute greatness by
itself.
which not only a great house is great, and
any great mountain is great, but also by which
every other thing whatsoever is great, which
is called great; so that greatness itself is one
thing, and those things are another which are
And this greatness cercalled great from it.
tainly is primarily great, and in a much more
excellent way than those things which are
But since God is
great by partaking of it.
not great with that greatness which is not
Himself, so that God, in being great, is, as
it were, partaker of that greatness;
otherwise that will be a greatness greater than
God, whereas there is nothing greater than
God; therefore, He is great with that greatness by which He Himself is that same greatAnd, therefore, as we do not say three
ness.
essences, so neither do we say three greatnesses; for it is the same thing to God to be,
For the same reason neither
and to be great.

8 John x. 30.

Chap. XII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

do we say three greats, but one who is great;
since God is not great by partaking of greatness, but He is great by Himself being great,
because He Himself is His own greatness.
Let the same be said also of the goodness,
and of the eternity, and of the omnipotence
of God, and, in short, of all the predicaments
which can be predicated of God, as He is
spoken of in respect to Himself, not metaphorically and by similitude, but properly, if
indeed anything can be spoken of Him
properly, by the mouth of man.

CHAP. II.

WHAT IS SAID RELATIVELY IN THE

TRINITY.

12. But whereas, in the same Trinity, some
things severally are specially predicated, these
are in no way said in reference to themselves
in themselves, but either in mutual reference,
or in respect to the creature; and, therefore,
it is manifest that such things are spoken relaFor
tively, not in the way of substance.
the Trinity is called one God, great, good,
and the same God
eternal, omnipotent;
Himself may be called His own deity, His
own magnitude, His own goodness, His own
eternity, His own omnipotence: but the Trinity cannot in the same way be called the
Father, except perhaps metaphorically, in
respect to the creature, on account of the
For that which is written,
adoption of sons.
"Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God is one
Lord," J ought certainly not to be understood
as if the Son were excepted, or the Holy Spirit
were excepted; which one Lord our God we
rightly call also our Father, as regenerating
us by His grace.
Neither can the Trinity in
any wise be called the Son, but it can be
called, in its entirety, the Holy Spirit, according to that which is written, "God is a
2 because both the Father is a spirit
Spirit;"
and the Son is a spirit, and the Father is holy
and the Son is holy.
Therefore, since the
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit are one
God, and certainly God is holy, and God is a
spirit, the Trinity can be called also the Holy
But yet that Holy Spirit, who is not
Spirit.
the Trinity, but is understood as in the Trinity, is spoken of in His proper name of the
Holy Spirit relatively, since He is referred
both to the Father and to the Son, because
the Holy Spirit is the Spirit both of the Father
and of the Son.
But the relation is not itself
apparent in that name, but it
is apparent
when He is called the gift of God; 3 for He
is the gift of the Father and of the Son, because "He proceeds from the Father,'' 4 as

1 Deut. vi. 4.
3 Acts viii. 20.

- John iv. 24.
4 John xv. 26.

"

the Lord says; and because that which the
Now, if any man have not the
apostle says,
Spirit of Christ, he is none of His," 5 he says
certainly of the Holy Spirit Himself. When
we say, therefore, the gift of the giver, and
the giver of the gift, we speak in both cases
relatively in reciprocal reference.
Therefore
the Holy Spirit is a certain unutterable communion of the Father and the Son; and on
that account, perhaps, He is so called, because the same name is suitable to both the
For He Himself is
Father and the Son.
called specially that which they are called in
common; because both the Father is a spirit
and the Son a spirit, both the Father is holy
and the Son
la order, therefore,
that the communion of both may be signified
from a name which is suitable to both, the
Holy Spirit is called the gift of both. And
this Trinity is one God, alone, good, great,
eternal, omnipotent; itself its own unity, deity,
greatness, goodness, eternity, omnipotence.

holy.

is

CHAP. 12.

in the Trinity

IN RELATIVE THINGS THAT ARE RECIPROCAL, NAMES ARE SOMETIMES WANTING.
13. Neither ought it to influence us

since
we have said that the Holy Spirit is so called
relatively, not the Trinity itself, but He who
that the designation of
Him to whom Fie is referred, does not seem
to answer in turn to His designation.
For
we cannot, as we say the servant of a master,
and the master of a servant, the son of a
father and the father of a son, so also say
because these things are said relatively.
here
For we speak of the Holy Spirit of the Father;
but, on the other hand, we do not speak of
the Father of the Holy Spirit, lest the Holy
Spirit should be understood to be His Son.
So also we speak of the Holy Spirit of the
Son; but we do not speak of the Son of the

5 Rom. viii. 9.
6 [The reason which Augustinhere assigns, why the name Holy
namely, hecause spirituality is
Spirit is given to the third person
a characteristic of both the Father and Son, from both of whom he
is not that assigned in the more developed trinitarianism.
proceeds
The explanation in this latter is, that the third person is denominated the Spirit because of the peculiar manner in which the divine
essence is communicated to him namely, by spiration, or outThis is supported by the etybreathing: spiritus quia spiratus.
mological signification of Trvevfxa, which is breath; and by the symbolical action of Christ in John xx. 22, which suggests the eternal
spiration, or out-breathing of the third person. The third trinitarian person is no more spiritual, in the sense of immaterial, than
the first and second persons, and if the term "
is to be
taken in this the ordinary signification, the" trinitarian relation,"
is not itself apparor personal peculiarity, as Augustin remarks,
because it would mention nothing distinctive of
ent in this name;
the third person, and not belonging to the first and second.
I!ut
taken technically to denote the spiration or out-breathing by the
Father and Son, the trinitarian peculiarity is apparent in the name.
is similarly explained. The third
person is the Holy Spirit, not because he is any more holy than the
first and second, but because he is the source and author of holiThis is eminently and officially his
ness in all created spirits.
In this way also, the epithet "Holy" which in its ordinary
work.
mentions
use would specify nothing peculiar to the third person,
a characteristic that differentiates him from the Father and Son.
W. G. T. S.]

And the epithet

Holy

Spirit

"

"

"

"

"

[Book V.

Holy Spirit, lest the Holy Spirit be underFor it is the case in
stood to be His Father.
many relatives, that no designation is to be
found by which those things which bear relation to each other may [in name] mutually
For what is more
correspond to each other.
clearly spoken relatively than the word earnSince it is referred to that of which it
est ?
is an earnest, and an earnest is always an
Can we, then, as we
earnest of something.
say, the earnest of the Father and of the
say in turn, the Father of the earnest
Son, 1
But, on the other
or the Son of the earnest?
hand, when we say the gift of the Father and
of the Son, we cannot indeed say the Father
of the gift, or the Son of the gift; but that
these may correspond mutually to each other,
we say the gift of the giver and the giver of
the gift; because here a word in use may be
found, there it cannot.

" He replied,

CHAP, 13. HOW THE WORD BEGINNING (PRINCIPIUM) IS SPOKEN RELATIVELY IN THE TRINITY.
14. The Father is called so, therefore,
relatively, and He is also relatively said to
be the Beginning, and whatever else there
may be of the kind; but He is called the
Father in relation to the Son, the Beginning
in relation to all things, which are from Him.
So the Son is relatively so called; He is called
relatively the Word and the Image.
also
And in all these appellations He is referred
to the Father, but the Father is called by
And the Son is also called
none of them.
the Beginning; for when it was said to Him,
" Even the
" Who art Thou ?
Beginning, who also speak to you."
But is
For
He, pray, the Beginning of the Father?
He intended
to show Himself to be the
Creator when He said that He was the Beginning, as the Father also is the beginning
of the creature in that all things are from
Him. For creator, too, is spoken relatively
to creature, as master to servant. And so,
when we say, both that the Father is the Beginning, and that the Son is the Beginning,
we do not speak of two beginnings of the
creature; since both the Father and the Son
together is one beginning in respect to the
But
creature, as one Creator, as one God.
if whatever remains within itself and produces
or works anything is a beginning to that
thing which it produces or works; then we
cannot deny that the Holy Spirit also is
rightly called the Beginning, since we do not
separate Him from the appellation of Creator:
and it is written of Him that He works; and

is given to every man to profit withal.

assuredly, in working, He remains within
Himself; for He Himself is not changed and
turned into any of the things which He
works. And see what it is that He works: "But
the manifestation of the Spirit,'' he says,
"
For
to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge by
the same Spirit; to another faith by the same
Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the
same Spirit; to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another the
discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds
of tongues; to another the interpretation of
tongues: but all these worketh that one and
the self-same Spirit, dividing to every man
"
severally as He will;
certainly as God for
who can work such great things but God ?
but "
it is the same God which worketh all in
For if we are asked point by point
all." 3
concerning the Holy Spirit, we answer most
truly that He is God; and with the Father
and the Son together He is one God. Therefore, God is spoken of as one Beginning in
respect to the creature, not as two or three
beginnings.

CHAP. 14.

THE FATHER AND THE SON THE
ONLY BEGINNING (PRINCIPIUM) OF THE HOLY
SPIRIT.

said,

15. But in their mutual relation to one another in the Trinity itself, if the begetter is a
beginning in relation to that which he begets,
the Father is a beginning in relation to the
Son, because He begets Him; but whether
the Father is also a beginning in relation to
" He prothe Holy Spirit, since it is
ceeds from the Father," is no small question.
it is so, He will not only be a
Because, if
beginning to that thing which He begets or
makes, but also to that which He gives.
And here, too, that question comes to light,
as it can, which is wont to trouble many, Why
the Holy Spirit is not also a son, since He,
too, comes forth from the Father, as it is read
For the Spirit came forth,
in the Gospel. 4
not as born, but as given; and so He is not
called a son, because He was neither born,
as the Only-begotten, nor made, so that by
the grace of God He might be born into
adoption, as we are.
For that which is born
of the Father, is referred to the Father only
when called Son, and so the Son is the Son
of the Father, and not also our Son; but that
which is given is referred both to Him who
gave, and to those to whom He gave; and so
the Holy Spirit is not only the Spirit of the
Father and of the Son who gave Him, but

1 2 Cor. v. 5, and Eph. i. 14.

- John viii. 25.

3 1 Cor. xii. 6-11.

4 John xv. 26.

Chap. XVI.]

ON THE TRINITY.

He is also called ours, who have received
" The salvation of the Lord," l who
Him: as
gives salvation, is said also to be our salvation, who have received it.
Therefore, the
Spirit is both the Spirit of God who gave
received Him.
Him, and ours who have
Not, indeed, that spirit of ours by which w*e
are, because that is the spirit of a man which
is in him; but this Spirit is ours in another
" Give
mode, viz. that in which we also say,
us this day our bread." 2
Although certainly
we have received that spirit also, which is
" For what hast
called the spirit of a man.
thou," he says, "which thou didst not reBut that is one thing, which we
ceive?" 3
have received that we might be; another,
that which we have received that we might
Whence it is also written of John,
be holy.
that he "came in the spirit and power of
" 4 and by the spirit of Elias is meant
Elias;
And
the Holy Spirit, whom Elias received.
the same thing is to be understood of Moses,
when the Lord says to him, "And I will take of
thy spirit, and will put it upon them;" 5 that is,
I will give to them of the Holy Spirit, which
I have already given to thee.
If, therefore,
that also which is given has him for a beginning by whom it is given, since it has received
from no other source that which proceeds
from him; it must be admitted that
the
Father and the Son are a Beginning of the
Holy Spirit, not two Beginnings; but as the
Father and Son are one God, and one Creator,
and one Lord relatively to the creature, so
are they one Beginning relatively to the Holy
But the Father, the Son, and the
Spirit.
Holy Spirit is one Beginning in respect to
the creature, as also one Creator and one
God. 6

CHAP. 15.

WHETHER THE HOLY SPIRIT WAS A
GIFT BEFORE AS WELL AS AFTER HE WAS
GIVEN.

16. But it

is asked further, whether, as the

3 1 Cor. iv. 7.

2 Matt. vi. 11.
5 Num. xi. 17.

When it is said that the Father is the

1 Ps. iii. S.
4 Luke i. 17.
6 [The term "beginning" (principiuni), when referring to the
relation of the Trinity, or of any person of the Trinity, to the creature, denotes creative energy, whereby a new substance is originThis is the reference in chapter 13. liut when
ated from nothing.
the term refers to the relations of the persons of the 1'rinity to each
other, it denotes only a modifying energy, whereby an existing
uncreated substance is communicated by generation and spiration.
This is the reference in chapter 14.
beginning" of the Son,
and the Father and Son are the "
" of the Spirit, it is not
meant that the substance of the Son is created e.r niliilo by the
Father, and the substance of the Spirit is created by the Fatherand
Son, but only that the Son by eternal generation receives from the
Father the one uncreated and undivided substance of the Godhead,
and the Spirit by eternal spiration receives the same numerical substance from the Father and Son. The term "
relates
not to the essence, but to the personal peculiarity.
Sonship originates in fatherhood; but deity is unoriginated. The Son as the
begins" from the Father, because the Father comsecond person
His sonship, not his deity or godmunicates the essence to him.
"
from the Father. And the same holds true of the
hood,

beginning

beginning

begins

"

"

"

"

Son, by being born, has not only this, that
He is the Son, but that He is absolutely; and
so also the Holy Spirit, by being given, has
not only this, that He is given, but that He
whether therefore He was, beis absolutely
fore He was given, but was not yet a gift; or
whether, for the very reason that God was
about to give Him, He was already a gift also
But if He does not
before He was given.
proceed unless when He is given, and assuredly could not proceed before there was one
to whom He might be given; how, in that
case, was He [absolutely] in His very substance, if He is not unless because He is
given? just as the Son, by being born, not
only has this, that He is a Son, which is said
relatively, but His very substance absolutely,
so that He is.
Does the Holy Spirit proceed
always, and proceed not in time, but from
eternity, but because He so proceeded that
He was capable of being given, was already a
gift even before there was one to whom He
For there is a difference in
might be given ?
meaning between a gift and a thing that has
For a gift may exist even before
been given.
it is given; but it cannot be called a thing
that has been given unless it has been given.

CHAP. 16. WHAT IS SAID OF GOD IN TIME, IS
SAID RELATIVELY, NOT ACCIDENTALLY.

co-eternal

17. Nor let it trouble us that the Holy
Spirit, although He is
with the
Father and the Son, yet is called something
which exists in time; as, for instance, this
very thing which we have called Him, a thing
For the Spirit is a gift
that has been given.
eternally, but a thing that has been given in
For if a lord also is not so called untime.
less when he begins to have a slave, that appellation likewise is relative and in time to
God; for the creature is not from all eternity,
of which He is the Lord. How then shall we
make it good that relative terms themselves
are not accidental, since nothing happens accidentally to God in time, because He is incapable of change, as we have argued in the
beginning of this discussion ? Behold ! to be
the Lord, is not eternal to God; otherwise we
should be compelled to say that the creature
also is from eternity, since He would not be
a lord from all eternity unless the creature
But as
also was a servant from all eternity.
he cannot be a slave who has not a lord,
neither can he be a lord who has not a slave.
And if there be any one who says that God,
indeed, is alone eternal, and that times are

beginning" as applied to the Holy Spirit. The "

term "
of the Holy Spirit
but not his deity or godhood. W. G. T. S.]

procession"
begins" by spiration from the Father and Son,

"

9 6

[Book V

not eternal on account of their variety and
changeableness, but that times nevertheless
did not begin to be in time (for there was no
time before times began, and therefore it did
not happen to God in time that He should be
Lord, since He was Lord of the very times
themselves, which assuredly did not begin in
time): what will he reply respecting man,
who was made in time, and of whom assuredly He was not the Lord before he was of
whom He was to be Lord ?
Certainly to be
the Lord of man happened to God in time.
And that all dispute may seem to be taken
away, certainly to be your Lord, or mine,
who have only lately begun to be, happened
to God in time.
Or if this, too, seems uncertain on account of the obscure question respecting the soul, what is to be said of His
being the Lord of the people of Israel ? since,
although the nature of the soul already existed, which that people had (a matter into
which we do not now inquire), yet that people
existed not as yet, and the time is apparent
Lastly, that He
when it began to
exist.
should be Lord of this or that tree, or of this
or that corn crop, which only lately began to
be, happened in time; since, although the
matter itself already existed, yet it is one
thing to be Lord of the matter [materia;), another to be Lord of the already created natFor man, too, is lord of the
ure {natural).'
wood at one time, and at another he is lord
of the chest, although fabricated of that same
wood; which he certainly was not at the time
when he was already the lord of the wood.
How then shall we make it good that nothing
is said of God according to accident, except
because nothing happens to His nature by
which He may be changed, so that those
things are relative accidents which happen in
connection with some change of the things of
As a friend is so
which they are spoken.
called relatively: for he does not begin to be
one, unless when he has begun to love; therefore some change of will takes place, in order
that he may be called a friend. And money,
when it
is called a price, is spoken of relatively, and yet it was not changed when it
began to be a price; nor, again, when it is
called a pledge, or any other thing of the
If, therefore, money can so often be
kind.
spoken of relatively with no change of itself,
so that neither when it begins, nor when it

1 ["Matter" denotes the material as created ex nihilo; "nature"
In this reference, Augusof the people of Israel as

the material as formed into individuals.
tin speaks of " the nature of the soul "
existing while " as yet that people existed not
having in mind their race-existence in Adam. W. G. T. S.

individually

"

-

"

ceases to be so spoken of, does any change
take place in that nature or form of it, whereby it is money; how much more easily ought
we to admit, concerning that unchangeable
substance of God, that something may be so
predicated relatively in respect to the creature, that although it begin to be so predicated in time, yet nothing shall be understood to have happened to the substance itself
of God, but only to that creature in respect
to which it is predicated ?
Lord," it is said,
" Thou hast been made our refuge."
God,
therefore, is said to be our refuge relatively,
for He is referred to us, and He then becomes our refuge when we flee to Him; pray
does anything come to pass then in His
nature, which, before we fled to Him, was
In us therefore some change does take
not?
place; for we were worse before we fled to
Him, and we become better by fleeing to
Him: but in Him there is no change.
So
also He begins to be our Father, when we are
regenerated through His grace, since He gave
us power to become the sons of God. 3 Our
substance therefore is changed for the better,
when we become His sons; and He at the
same time begins to be our Father, but without any change of His own substance.
Therefore that which begins to be spoken of
God in time, and which was not spoken of
Him before, is manifestly spoken of Him
relatively; yet not according to any accident
of God, so that anything should have happened to Him, but clearly according to some
accident of that, in respect to which God
begins to be called something relatively.
When a righteous man begins to be a friend
of God, he himself is changed; but far be it
from us to say, that God loves any one in
time with as it were a new love, which was
not in Him before, with whom things gone
by have not passed away and things future
Therefore He loved
have been already done.
all His saints before the foundation of the
world, as He predestinated them; but when
they are converted and find Him, then they
are said to begin to be loved by Him, that
what is said may be said in that way in which
it can be comprehended by human affections.
So also, when He is said to be wroth with the
unrighteous, and gentle with the good, they
are changed, not He: just as the light is
troublesome to weak eyes, pleasant to those
that are strong; namely, by their change, not
its own.

2 Ps. XC. I.

3 John i. i2.

BOOK VI.
THE QUESTION IS PROPOSED, HOW THE APOSTLE CALLS CHRIST " THE POWER OF GOD, AND THE
AND AN ARGUMENT IS RAISED, WHETHER THE FATHER IS NOT WISDOM
WISDOM OF GOD."
HIMSELF, BUT ONLY THE FATHER OF WISDOM ; OR WHETHER WISDOM BEGAT WISDOM.
BUT
THE ANSWER TO THIS IS DEFERRED FOR A LITTLE, WHILE THE UNITY AND EQUALITY OF THE
FATHER, AND OF THE SON, AND OF THE HOLY GHOST, ARE PROVED ; AND THAT WE OUGHT
TO BELIEVE IN A TRINITY, NOT IN A THREEFOLD (TRIPLICEM) GOD.
LASTLY, THAT SAYING
OF HILARY IS EXPLAINED, ETERNITY IN THE FATHER, APPEARANCE IN THE IMAGE, USE IN THE
GIFT.

"

CHAP. I.

THE SON, ACCORDING TO THE APOSTLE, IS THE POWER AND WISDOM OF THE
HENCE THE REASONING OF THE
FATHER.
CATHOLICS AGAINST THE EARLIER ARIANS.
A DIFFICULTY IS RAISED, WHETHER THE
FATHER IS NOT WISDOM HIMSELF, BUT ONLY
THE FATHER OF WISDOM.
i. Some think themselves hindered from
admitting the equality of the Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, because it is written,
Christ,
the power of God, and the wisdom of God;"
in that, on this ground, there does not appear
to be equality; because the Father is not
Himself power and wisdom, but the begetter
of power and wisdom.
And, in truth, the
question is usually asked with no common
earnestness, in what way God can be called
the Father of power and wisdom.
For the
Christ the power of God, and
apostle says,
the wisdom of God." 1 And hence some on
our side have reasoned in this way against
the Arians, at least against those who at first
set themselves up against the Catholic faith.
For Arius himself is reported to have said,
that if He is a Son, then He was born; if He
was born, there was a time when the Son was
not: not understanding that even to be born
is, to God, from all eternity; so that the Son
is co-eternal with the Father, as the brightness which is produced and is spread around
by fire is co-eval with it, and would be coeternal, if fire were eternal. And therefore
some of the later Arians have abandoned that
opinion, and have confessed that the Son of

"

i Cor.

God did not begin to be in time.
But among
the arguments which those on our side used
to hold against them who said that there was
a time when the Son was not, some were wont
to introduce such an argument as this: If the
Son of God is the power and wisdom of God,
and God was never without power and wisdom, then the Son is co-eternal with God the
Father; but the apostle says, "Christ the
" and
power of God, and the wisdom of God;
a man must be senseless to say that God at
anytime had not power or wisdom; therefore
there was no time when the Son was not.

2. Now this argument compels us to say
that God the Father is not wise, except by
having the wisdom which He begat, not by
the Father in Himself being wisdom itself.
Further, if it be so, just as the Son also Himself is called God of God, Light of Light, we
must consider whether He can be called wisdom of wisdom, if God the Father is not
wisdom itself, but only the begetter of wisAnd if we hold this, why is He not
dom.
the begetter also of His own greatness, and
of His own goodness, and of His own eternity, and of His own omnipotence; so that
He is not Himself His own greatness, and
His own goodness, and His own eternity,
and His own omnipotence; but is great with
that greatness which He begat, and good with
that goodness, and eternal with that eternity,
and omnipotent with that omnipotence, which
was born of Him; just as He Himself is not
His own wisdom, but is
that
wisdom which was born of Him ?
For we
need not be afraid of being compelled to say

with

wise

[Book VI.

that there are many sons of God, over and
above the adoption of the creature, co-eternal
with the Father, if He be the begetter of His
own greatness, and goodness, and eternity,
and omnipotence.
Because it is easy to reply
to this cavil, that it does not at all follow,
because many things are named, that He
should be the Father of many co-eternal sons;
just as it does not follow that He is the
Father of two sons, because Christ is said to
be the power of God, and the wisdom of God.
For that certainly is the power which is the
wisdom, and that is the wisdom which is the
power; and in like manner, therefore, of the
rest also; so that that is the greatness which
is the power, or any other of those things
which either have been mentioned above, or
may hereafter be mentioned.

CHAP. 2.

WHAT IS SAID OF THE FATHER AND

SON TOGETHER, AND WHAT NOT.

3. But if nothing is spoken of the Father
as such, except that which is spoken of Him
in relation to the Son, that is, that He is His
father, or begetter, or beginning; and if also
the begetter is by consequence a beginning
to that which he begets of himself; but whatever else is spoken of Him is so spoken as
with the Son, or rither in the Son; whether
that He is great with that greatness which
He begat, or just with that justice which He
begat, or good with that goodness which He
begat, or powerful with that force or power
which He begat, or wise with that wisdom
which He begat: yet the Father is not said
to be greatness itself, but the begetter of
greatness; but the Son, as He is called the
Son as such, is not so called with the Father
but in relation to the Father, so is not great
in and by himself, but with the Father, of
whom He is the greatness; and so also is
called wise with the Father, of whom He
Himself is the wisdom; just as the Father is
called wise with the Son, because He is wise
with that wisdom which He begat; therefore
the one is not called without the other, whatever they are called in respect to themselves;
that is, whatever they are called that manifests their essential nature, both are so called
if these things are so, then the
together;
Father is not God without the Son, nor the
Son God without the Father, but both together are God. And that which is said,
In
the beginning was the Word," means that
the Word was in the Father,
Or if "In the
beginning" is intended to mean, Before all
things; then in that which follows, "And the
Word was with God/' the Son alone is understood to be the Word, not the Father and

"

Son together, as though both were one Word
(for He is the Word in the same way as He
is the Image, but the Father and Son are not
both together the Image, but the Son alone
is the Image of the Father: just as He is also
the Son of the Father, for both together are
But in that which is added,
not the Son).
"And the Word was with God," there is
much reason to understand thus: "The
Word," which is the Son alone, "was with
God," which is not the Father alone, but God
the Father and the Son together.
But what
wonder is there, if this can be said in the case
of some twofold things widely different from
each other ? For what are so different as soul
and body ? Yet we can say the soul was with
a man, that is, in a man; although the soul
is not the body, and man is both soul and
So that what follows in the
body together.
Scripture, "And the Word was God/' 2 may
be understood thus: The Word, which is not
the Father, was God together with the Father.
Are we then to say thus, that the Father is
the begetter of His own greatness, that is,
the begetter of His own power, or the begetter of His own wisdom; and that the Son
is greatness, and power, and wisdom; but
that the great, omnipotent, and wise God, is
both together? How then God <?/"God, Light
For not ttoth together are God of
of Light ?
God, but only the Son is of God, that is to
say, of the Father; nor are both together
Light of Light, but the Son only is of Light,
that is, of the Father.
Unless, perhaps, it
was in order to intimate and inculcate briefly
that the Son is co-eternal with the Father,
is said, God of God, and Light of
that it
Light, or anything else of the like kind: as
if to say, This which is not the Son without
the Father, of this which is not the Father
without the Son; that is, this Light which is
not Light without the Father, of that Light,
viz. the Father, which is not Light without
the Son; so that, when it is said, God which
is not the Son without the Father, and of
God which is not the Father without the Son,
it may be perfectly understood that the Begetter did not precede that which He begot.
And if this be so, then this alone cannot be
said of them, namely, this or that of this or
that, which they are not both together.
Just
as the Word cannot be said to be of the

"

1 [The term "

God," in the proposition,

" the Word was with
- must refer to the Father, not to " the Father and Son toGod,'
gether," because the Son could not be said to be " with "
himself.
the word was God" (fobs). The absence of
St. John says that
the article with flebs denotes the abstract deity, or the divine nature without reference to the persons in it. He also says that
" the Word was with God "
(tov 6e'ov). The presence of the article in this instance denotes one of the divine persons in the essence :
namely, the Father, with whom the Word was from eternity, and
upon whose " bosom " he was from eternity.
(Johni. 18). W. G.
T. S.]

2 John i. 1.

Chap. IV.]

ON THE TRINITY.

Word, because both are not the Word together, but only the Son; nor image of image,
since they are not both together the image;
nor Son of Son, since both together are not
the Son, according to that which is said,
For "we are
and my Father are one." 1
means, what' He is, that am I also; acone
cording to essence, not according to relation.

"

"

CHAP. 3.

THAT THE UNITY OF THE ESSENCE
OF THE FATHER AND THE SON IS TO BE GATH-
" WE ARE ONE."
ERED FROM THE WORDS,
THE SON IS EQUAL TO THE FATHER BOTH IN
WISDOM AND IN ALL OTHER THINGS.
4. And I know not whether the
words,
"
They are one," are ever found in Scripture
as spoken of things of which the nature is
But if there are more things than
different.
one of the same nature, and they differ in
sentiment, they are not one, and that so far
For if the disas they differ in sentiment.
ciples were already one by the fact of being
" That they may be
men, He would not say,
- when commending
one, as we are one,"
But because Paul and
them to the Father.
Apollos were both alike men, and also of like
sentiments, "He that planteth," he
says,
"and he that watereth are one." 3 When,
therefore, anything is so called one, that it
is not added in what it is one, and yet more
things than one are called one, then the same
essence and nature is signified, not differing
is added in
nor disagreeing.
what it is one, it may be meant that something is made one out of things more than
As
one, though they are different in nature.
soul and body are assuredly not one; for
what are so different? unless there be added
or understood in what they are one, that is,
Thence
one man, or one animal [person].
" He who is joined to a harthe apostle says,
lot, is one body;" he does not say, they are
one or he is one; but he has added "body,"
as though it were one body composed by being joined together of two different bodies,
And, "He that
masculine and feminine. 4
'is joined unto the Lord," he says," is one
" he did not say, he that is joined unto
spirit:
the Lord is one, or they are one; but he
For the spirit of man and
added, "spirit"
the Spirit of God are different in nature; but
by being joined they become one spirit of
two different spirits, so that the Spirit of God
is blessed and perfect without the human
spirit, but the spirit of man cannot be blessed
it without cause, I
without God.
think, that when the Lord said so much in

But when it

Nor is

the Gospel according to John, and so often,
of unity itself, whether of His own with the
Father, or of ours interchangeably with ourselves; He has nowhere said, that we are
also one with Himself, but, "that they may
Therefore the
be one as we also are one." 5
Father and the Son are one, undoubtedly according to unity of substance; and there is
one God, and one great, and one wise, as we
have argued.

5. Whence then is the Father greater?
For if greater, He is greater by greatness;
but whereas the Son is His greatness, neither
assuredly is the Son greater than He who
begat Him, nor is the Father greater than
that greatness, whereby He is great; therefore
For whence is He equal, if
they are equal.
not in that which He is, to whom it is not
one thing to be, and another to be great?
Or if the Father is greater in eternity, the
Son is not equal in anything whatsoever.
For whence equal ?
If you say in greatness,
that greatness is not equal which is less eterOr is He pernal, and so of all things else.
haps equal in power, but not equal in wisdom ?
But how is that power which is less
wise, equal ? Or is He equal in wisdom, but
But how is that wisdom
not equal in power ?
equal which is less powerful ?
It remains,
therefore, that if He is not equal in anything,
He is not equal in all.
But Scripture pro-
" He thought it not robbery to
claims, that
be equal with God." 6
Therefore any adversary of the truth whatever, provided he
feels bound by apostolical authority, must
needs confess that the Son is equal with God
Let him
in each one thing whatsoever.
choose that which he will; from it he will be
shown, that He is equal in aM things which
are said of His substance.

CHAP. 4.

THE SAME ARGUMENT CONTINUED.

6. For in like manner the virtues which are
in the human mind, although each has its
own several and different meaning, yet are in
no way mutually separable; so that, for instance, whosoever were equal in courage, are
equal also in prudence, and temperance, and
For if you say that such and such
justice.
men are equal in courage, but that one of
them is greater in prudence, it follows that
the courage of the other is less prudent, and
so neither are they equal in courage, since
the courage of the former is more prudent.
And so you will find it to be the case with
the other virtues, if you consider them one
For the question is not of the
by one.
strength of the body, but of the courage of

1 John x. 30.
3 1 Cor. iii. 8.

2 John xvii. 11.
4 1 Cor. vi. 16, 17.

5 John xvii. 11.

6 Phil. ii. 6.

IOO

the mind. How much more therefore is this
the case in that unchangeable and eternal substance, which is incomparably more simple
Since, in the human
than the human mind is ?
mind, to be is not the same as to be strong,
or prudent, or just, or temperate; for a mind
can exist, and yet have none of these virtues.
But in God to be is the same as to be strong,
or to be just, or to be wise, or whatever is
said of that simple multiplicity, or multifold
simplicity, whereby to signify His substance.
Wherefore, whether we say God of God in
such way that this name belongs to each, yet
not so that both together are two Gods, but
one God; for they are in such way united
with each other, as according to the apostle's
testimony may take place even in diverse
and differing substances; for both the Lord
alone is a Spirit, and the spirit of a man alone
is assuredly a spirit; yet, if
it cleave to the
Lord, "it is one spirit:" how much more
there, where there is an absolutely inseparable
and eternal union, so that He may not seem
absurdly to be called as it were the Son of
both, when He is called the Son of God, if
that which is called God is only said of both
Or perhaps it is, that whatever is
together.
said of God so as to indicate His substance,
is not said except of both together, nay of the
Whether therefore
Trinity itself together?
it be this or that (which needs a closer inis enough for the present to see
quiry), it
from what has been said, that the Son is in
no respect equal with the Father, if He is
found to be unequal in anything which has
to do with signifying His substance, as we
have already shown. But the apostle has said
that He is equal.
Therefore the Son is
equal with the Father in all things, and is of
one and the same substance.

CHAP. 5.

THE HOLY SPIRIT ALSO IS EQUAL TO

THE FATHER AND THE SON IN ALL THINGS.

7. Wherefore also the Holy Spirit consists
in the same unity of substance, and in the
For whether He is the unity
same equality.
of both, or the holiness, or the love, or therefore the unity because the love, and therefore
the love because the holiness, it
is manifest
that He is not one of the two, through whom
the two are joined, through whom the Begotten is loved by the Begetter, and loves Him
that begat Him, and through whom, not by
participation, but by their own essence,
neither by the gift of any superior, but by
their own, they are "
keeping the unity of the
,,z which we are
Spirit in the bond of peace;
commanded to imitate by grace, both towards

it

[Book VI.
" On which two
God and towards ourselves.
commandments hang all the law and the
So those three are God, one,
prophets." 2
But we are
alone, great, wise, holy, blessed.
blessed from Him, and through Him, and in
Him; because we ourselves are one by His
gift, and one spirit with Him, because our
soul cleaves to Him so as to follow Him.
And it is good for us to cleave to God, since
He will destroy every man who is estranged
from Him. 3
Therefore the Holy Spirit, whatever it is, is something common both to the
But that communion itself
Father and Son.
is consubstantial and co-eternal; and if
may fitly be called friendship, let it be so
called; but it is more aptly called love. And
this is also a substance, since God is a substance, and " God is love," as it is written. *
But as He is a substance together with the
Father and the Son, so that substance is together with them great, and together with
them good, and together with them holy,
and whatsoever else is said in reference to
substance; since it is not one thing to God to
be, and another to be great or to be good,
and the rest, as we have shown above.
For if
in God] than
love is less great therein [i.e.
wisdom, then wisdom is loved in less degree
than according to what it is; love is therefore
equal, in order that wisdom may be loved
according to its being; but wisdom is equal
with the Father, as we have proved above;
therefore also the Holy Spirit is equal; and
if equal, equal in all things, on account of
the absolute simplicity which is in that subAnd therefore they are not more
stance.
than three: One who loves Him who is from
Himself, and One who loves Him from whom
He is, and Love itself.
And if this last is
nothing, how is "God love"?
is not
If it
substance, how is God substance ?

CHAP. 6.

HOW GOD IS A SUBSTANCE BOTH
SIMPLE AND MANIFOLD.

8. But if it is asked how that substance is
both simple and manifold:
consider, first,
why the creature is manifold, but in no way
And first, all that is body is
really simple.
composed certainly of parts; so that therein
one part is greater, another less, and the
whole is greater than any part whatever or
For the heaven and the
how great soever.
earth are parts of the whole bulk of the
world; and the earth alone, and the heaven
alone, is composed of innumerable parts;
and its third part is less than the remainder,
and the half of it is less than the whole; and
the whole body of the world, which is usually

1 Eph. iv. 3.

Matt. xxii. 37-40.

3 Ps. lxxvii. 28, 27.

4 1 John iv. 16.

Chap. VIII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

IOI

it

or the

called by its two parts, viz. the heaven and
the earth, is certainly greater than the heaven
And in each
earth alone.
alone
several body, size is one thing, color another,
shape another; for the same color and the
same shape may remain with diminished
size; and the same shape and the same size
the color changed ; and
may remain with
the same shape not remaining, yet the thing
may be just as great, and of the same color.
And whatever other things are predicated
together of body can be changed either all together, or the larger part of them without
And hence the nature of body is
the rest.
conclusively proved to be manifold, and in
The spiritual creature
no respect simple.
also, that is, the soul, is indeed the more
simple of the two if compared with the body;
but if we omit the comparison with the body,
is manifold, and itself also not simple.
For it is on this account more simple than
is not diffused in bulk
the body, because it
through extension of place, but in each body,
it is both whole in the whole, and whole in
each several part of it; and, therefore, when
anything takes place in any small particle
whatever of the body, such as the soul can
feel, although it does not take place in the
whole body, yet the whole soul feels it, since
the whole soul is not unconscious of it.
But,
nevertheless, since in the soul also it is one
thing to be skillful, another to be indolent,
another to be intelligent, another to be of
retentive memory; since cupidity is one thing,
fear another, joy another, sadness another;
and since things innumerable, and in innumerable ways, are to be found in the nature
of the soul, some without others, and some
more, some less; it is manifest that its nature
For nothing
is not simple, but manifold.
simple is changeable, but every creature is
changeable.

chap. 7.

god is a trinity, but not triple

(triplex).
But God is truly called in manifold ways,
great, good, wise, blessed, true, and whatsoever other thing seems to be said of Him
not unworthily: but His greatness is the same
as His wisdom; for He is not great by bulk,
but by power; and His goodness is the same
as His wisdom and greatness, and His truth
the same as all those things; and in Him it
is not one thing to be blessed, and another
to be great, or wise, or true, or good, or in
a word to be Himself.

9. Neither, since He is a Trinity, is He
* other-

therefore to be thought triple {triplex)

1 [The Divine Unity is trinal, not triple. The triple is com-

wise the Father alone, or the Son alone, will
be less than the Father and Son together.
Although, indeed, it is hard to see how we
can say, either the Father alone, or the Son
alone; since both the Father is with the Son,
and the Son with the Father, always and inseparably: not that bth are the Father, or
both are the Son; but because they are always
one in relation to the other, and neither the
But because we
one nor the other alone.
call even tke Trinity itself God alone, although He is always with holy spirits and
souls, but say that He only is God, because
they are mot also God with Him; so we call
the Father the Father alone, not because He
is separate from the Son, but because they
are not both together the Father.

CHAP. 8.

NO ADDITION CAN BE MADE TO THE

NATURE OF GOD.

Since, therefore, the Father alone, or the
Son alone, or the Holy Spirit alone, is as
oreat as is the Father and the Son and the
2 in no manner is He to
Holy Spirit together,
Forasmuch as bodies
be called threefold.
For alincrease by union of themselves.
though he who cleaves to his wife is one body;
yet it is a greater body than if it were that of
the husband alone, or of the wife alone.
But in spiritual things, when the less adheres
to the greater, as the creature to the Creator,
the former becomes greater than it was, not
For in those things which are
the latter. 3
not great by bulk, to be greater is to be
better. And the spirit of any creature becomes better, when it cleaves to the Creator,
it did not so cleave; and therefore
than if
also greater because better. "He," then,
" 4
"
that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit:
but yet the Lord does not therefore become

posed of three different substances.
The trinal is without parts, and is incomplex.
ple substance in three modes or forms.
trinal, but not of the triple deity."
i 72.-W. G. T. S.]

It has parts, and is complex.
It denotes one sim-
" We may speak of the
Hollaz, in Hase's Hutterus,

- [Each trinitarian person is as great as the Trinity, if reference
be had to the essence, but not if reference be had to the persons.
Each person has the entire essence, and the Trinity has the entire
But each person has the essence with only one personal
essence.
characteristic; while the Trinity has the essence with all three personal characteristics. No trinitarian person is as comprehensive
as the triune Godhead, because he does not possess the two personal characteristics belonging to the other two persons. The
Father is God, but he is not God the Son and God the Holy Spirit.

W. G. T. S.]
3 [The addition of finite numbers, however great, to an infinite
Similarly, any addition of
number, does not increase the infinite.
finite being to the Infinite Being is no increase. Cod plus the
universe is no larger an infinite than God minus the universe.
The creation of the universe adds nothing to the infinite being and
attributes of God. To add contingent being to necessary being,
does not make the latter any more necessary. To add imperfect
being to perfect being, does not make the latter more perfect. To
add finite knowledge to infinite knowledge, does not produce a
This truth has been overlooked by
greater amount of knowledge.
Hamilton. Mansell, and others, in the argument against the personality of the Infinite, in which the Infinite is confounded with
the All, and which assumes that the All is greater than the Infinite
in other words, that God plus the universe is greater than God

minus the universe. W. G. T. S.]

4 Cor. vi. 17.

[Book VI.

greater, although he who is joined to the
In God Himself, therefore,
Lord does so.
when the equal Son, or the Holy Spirit equal
to the Father and the Son, is joined to the
equal Father, God does not become greater
than each of them severally; because that
But whether t
perfectness cannot increase.
be the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit
He is perfect, and God the Father the Son
and the Holy Spirit is perfect; and therefore
He is a Trinity rather than triple.

CHAP. 9.

WHETHER ONE OR THE THREE PERSONS TOGETHER ARE CALLED THE ONLY GOD.
10. And since we are showing how we can
say the Father alone, because there is no
Father in the Godhead except Himself, we
must consider also the opinion which holds
that the only true God is not the Father
alone, but the Father and the Son and the
For if any one should ask
Holy Spirit.
whether the Father alone is God, how can it
be replied that He is not, unless perhaps we
were to say that the Father indeed is God,
but that He is not God alone, but that the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are God alone ?
But then what shall we do with that testiFor He was speaking to
mony of the Lord ?
the Father, and had named the Father as
Him to whom He was speaking, when He
says, "And this is life eternal, that they may
know Thee the one true God." 1 And this
the Arians indeed usually take, as if the Son
Passing them by, howwere not true God.
ever, we must see whether, when it is said to
" That they may know Thee the
the Father,
one true God," we are forced to understand
it as if He wished to intimate that the Father
alone is the true God; lest we should not understand any to be God, except the three together, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Are we therefore, from the testimony of the
Lord, both to call the Father the one true
God, and the Son the one true God, and the
Holy Spirit the one true God, and the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Spirit together, that
is, the Trinity itself together, not three true
Gods but one true God ? Or because He
added, "And Jesus Christ whom Thou hast
"
sent," are we to supply
so that the order of the words is this,
That
they may know Thee, and Jesus Christ whom
Thou hast sent, the one true God?" Why
then did He omit to mention the Holy Spirit ?
Is it because it follows, that whenever we
name One who cleaves to One by a harmony
so great that through this harmony both are
one, this harmony itself must be understood,

the one true God;

"

"

"

again,

t's, and

for my Father is greater than I;

although it is not mentioned ?
For in that
place, too, the apostle seems as it were to
pass over the Holy Spirit; and yet there, too,
He is understood, where he says, "All are
yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is
God's." 2 And
"The head of the
woman is the man
the head of the man is
Christ, and the head of Christ is God." 3
But again, if God is only all three together,
how can God be the head of Christ, that is,
the Trinity the head of Christ, since Christ
is in the Trinity in order that it may be the
Is that which is the Father with
Trinity?
the Son, the head of that which is the Son
For the Father with the Son is God,
alone ?
but the Son alone is Christ: especially since
it is the Word already made flesh that speaks;
and according to this His humiliation ai
the Father is greater than

ISO,
He
He, as tie says,
" 4 so that
the very being of God, which is one to Him
with the Father, is itself the head of the man
who is mediator, which He is alone. 5
For if
we rightly call the mind the chief thing of
man, that is, as it were the head of the human
substance, although the man himself together
with the mind is man; why is not the Word
with the Father, which together is God, much
more suitably and much more the head of
Christ, although Christ as man cannot be
understood except with the Word which was
made flesh ?
But this, as we have already
said, we shall consider somewhat more careAt present the equality and
fully hereafter.
one and the same substance of the Trinity
has been demonstrated as briefly as possible,
that in whatever way that other question be
determined, the more rigorous discussion of
which we have deferred, nothing may hinder
us from confessing the absolute equality of
the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

"

CHAP. X.

OF THE ATTRIBUTES ASSIGNED BV
THE TRINITY IS

HILARY TO EACH PERSON.
REPRESENTED IN THINGS THAT ARE MADE.
11. A certain writer, when he would briefly
intimate the special attributes of each of the
persons in the Trinity, tells us that
Eternity
is in the Father, form in the Image, use in
the Gift." And since he was a man of no
mean authority in handling the Scriptures,
and in the assertion of the faith, for it is Hilary who put this in his book (On the Trinity,
ii.); I have searched into the hidden meaning
of these words as far as I can, that is, of the
Father, and the Image, and the Gift, of eternity, and of form, and of use. And I do not
think that he intended more by the word eter-

1 John xvii. 3.

- 1 Cor. iii. 22, 23.
4 John xiv. 28.

3 i Cor. xi. 3.
5 1 Tim. ii. 5.

Chap. X.]

ON THE TRINITY.

nity, than that the Father has not a father
from whom He is; but the Son is from the
Father, so as to be, and so as to be co-eternal
with Him.
For if an image perfectly fills the
measure of that of which it is the image, then
the image is made equal to that of which it is
the image, not the latter to its own image.
And in respect to this image he has named
form, I believe on account of the quality of
beauty, where there is at once such great fitness, and prime equality, and prime likeness,
differing in nothing, and unequal in no respect, and in no part unlike, but answering
exactly to Him whose image it is: where there
is prime and absolute life, to whom it is not
one thing to live, and another to be, but the
same thing to be and to live; and prime and
absolute intellect, to whom it is not one thing
to live, another to understand, but to understand is to live, and is to be, and all things
are one: as though a perfect Word (John i.
1), to which nothing is wanting, and a certain
skill of the omnipotent and wise God, full of
all living, unchangeable sciences, and all one
in it, as itself is one from one, with whom it
Therein God knew all things which
is one.
He made by it; and therefore, while times
pass away and succeed, nothing passes away
or succeeds to the knowledge of God.
For
things which are created are not therefore
known by God, because they have been made;
and not rather have been therefore made,
even although changeable, because they are
known unchangeably by Him.
Therefore
that unspeakable conjunction of the Father
and His image is not without fruition, without love, without joy.
Therefore that love,
delight, felicity, or blessedness, if indeed it
can be worthily expressed by any human
word, is called by him, in short, Use; and is
the Holy Spirit in the Trinity, not begotten,
but the sweetness of the begetter and of the
all creatures according to
begotten, filling
their capacity with abundant bountifulness
and copiousness, that they may keep their

proper order and rest satisfied in their proper
place.

12. Therefore all these things which are
made by divine skill, show in themselves a
certain unity, and form, and order; for each
of them is both some one thing, as are the
several natures of bodies and dispositions of
souls; and is fashioned in some form, as are
the figures or qualities of bodies, and the
various learning or skill of souls; and seeks
or preserves a certain order, as are the several weights or combinations of bodies and
the loves or delights of souls. When therefore we regard the Creator, who is understood
by the things that are made x we must needs
understand the Trinity of whom there appear
For in
traces in the creature, as is fitting.
that Trinity is the supreme source of all things,
and the most perfect beauty, and the most
Those three, therefore, both
blessed delight.
seem to be mutually determined to each other,
But here in
and are in themselves infinite.
corporeal things, one thing alone is not as
much as three together, and two are something more than one;
but in that highest
Trinity one is as much as the three together,
And
nor are two anything more than one.
So both
They are infinite
each are in each, and all in each, and each
in all, and all in all, and all are one.
Let
him who sees
or
2 re-
"through a glass and in an enigma,"
joice in knowing God ; and let him honor Him
as God, and give thanks; but let him who
does not see it, strive to see it through piety,
Since
not to cavil at it through blindness.
God is one, but yet is a Trinity.
Neither are
"
we to take the words,
of whom, and through
whom, and to whom are all things," as used
indiscriminately [i.e., to denote a unity without distinctions]; nor yet to denote many
gods, for "to Him, be glory for ever and
ever.

this, whether

in themselves.

Amen." 3

part,

in

*

1 Rom. i. 20.
3 Rom. xi. 36, in A.V.

- 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

Darkly, A.V.

BOOK VII.
THE QUESTION IS EXPLAINED, WHICH HAD BEEN DEFERRED IN THE PREVIOUS BOOK, VIZ. THAT
GOD THE FATHER, WHO BEGAT THE SON, HIS POWER AND WISDOM, IS NOT ONLY THE FATHER
OF POWER AND WISDOM, BUT ALSO HIMSELF POWER AND WISDOM ; AND SIMILARLY THE HOLY
SPIRIT : YET THAT THERE ARE NOT THREE POWERS OR THREE WISDOMS, BUT ONE POWER
INQUIRY IS THEN MADE, WHY
AND ONE WISDOM, AS THERE IS ONE GOD AND ONE ESSENCE.
THE LATINS SAY ONE ESSENCE, THREE PERSONS, IN GOD ; BUT THE GREEKS, ONE ESSENCE,
THREE SUBSTANCES OR HYPOSTASES : AND BOTH MODES OF EXPRESSION ARE SHOWN TO ARISE
FROM THE NECESSITIES OF SPEECH, THAT WE MIGHT HAVE AN ANSWER TO GIVE WHEN ASKED,
WHAT THREE, WHILE TRULY CONFESSING THAT THERE ARE THREE, VIZ. THE FATHER, AND
THE SON, AND THE HOLY SPIRIT.

CHAP. I.

AUGUSTIN RETURNS TO THE QUESTION, WHETHER EACH PERSON OF THE TRINIWITH WHAT DIFTY BY ITSELF IS WISDOM.
FICULTY, OR IN WHAT WAY, THE PROPOSED
QUESTION IS TO BE SOLVED.
i. Let us now inquire more carefully, so
far as God grants, into that which a little
before we deferred; whether each person
also in the Trinity can also by Himself and
not with the other two be called God, or
great, or wise, or true, or omnipotent, or just,
or anything else that can be said of God, not
relatively, but absolutely; or whether these
things cannot be said except when the Trinity
For the question is raised,
is understood.
Christ the power of
God, and the wisdom of God," 1
whether
He is so the Father of His own wisdom and
His own power, as that He is wise with that
wisdom which He begat, and powerful with
that power which He begat; and whether,
since He is always powerful and wise, He
always begat power and wisdom.
be so, then, as we have said, why is He not
also the Father of His own greatness by
which He is great, and of His own goodness
by which He is good, and of His own justice
by which He is just, and whatever else there
Or if all these things are understood, although under more names than one, to be in

because it is written,

For if

is ?

"

it

is

uttered,

the same wisdom and power, so that that is
greatness which is power, that is goodness
which is wisdom, and that again is wisdom
which is power, as we have already argued;
then let us remember, that when I mention
any one of these, I am to be taken as if I
mentioned all.
It is asked, then, whether
the Father also by Himself is wise, and is
Himself His own wisdom itself; or whether
He is wise in the same way as He speaks.
For He speaks by the Word which He begat,
and
not by the word which
sounds, and passes away, but by the Word
which was with God, and the Word was God,
and all things were made by Him: 2
by the
Word which is equal to Himself, by whom
He always and unchangeably utters Himself.
For He is not Himself the Word, as He is
But in speaknot the Son nor the image.
ing (putting aside those words of God in time
which are produced in the creature, for they
sound and pass away,
in speaking then) by
that co-eternal Word, He is not understood
singly, but with that Word itself, without
Is He
whom certainly He does not speak.
then in such way wise as He is one who
speaks, so as to be in such way wisdom, as
He is the Word, and so that to be the Word
is to be wisdom, that is, also to be power, so
that power and wisdom and the Word may be

1 i Cor. i. 24.

- John i. i, 3.

Chap. I.J

ON THE TRINITY.

the same, and be so called relatively as the
Son and the image: and that the Father is
not singly powerful or wise, but together with
the power and wisdom itself which He begat
(genuii); just as He is not singly one who
speaks, but by that Word and together with
that Word which He begat; and in like way
great by that and together with that greatness, which He begat? And if He is not
great by one thing, and God by another, but
great by that whereby He is God, because it
is not one thing to Him to be great and another to be God; it follows that neither is He
God singly, but by that and together with
that deity (deltas) which He begat; so that
the Son is the deity of the Father, as He is
the wisdom and power of the Father, and as
He is the Word and image of the Father.
is not one thing to Him to
And because it
be, another to be God, the Son is also the
essence of the Father, as He is His Word and
except that He is
image. And hence also
the Father is
the Father [the Unbegotten]
not anything unless because He has the Son;
so that not only that which is meant by
Father (which it is manifest He is not called
relatively to Himself but to the Son, and
therefore is the Father because He has the
Son), but that which He is in respect to His
own substance is so called, because He begat
For as He is great, only
His own essence.
with that greatness which He begat, so also
He is, only with that essence which He begat;
because it is not one thing to Him to be, and
Is He therefore the
another to be great.
Father of His own essence, in the same way
as He is the Father of His own greatness, as
He is the Father of His own power and wisdom ? since His greatness is the same as His
power, and His essence the same as His
greatness.

"

that

2. This discussion has arisen from that
which is written, that
Christ is the power of
God, and the wisdom of God."
Wherefore
our discourse is compressed into these narrow
limits, while we desire to speak things uneither we must say that
speakable;
Christ is not the power of God and the wisdom of God, and so shamelessly and impiously resist the apostle; or we must acknowledge that Christ is indeed the power of
God and the wisdom of God, but that His
Father is not the Father of His own power
and wisdom, which is not less impious; for
so neither will He be the Father of Christ,
because Christ is the power of God and the
wisdom of God; or that the Father is not
powerful with His own power, or wise with
His own wisdom: and who shall dare to say
this ? Or yet, again, that we must understand,

is called

that in the Father it is one thing to be, another thing to be wise, so that He is not by
that by which He is wise: a thing usually
understood of the soul, which is at some times
unwise, at others wise; as being by nature
changeable, and not absolutely and perfectly
Or, again, that the Father is not
simple.
anything in respect to His own substance;
and that not only that He is the Father, but
How
that He is, is said relatively to the Son.
then can the Son be of the same essence as
the Father, seeing that the Father, in respect
to Himself, is neither His own essence, nor
is at all in respect to Himself, but even His
essence is in relation to the Son ?
But, on
the contrary, much more is He of one and
the same essence, since the Father and Son
are one and the same essence; seeing that
the Father has His being itself not in respect
to Himself, but to the Son, which essence
He begat, and by which essence He is whatever He is.
Therefore neither [person] is
in respect to Himself alone; and both exist
Or is the
relatively the one to the other.
Father alone not called Father of himself,
but whatever He is called,
relatively to the Son, but the Son is predicated
of in reference to Himself? And if it be so,
what is predicated of Him in reference to
But the
Himself?
Is it His essence itself?
Son is the essence of the Father, as He is the
power and wisdom of the Father, as He is
the Word of the Father, and the image of
Or if the Son is called essence
the Father.
in reference to Himself, but the Father is
not essence, but the begetter of the essence,
and is not in respect to Himself, but is by
that very essence which He begat; as He is
great by that greatness which He begat:
therefore the Son is also called greatness in
respect to Himself; therefore He is
also
called, in like manner, power, and wisdom,
But what can be more
and word, and image.
absurd than that He should be called image
in respect to Himself? Or if image and word
are not the very same with power and wisdom, but the former are spoken relatively,
and the latter in respect to self, not to another; then we get to this, that the Father is
not wise with that wisdom which He begat,
because He Himself cannot be spoken relatively to it, and it cannot be spoken relatively
to Him.
For all things which are said relatively are said reciprocally; therefore it remains that even in essence the Son is spoken
But from this is
of relatively to the Father.
educed a most unexpected sense: that essence itself is not essence, or at least that,
when it
is called essence, not essence but
As when
something relative is intimated.

io6

[Book VII.

we speak of a master, essence is not intimated, but a relative which has reference to
a slave; but when we speak of a man, or any
such thing which is said in respect to self not
to something else, then essence is intimated.
Therefore when a man is called a master,
man himself is essence, but he is called master relatively; for he is called man in respect
to himself, but master in respect to his slave.
But in regard to the point from which we
started, if essence itself is spoken relatively,
essence itself is not essence. Add further,
that all essence which is spoken of relatively,
is also something, although the relation be
taken away; as e.g. in the case of a man who
is a master, and a man who is a slave, and a
horse that is a beast of burden, and money
that is a pledge, the man, and the horse, and
the money are spoken in respect to themselves, and are substances or essences; but
master, and slave, and beast of burden, and
pledge, are spoken relatively to something.
But if there were not a man, that is, some
substance, there would be none who could be
called relatively a master; and if there were
no horse having a certain essence, there would
be nothing that could be called relatively a
beast of burden; so if money were not some
kind of substance, it could not be called relaWherefore, if the Father
tively a pledge.
also is not something in respect to Himself,
then there is no one at all that can be spoken
For it is not as
of relatively to something.
The color of a thing is reit is with color.
ferred to the thing colored, and color is not
spoken at all in reference to substance, but
is always of something that is colored; but
that thing of which it is the color, even if
it
is referred to color in respect to its being
colored, is yet, in respect to its being a body,
But in no
spoken of in respect to substance.
way may we think, in like manner, that the
Father cannot be called anything in respect
to His own substance, but that whatever He
is called, He is called in relation to the Son;
while the same Son is spoken of both in respect to His own substance and in relation to
the Father, when He is called great greatness,
and powerful power, plainly in respect to Himself, and the greatness and power of the great
and powerful Father, by which the Father
is great and powerful.
It is not so; but both
are substance, and both are one substance.
And as it is absurd to say that whiteness is
not white, so is it absurd to say that wisdom
is not wise; and as whiteness is called white
in respect to itself, so also wisdom is called
But the whiteness
wise in respect to itself.
of a "body is not an essence, since the body

itself is the essence, and that is a quality of
it; and hence also a body is said from that
quality to be white, to which body to be is
not the same thing as to be white.
For the
form in it is one thing, and the color another;
and both are not in themselves, but in a certain bulk, which bulk is
neither form nor
color, but is formed and colored.
True wisdom is both wise, and wise in itself. And
since in the case of every soul that becomes
wise by partaking of wisdom, if
it again becomes foolish, yet wisdom in itself remains;
nor when that soul was changed into folly is
the wisdom likewise so changed; therefore
wisdom is not in him who becomes wise by it,
in the same manner as whiteness is in the
body which is by it made white.
For when
the body has been changed into another color,
that whiteness will not remain, but will altoBut if the Father who
gether cease to be.
begat wisdom is also made wise by it, and to
be is not to Him the same as to be wise, then
the Son is His quality, not His offspring; and
there will no longer be absolute simplicity in
the Godhead.
But far be it from being so,
since in truth in the Godhead is absolutely
simple essence, and therefore to be is there
the same as to be wise.
But if to be is there
the same as to be wise, then the Father is
not wise by that wisdom which He begat;
otherwise He did not beget it, but it begat
Him.
For what else do we say when we say,
that to Him to be is the same as to be wise,
unless that He is by that whereby He is wise?
Wherefore, that which is the cause to Him
of being wise, is itself also the cause to Him
that He is; and accordingly, if the wisdom
which He begat is the cause to Him of being
wise, it is also the cause to Him that He is;
and this cannot be the case, except either by
begetting or by creating Him.
But no one
ever said in any sense that wisdom is either
the begetter or the creator of the Father; for
what could be more senseless ?
Therefore
both the Father Himself is wisdom, and the
Son is in such way called the wisdom of the
Father, as He is called
the
Father; that is, that in the same manner as
light from light,and yet both one light, so we
are to understand wisdom of wisdom, and yet
both one wisdom; and therefore also one
essence, since, in God, to be, is the same as
to be wise. For what to be wise is to wisdom,
and to be able is to power, and to be eternal
is to eternity, and to.be just to justice, and
to be great to greatness, that being itself is
A.nd since in the Divine simplicto essence.
ity, to be wise is nothing else than to be,
therefore wisdom there is the same as essence.

the light of

Chap. III.]

ON THE TRINITY.

CHAP. 2.

THE FATHER AND THE SON ARE TOGETHER ONE WISDOM, AS ONE ESSENCE, ALTHOUGH NOT TOGETHER ONE WORD.

is, when it

3. Therefore the Father and the Son together are one essence, and one greatness,
and one truth, and one wisdom.
But the
Father and Son both together are not one
not one
Word, because both together are
For as the Son is referred to the
Son.
Father, and is not so called in respect to
Himself, so also the Word is referred to
him whose Word it
is called the
Word. Since He is the Son in that He is the
Word, and He is the Word in that He is the
Inasmuch, therefore, as the Father
Son.
and the Son together are certainly not one
Son, it follows that the Father and the Son
together are not the one Word of both.
And
therefore He is not the Word in that He is
wisdom; since He is not called the Word in
respect to Himself, but only relatively to
Him whose Word He is, as He is called the
Son in relation to the Father; but He is wisdom by that whereby He is essence. And
therefore, because one essence, one wisdom.
But since the Word is also wisdom, yet is
not thereby the Word because He is wisdom;
for He is understood to be the Word relatively, but wisdom essentially: let us understand, that when He is called the Word, it is
meant, wisdom that is bom, so as to be both
the Son and the Image; and that when these
two words are used, namely wisdom (is) bom,
in one of the two, namely bom, 1 both Word,
and Image, and Son, are understood, and in
all these names essence is not expressed,
since they are spoken relatively; but in the
other word, namely wisdom, since it is spoken
also in respect to substance, for wisdom is
wise in itself, essence also is expressed, and
that being of His which is to be wise. Whence
the Father and Son together are one wisdom,
because one essence, and singly wisdom of
wisdom, as essence of essence. And hence
they are not therefore not one essence, because the Father is not the Son, and the Son is
not the Father, or because the Father is unbegotten, but the Son is begotten: since by
these names only their relative attributes are
But both together are one wisexpressed.
dom and one essence; in which to be, is the
And both together are
same as to be wise.
not the Word or the Son, since to be is not
the same as to be the Word or the Son, as
we have already sufficiently shown that these
terms are spoken relatively.

1 [Augustin sometimes denominates the Son "begotten"
"
(genitus), and sometimes " born
Both terms signify
that the Son is ^/the Father; God of God, Light of Light, Essence
of Essence. W. G. T. S.]

(natus).

CHAP. 3.

WHY THE SON CHIEFLY IS INTIMATED
IN THE SCRIPTURES BY THE NAME OF WISDOM, WHILE BOTH THE FATHER AND THE
THAT THE HOLY
HOLY SPIRIT ARE WISDOM.
SPIRIT, TOGETHER WITH THE FATHER AND
THE SON, IS ONE WISDOM.
4. Why, then, is scarcely anything ever
said in the Scriptures of wisdom, unless to
show that it is begotten or created of God ?
begotten in the case of that Wisdom by
which all things are made; but created or
made, as in men, when they are converted to
that Wisdom which is not created and made
but begotten, and are so enlightened;
for
in these men themselves there comes to be
something which may be called their wisdom:
even as the Scriptures foretell or narrate, that
"
the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among
us;" 2 for in this way Christ was made wisdom, because He was made man.
Is it on
this account that wisdom does not speak in
these books, nor is anything spoken of it,
except to declare that it is born of God, or
made by Him (although the Father is Himself wisdom), namely, because wisdom ought
to be commended and imitated by us, by the
imitation of which we are fashioned [rightly] ?
For the Father speaks it, that it may be His
Word: yet not as a word producing a sound
proceeds from the mouth, or
thought
For this word is
before it
completed in certain spaces of time, but that
is eternal, and speaks to us by enlightening
us, what ought to be spoken to men, both of
itself and of the Father. And therefore He
says, "No man knoweth the Son, but the
Father; neither knoweth any man the Father,
save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son
will reveal Him:" 3 since the Father reveals
by the Son, that is, by His Word.
For if
that word which we utter, and which is temporal and transitory, declares both itself, and
that of which we speak, how much more the
Word'of God, by which all things are made ?
For this Word so declares the Father as He
is the Father; because both itself so is, and
is that which is the Father, in so far as it is
wisdom and essence.
For in so far as it is
is not what the Father is; bethe Word, it
cause the Word is not the Father, and Word
is spoken relatively, as is also Son, which
assuredly is not the Father. And therefore
Christ is the power and wisdom of God, because He Himself, being also power and wisdom, is from the Father, who is power and
wisdom; as He is light of the Father, who is
light, and the fountain of life with God the
Father, who is Himself assuredly the fountain

is pronounced.

is

John i. 14.

3 Matt. xi. 27.

io8

[Book VII.

"

For "

"

"

"

Because,

" s but

with Thee," He says,

" and this light,

is the
of life.
fountain of life, and in Thy light shall we see
as the Father hath life
light." 1
in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to
and, "He was the
have life in Himself:" 2
true Light, which lighteth every man that
cometh into the world:
the
Word," was "with God;" but "the Word
" 3 and "God is light, and in
also was -God;
" 4 but a light that
Him is no darkness at all:
is not corporeal, but spiritual; yet not in
such way spiritual, that it was wrought by
illumination, as it was said to the apostles,
*' Ye are the light of the world,
the
light which lighteth every man," that very
supreme wisdom itself who is God, of whom
we now treat.
The Son therefore is Wisdom
of wisdom, namely the Father, as He is Light
of light, and God of God; so that both the
Father singly is light, and the Son singly is
light; and the Father singly is God, and the
Son singly is God: therefore the Father also
singly is wisdom, and the Son singly is wisAnd as both together are one light
dom.
and one God, so both are one wisdom.
But
the Son is "by God made unto us wisdom,
" 6 beand righteousness, and sanctification;
cause we turn ourselves to Him in time, that
is, from some particular time, that we may
remain with Him for ever. And He Himself
from a certain time was "the Word made
flesh, and dwelt among us."

5 . On this account, then, when anything concerning wisdom is declared or narrated in the
Scriptures, whether as
itself speaking, or
where anything is spoken of it, the Son chiefly
And by the example of
is intimated to us.
Him who is the image, let us also not depart
from God, since we also are the Image of
God: not indeed that which is equal to Him,
since we are made so by the Father through
the Son, and not born of the Father, as that
is. And we are so, because we are enlightened with light; but that is so, because it is
the light that enlightens; and which, therefore, being without pattern, is to us a pattern.
For He does not imitate any one going before
Him, in respect to the Father, from whom
He is never separable at all, since He is the
very same substance with Him from whom
He is.
But we by striving imitate Him who
abides, and follow Him who stands still, and
walking in Him, reach out towards Him; because He is made for us a way in time by
His humiliation, which is to us an eternal
For since to
abiding-place by His divinity.
pure intellectual spirits, who have not fallen
through pride, He gives an example in the

form of God and as equal with God and as
God; so, in order that He might also give
Himself as an example of returning to fallen
man, who on account of the uncleanness of
sins and the punishment of mortality cannot
" not by
" He emptied Himself;
see God,
changing His own divinity, but by assuming
our changeableness: and "taking upon Him
the form of a servant,'' 7 " He came to us
into this world," 8 who " was in this world,"
because "the world was made by Him;" 9
that He might be an example upwards to
those who see God, an example downwards
to those who admire man, an example to the
sound to persevere, an example to the sick to
be made whole, an example to those who are
to die that they may not fear, an example to
the dead that they may rise again, "that in
all things He might have the pre-eminence."
So that, because man ought not to follow any
except God to blessedness, and yet cannot
perceive God; by following God made man,
he might follow at once Him whom he could
perceive, and whom he ought to follow.
Let
us then love Him and cleave to Him, by
charity spread abroad in our hearts, through
the Holy Spirit which is given unto us."
It
is not therefore to be wondered at, if, on account of the example which the Image, which
is equal to the Father, gives to us, in order
that we may be refashioned after the image
of God, Scripture, when it speaks of wisdom,
speaks of the Son, whom we follow by living
wisely; although the Father also is wisdom,
as He is both light and God.

6. The Holy Spirit also, whether we are to
call Him that absolute love which joins together Father and Son, and joins us also
from beneath, that so that is not unfitly said
which is written, "God is love;" 12 how is He
not also Himself wisdom, since He is light,
because "God is light"? or whether after
any other way the essence of the Holy Spirit
is to be singly and properly named; then,
too, since He is God, He is certainly light;
and since He is light, He is certainly wisdom.
But that the Holy Spirit is God, Scripture
" Know
proclaims by the apostle, who says,
" and
ye not that ye are the temple of God ?
immediately subjoins, "And the Spirit of
God dwelleth in you;" 13 for God dwelleth in
For the Spirit of God does
His own temple.
not dwell in the temple of God as a servant,
since he says more plainly in another place,
" Know ye not that your body is the temple
of the Holy Ghost which is in you, and which
ye have of God, and ye are not your own?

1 Ps. xxxvi. 9.
4 1 John i. 5.

- John v. 2'.
5 Matt. v. 14.

3 John i. 9, 1.
6 1 Cor. i. -io.

7 Phil. ii. 7 .
1 Col. i. tS.
J 3 1 Cor. iii. 16.

8 1 Tim. i. 15.
11 Rom. v. 5.

9 John i. 10.
12 1 John iv. i

Chap. IV.]

ON THE TRINITY.

For ye are bought with a great price: therefore glorify God in your body." 1
But what
is wisdom, except spiritual and unchangeable
For yonder sun also is light, but it is
light?
corporeal; and the spiritual creature also is
Therefore
light, but it is not unchangeable.
the Father is light, the Son is light, and the
Holy Spirit is light; but together not three
lights, but one light. And so the Father is
wisdom, the Son is wisdom, and the Holy
Spirit is wisdom, and together not three wisdoms, but one wisdom: and because in the
Trinity to be is the same as to be wise, the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are one essence.
it one thing to be
Neither in the Trinity is
and another to be God; therefore the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, are one God.

CHAP. 4. HOW IT WAS BROUGHT ABOUT THAT
THE GREEKS SPEAK OF THREE HYPOSTASES,
THE LATINS OF THREE PERSONS.
SCRIPTURE
NOWHERE SPEAKS OF THREE PERSONS IN ONE
GOD.

7. For the sake, then, of speaking of things
that cannot be uttered, that we may be able
in some way to utter what we are able in no
way to utter fully, our Greek friends have
spoken of one essence, three substances; but
the Latins of one essence or substance, three
persons; because, as we have already said,
essence usually means nothing else than substance in our language, that is,
in Latin.
And provided that what is said is understood
only in a mystery, such a way of speaking
was sufficient, in order that there might be
something to say when it was asked what the
three are, which the true faith pronounces to
be three, when it both declares that
the
Father is not the Son, and that the Holy
Spirit, which is the gift of God, is neither
the Father nor the Son.
When, then, it is
asked what the three are, or who the three
are, we betake ourselves to the finding out
of some special or general name under which
we may embrace these three; and no such
name occurs to the mind, because the supereminence of the Godhead surpasses the power
For God is more truly
of customary speech.
thought than He is uttered, and exists more
truly than He is thought.
For when we say
that Jacob was not the same as Abraham,
but that Isaac was neither Abraham nor
Jacob, certainly we confess that they are
three, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
But
when it is asked what three, we reply three
men, calling them in the plural by a specific
name; but if we were to say three animals,
then by a generic name; for man, as the

ancients have defined him, is a rational, mortal animal: or again, as our Scriptures usually
speak, three souls, since it is fitting to denominate the whole from the better part, that
is, to denominate both body and soul, which
is the whole man, from the soul; for so it is
said that seventy-five souls went down into
Egypt with Jacob, instead of saying so many
Again, when we say that your horse
men. 3
is not mine, and that a third belonging to
some one else is neither mine nor yours, then
we confess that there are three; and if any
one ask what three, we answer three horses
by a specific name, but three animals by a
And yet again, when we say
generic one.
that an ox is not a horse, but that a dog is
neither an ox nor a horse, we speak of a three;
and if any one questions us what three, we
do not speak now by a specific name of three
horses, or three oxen, or three dogs, because
the three are not contained under the same
species, but by a generic name, three animals;
or if under a higher genus, three substances,
But
or three creatures, or three natures.
whatsoever things are expressed in the plural
number specifically by one name, can also be
But all
expressed generically by one name.
things which are generically called by one
name cannot also be called specifically by
For three horses, which is a
one name.
specific name, we also call three animals; but
a horse, and an ox, and a dog, we call only
three animals or substances, which are generic
names, or anything else that can be spoken
generically concerning them; but we cannot
speak of them as three horses, or oxen, or
dogs, which are specific names; for we express those things by one name, although in
the plural number, which have that in common that is signified by the name.
For
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, have in common that which is man; therefore they are
called three men: a horse also, and an ox,
and a dog, have in common that which is
animal; therefore they are called three aniSo three several laurels we also call
mals.
three trees; but a laurel, and a myrtle, and
an olive, we call only three trees, or three
substances, or three natures: and so three
stones we call also three bodies; but stone,
and wood, and iron, we call only three bodies,
or by any other higher generic name by which
Of the Father, therethey can be called.
fore, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, seeing
that they are three, let us ask what three they
are, and what they have in common.
For the
being the Father is not common to them, so
that they should be interchangeably fathers

1 1 Cor. vi. 19, 20.

Bk. v. c. 28

3 Gen. xlvi. 27, and Deut. x. 22.

I IO

[Book VII.

is

Trinity, since

to one another: as friends, since they are so
called relatively to each other, can be called
three friends, because they are so mutually
But this
is not the case
to each other.
the Father only is
in the
there father; and not Father of two, but
Neither are they three
of the Son only.
not the
Sons, since the Father there
Neither three
Son, nor is the Holy Spirit.
Holy Spirits, because the Holy Spirit also,
in that proper meaning by which He is also
called the gift of God, is neither the Father
nor the Son. What three therefore ?
For if
three persons, then that which is meant by
person is common to them; therefore this
name is either specific or generic to them,
according to the manner of speaking.
But
where there is no difference of nature, there
things that are several in number are so expressed generically, that they can also be exFor the difference of
pressed specifically.
nature causes, that a laurel, and a myrtle,
and an olive, or a horse, and an ox, and a
dog, are not called by the specific name, the
former of three laurels, or the latter of three
oxen, but by the generic name, the former of
three trees, and the latter of three animals.
But here, where there is no difference of essence, it is necessary that these three should
have a specific name, which yet is not to be
For person is a generic name, insofound.
much that man also can be so called, although
there is so great a difference between man
and God.

8. Further, in regard to that very generic
(generalis) word, if on this account we say
that which person
three persons, because
means is common to them (otherwise they
just as they are
can in no way be so called,
called three sons, because that which
not
son means is not common to them); why do
we not also say three Gods ? For certainly,
since the Father is a person, and the Son a
person, and the Holy Spirit a person, therethree persons: since then the
fore there are
Father is God, and the Son God, and the
Holy Spirit God, why not three Gods ? Or
else, since on account of their ineffable union
these three are together one God, why not
also one person; so that we could
say
persons, although we call each a perthree
son singly, just as we cannot say three Gods,
although we call each singly God, whether
the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit?
Is it because Scripture does not say three
But neither do we find that Scripture
Gods?
Or is it
anywhere mentions three persons.
because Scripture does not call these three,
either three persons or one person (for we
read of the person of the Lord, but not of the

not

" J Why then is

Lord as a person), that therefore it was lawful through the mere necessity of speaking
and reasoning to say three persons, not because Scripture says it, but because Scripture
does not contradict it: whereas, if we were to
say three Gods, Scripture would contradict it,
which says, "Hear, O Israel; the Lord thy
God is one God ?
it not also
lawful to say three essences; which, in
like
manner, as Scripture does not say, so neither
For if essence is a spedoes it contradict ?
cific (specialis) name common to three, why
are They not to be called three essences, as
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are called three
men, because man is the specific name common to all men ?
But if essence is not a specific name, but a generic one, since man, and
cattle, and tree, and constellation, and angel,
are called essences; why are not these called
are called
three essences, as
three animals, and three laurels are called
three trees, and three stones three bodies ?
Or if they are not called three essences, but
one essence, on account of the unity of the
Trinity, why is it not the case, that on account of the same unity of the Trinity they
are not to be called three substances or three
persons, but one substance and one person?
For as the name of essence is common to
them, so that each singly is called essence,
so the name of either substance or person is
common to them.
For that which must be
understood of persons according to our usage,
this is to be understood of substances according to the Greek usage; for they say three
substances, one essence, in the same way as
we say three persons, one essence or substance.

three horses

9. What therefore remains, except that we
confess that these terms sprang from the necessity of speaking, when copious reasoning was required against the devices or errors
For when human weakness
of the heretics ?
endeavored to utter in speech to the senses
of man what it grasps in the secret places of
mind in proportion to its comprehenthe
the Lord God its creator,
sion respecting
whether by devout faith, or by any discernment whatsoever; it feared to say three essences, lest any difference should be understood
equality.
Again, it could not say that there were not
three somewhats (tria qucedani), for it was besaid this that he fell into
cause Sabellius
For it must be devoutly believed, as
heresy.
most certainly known from the Scriptures, and
must be grasped by the mental eye with unboth
doubting

perception, that

exist in that

absolute

there

to

is

1 Deut. vi. 4.

Chap. VI.]

ON THE TRINITY.

I I I

it

or persons.

Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit; and that
the Son is not the same with the Father, nor
the Holy Spirit the same with the Father or
It sought then what three it should
the Son.
call them, and answered substances or persons; by which names it did not intend diversity to be meant, but singleness to be
that not only unity might be undenied:
derstood therein from the being called one
Trinity from the being
essence, but also
For if
called three substances
is the same thing with God to be {esse) as
to subsist (subsisterc), they were not
to be
called three substances, in such sense as they
are not called three essences; just as, because
it is the same thing with God to be as to be
wise, as we do not say three essences, so
For so, because it is
neither three wisdoms.
the same thing to Him to be God as to be, it
is not right to say three essences, as it is not
is one
right to say three Gods.
thing to God to be, another to subsist, as it is
one thing to God to be, another to be the
Father or the Lord (for that which He is, is
spoken in respect to Himself, but He is called
Father in relation to the Son, and Lord in reto the creature which serves Him);
lation
therefore He subsists relatively, as He begets
relatively, and bears rule relatively: so then
substance will be no longer substance, because
For as from being, He is
it will be relative.
called essence, so from subsisting, we speak
But it is absurd that substance
of substance.
should be spoken relatively, for everything
subsists in respect to itself; how much more
God? 1

But if

it

CHAP. 5.

IN GOD, SUBSTANCE IS SPOKEN IM-

PROPERLY, ESSENCE PROPERLY.

10. If, however, it is fitting that God should
be said to subsist
(For this word is rightly applied to those things, in which as subjects those things are, which are said to be in
For
a subject, as color or shape in body.
body subsists, and so is substance; but those
things are in the body, which subsists and is
their subject, and they are not substances,
but are in a substance : and so, if either that
color or that shape ceases to be, it does not
deprive the body of being a body, because
it is not of the being of body, that it should
retain this or that shape or color; therefore
neither changeable nor simple things are proIf, I say, God subperly called substances.)
sists so that He can be properly called a sub-

1 [Augustin's meaning is, that the term " substance

is not
an adequate one whereby to denote a trinitarian distinction, because in order to denote such a distinction it must be employed re
latively, while in itself it has an absolute signification.
In the
next chapter he proceeds to show this. W. G. T. S.]

"

But it

stance, then there is something in Him as
it were in a subject, and He is not simple, i.e.
such that to Him to be is the same as is anything else that is said concerning Him in
as, for instance, great,
respect to Himself;
omnipotent, good, and whatever of this kind
is not unfitly said of God.
is an impiety to say that God subsists, and is a subject in relation to His own goodness, and that
this goodness is not a substance or rather essence, and that God Himself is not His own
goodness, but that it is in Him as in a subAnd hence it is clear that God is imject.
properly called substance, in order that He
may be understood to be, by the more usual
name essence, which He is truly and proso that perhaps it is right that
perly called;
God alone should be called essence.
For
He is truly alone, because He is unchangeable; and declared this to be His own name
to His servant Moses, when He says, "I am
that I am;" and, "Thus shalt thou say unto
the children of Israel: He who is hath sent
me unto you." 2
However, whether He be
called essence, which He is properly called,
or substance, which He is called improperly,
He is called both in respect to Himself, not
relatively to anything; whence to God to be
is the same thing as to subsist; and so the
Trinity, if one essence, is also one substance.
Perhaps therefore they are more conveniently
called three persons than three substances.

CHAP. 6. WHY WE DO NOT IN THE TRINITY
SPEAK OF ONE PERSON, AND THREE ESSENCES.
WHAT HE OUGHT TO BELIEVE CONCERNING
THE TRINITY WHO DOES NOT RECEIVE WHAT
MAN IS BOTH AFTER THE
IS SAID ABOVE.
IMAGE, AND IS THE IMAGE OF GOD.
11. But lest I should seem to favor ourselves [the Latins], let us make this further
Although they [the Greeks] also,
inquiry.
if they pleased, as they call three substances
three hypostases, so might call three persons
three "prosopa," yet they preferred that word
which, perhaps, was more in accordance with
For the case is
the usage of their language.
the same with the word persons also; for to
God it is not one thing to be, another to be a
person, but it is absolutely the same thing.
For if to be is said in respect to Himself, but
person relatively; in this way we should say
three persons, the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit; just as we speak of three friends, or
three relations, or three neighbors, in that
they are so mutually, not that each one of
them is so in respect to himself.
Wherefore
any one of these is the friend of the other two,

Ex. iii. 14.

I 12

THE WORKS OF ST. AUGUST1X.

[Book VII.

the neighbor, because
or the relation, or
these names have a relative signification.
What then ? Are we to call the Father the person of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, or the
Son the person of the Father and of the Holy
Spirit, or the Holy Spirit the person of the
But neither is the
Father and of the Son ?
word person commonly so used in any case;
nor in this Trinity, when we speak of the person of the Father, do we mean anything else
than the substance of the Father. Wherefore,
as the substance of the Father is the Father
Himself, not as He is the Father, but as He
is, so also the person of the Father is not anything else than the Father Himself; for He is
called a person in respect to Himself, not in
respect to the Son, or the Holy Spirit: just as
He is called in respect to Himself both God,
and great, and good, and just, and anything
else of the kind ; and just as to Him to be is the
same as to be Gcd, or as to be great, or as
to be good, so it is the same thing to Him to
Why, therefore, do
be, as to be a person.
we not call these three together one person,
as one essence and one God, but say three
persons, while we do not say three Gods or
three essences; unless it be because we wish
some one word to serve for that meaning
whereby the Trinity is understood, that we
might not be altogether silent, when asked,
what three, while we confessed that they are
For if essence is the genus, and subthree ?
stance or person the species, as some think,
then I must omit what I just now said, that
they ought to be called three essences, as they
are called three substances or persons ;
as
three horses are called three horses, and the
same are called three animals, since horse is
For in this
the species, animal the genus.
case the species is not spoken of in the plural,
and the genus in the singular, as if we were
to say that three horses were one animal; but
as they are three horses by the special name,
so they are three animals by the generic one.
But if they say that the name of substance or
person does not signify species, but something
singular and individual; so that anyone is not
so called a substance or person as he is called
a man, for man is common to all men, but in
the same manner as he is called this or that
man, as Abraham, as Isaac, as Jacob, or anyone else who, if present, could be pointed out
with the finger : so will the same reason reach
these too. For as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
are called three individuals, so are they called
three men, and three souls. Why then are
both the Father and the Son and the Holy
Spirit, if we are to reason about them also according to genus and species and individual,
not so called three essences, as they are called

three substances or persons? But this, as I said,
I pass over : but I do affirm, that if essence
is a genus, then a single essence has no
species; just as, because animal is a genus, a
single animal has no species.
Therefore the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are not three
species of one essence.
But if essence is a
species, as man is a species, but those are
three which we call substances or persons, then
they have the same species in common, in
such way as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob have
in common the species which is called man ;
not as man is subdivided into Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, so can one man also be subdivided
into several single men; for this is altogether
impossible, since one man is already a single
man. Why then is one essence subdivided
For if esinto three substances or persons ?
ence is a species, as man is, then one essence
is as one man is : or do we, as we say that any
three human beings of the same sex, of the
same constitution of body, of the same mind,
for they are three human
are one nature,
beings, but one nature,
so also say in the
Trinity three substances one essence, or three
persons one substance or essence ?
But this
is somehow a parallel case, since the ancients
also who spoke Latin, before they had these
terms, which have not long come into use,
that is, essence or substance, used for them to
say nature. We do not therefore use these
terms according to genus or species, but as if
according to a matter that is common and the
Just as if three statues were made of
same.
the same goid, we should say three statues
one gold, yet should neither call the gold
genus, and the statues species; nor the gold
species, and the statues individuals.
For no
species goes beyond its own individuals, so
as to comprehend anything external to them.
For when I define what man is, which is a
specific name, every several man that exists
is contained in the same individual definition,
neither does anything belong to it which is
But when I define gold, not
not a man.
statues alone, if they be gold, but rings also,
and anything else that is made of gold, will
and even if nothing were
belong to gold ;
made of it, it would still be called gold; since,
even if there were no gold statues, there will
not therefore be no statues at all.
Likewise
no species goes beyond the definition of its
genus. For when I define animal, since horse
is a species of this genus, every horse is an
animal ; but every statue is not gold.
So, although in the case of three golden statues we
should rightly say three statues, one gold ;
yet we do not so say it, as to understand gold
to be the genus, and the statues to be species.
Therefore neither do we so call the Trinity

Chap. VI.]

ON THE TRINITY.

three persons or substances, one essence and
one God, as though three somethings subsisted out of one matter [leaving a remainder, i.
e.\, although whatever that is, it is unfolded in
these three. For there is nothing else of that
Yet we say
essence besides the Trinity.
three persons of the same essence, or three
persons one essence ; but we do not say three
persons out of the same essence, as though
therein essence were one thing, and person
another, as we can say three statues out of the
same gold ; for there it is one thing to be gold,
another to be statues. And when we say three
men one nature, or three men of the same
nature, they also can be called three men out
of the same nature, since out of the same nature there can be also three other such men.
But in that essence of the Trinity, in no way
can any other person whatever exist out of the
same essence.
Further, in these things, one
man is not as much as three men together ;
and two men are something more than one
man : and in equal statues, three together
amount to more of gold than each singly, and
one amounts to less of gold than two.
But
in God it is not so; for the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Spirit together is not a greater
or the Son
essence than the Father alone
alone; but these three substances or persons,
if they must be so called, together are equal
to each singly: which the natural man does
For he cannot think exnot comprehend.
cept under the conditions of bulk and space,
either small or great, since phantasms or as
it were images of bodies flit about in his
mind.

12. And until he be purged from this
uncleanness, let him believe in the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, one God, alone, great,
omnipotent, good, just, merciful, Creator of
all things visible and invisible, and whatsoever can be worthily and truly said of Him in
proportion to human capacity.
And when he
is told that the Father only is God, let him
not separate from Him the Son or the Holy
Spirit ; for together with Him He is the only
God, together with whom also He is one God;
because, when we are told that the Son also is
the only God, we must needs take it without
any separation of the Father or the Holy
And let him so say one essence, as
Spirit.
not to think one to be either greater or better
than, or in any respect differing from, another.
Yet not that the Father Himself is both Son
and Holy Spirit, or whatever else each is singly called in relation to either of the others ; as
Word, which is not said except of the Son, or
Gift, which is not said except of the Holy
And on this account also they admit
Spirit.
the plural number, as it is written in the Gos-

"

"

in Genesis :

pel, "I and my Father are one." 1 He has
2 and "we are 3 one," accordboth said "one/'
ing to essence, because they are the same God;
" we are," according to relation, because the
Sometimes
one is Father, the other is Son.
also the unity of the essence is left unexpressed, and the relatives alone are mention-
" My Father and I
ed in the plural number :
will come unto him, and make our abode with
We will come, and we will make our
him." 4
abode, is the plural number, since it was said
I and my Father," that is, the Son
before,
and the Father,which terms are used relatively
Sometimes the meaning is
to one another.
Let us
altogether latent, as
make man after our image and likeness." 5
Both let us make and our is said in the plural,
and ought not to be received except as of
For it was not that gods might
relatives.
make, or make after the image and likeness
of gods ; but that the Father, and Son, and
Holy Spirit might make after the image of the
Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, that man
might subsist as the image of God. And God
is the Trinity. But because that image of God
was not made altogether equal to Him, as
being not born of Him, but created by Him;
in order to signify this, he is in such way the
image as that he is
after the image," that
is, he is not made equal by parity, but approaches to Him by a sort of likeness.
For
approach to God is not by interval's of place,
but by likeness, and withdrawal from Him is
are some who
For there
by unlikeness.
draw this distinction, that they will have the
Son to be the image, but man not to be the
But the
image,
" For a man
apostle refutes them, saying,
indeed ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of God." 6
He did not say after the image, but the image.
And this image, since it is elsewhere spoken
of as after the image, is not as if it were said
relatively to the Son, who is the image equal
to the Father ; otherwise he would not say
For how our, when the Son
after our image.
But man
is the image of the Father alone ?
is said to be "
after the image," on account,
as we have said, of the inequality of the likeness; and therefore after our image, that man
might be the image of the Trinity; 7 not equal
to the Trinity as the Son is equal to the
Father, but approaching to it, as has been

but "after the image."

"

- I'num.
5 Gen. i. 26.
"
image

'John x. 30.
4 John xiv. 23.
7 [Augustin would find this

3 Sumi/s.
6 1 Cor. xi. 7.
"
in the ternaries of nature
and the human mind which illustrate the Divine trinality. The
remainder of the treatise is mainly devoted to this abstruse subject; and is one of the most metaphysical pieces of composition in
patristic literature. The exegetical portion of the work ends substantially with the seventh chapter. The remainder is ontological, yet growing out of, and founded upon the biblical data and
results of the first part. W. G. T. S.]

ii4

[Book VII.

For it

said, by a certain likeness ; just as nearness
may in a sense be signified in things distant
from each other, not in respect of place, but
is also said,
of a sort of imitation.
"Be ye transformed by the renewing of your
" Be ye
mind;" 1 to whom he likewise says,
therefore imitators of God as dear children." 2
For it is said to the new man,
which is renewed to the knowledge of God, after the
image of Him that created him."3 Or if we
choose to admit the plural number, in order
to meet the needs of argument, even putting
aside relative terms, that so we may answer in

"

one term when it is asked what three, and say
three substances or three persons; then let no
one think of any bulk or interval, or of any
distance of howsoever little unlikeness, so that
in the Trinity any should be understood to be
even a little less than another, in whatsoever
way one thing can be less than another : in
order that there may be neither a confusion
of persons, nor such a distinction as that there
should be any inequality. And if this cannot
be grasped by the understanding, let it be held
by faith, until He shall dawn in the heart who
"
says by the prophet,
If ye will not believe,
surely ye shall not understand." 4

1 Rom. xii. 2.
3 Col. iii. 10.

Eph. v. 1.

4 Isa. vii. 9.

BOOK VIII.

EXPLAINS AND PROVES THAT NOT ONLY THE FATHER IS NOT GREATER THAN THE SON, BUT
NEITHER ARE BOTH TOGETHER ANYTHING GREATER THAN THE HOLY SPIRIT, NOR ANY TWO
TOGETHER IN THE SAME TRINITY ANYTHING GREATER THAN ONE, NOR ALL THREE TOGETHER
IT IS THEN SHOWN HOW THE NATURE ITSELF
ANYTHING GREATER THAN EACH SEVERALLY.
OF GOD MAY BE UNDERSTOOD FROM OUR UNDERSTANDING OF TRUTH, AND FROM OUR
KNOWLEDGE OF THE SUPREME GOOD, AND FROM THE INNATE LOVE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS,
WHEREBY A RIGHTEOUS SOUL IS LOVED EVEN BY A SOUL THAT IS ITSELF NOT YET RIGHTEOUS.
BUT IT IS URGED ABOVE ALL, THAT THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD IS TO BE .SOUGHT BY LOVE,
WHICH GOD IS SAID TO BE IN THE SCRIPTURES J AND IN THIS LOVE IS ALSO POINTED OUT
THE EXISTENCE OF SOME TRACE OF A TRINITY.

PREFACE.

THE CONCLUSION OF WHAT HAS BEEN
THE RULE TO BE OBSERVED IN
SAID ABOVE.
THE MORE DIFFICULT QUESTIONS OF THE
FAITH.
We have said elsewhere that those things
are predicated specially in the Trinity as belonging severally to each person, which are
predicated relatively the one to the other, as
Father and Son, and the gift of both, the
Holy Spirit; for the Father is not the Trinity,
nor the Son the Trinity, nor the gift the
Trinity: but what whenever each is singly
in respect to themselves, then
spoken of
they are not spoken of as three in the plural
number, but one, the Trinity itself, as the
Father God, the Son God, and the Holy
Spirit God; the Father good, the Son good,
and the Holy Spirit good; and the Father
omnipotent, the Son omnipotent, and the
Holy Spirit omnipotent: yet neither three
Gods, nor three goods, nor three omnipotents, but one God, good, omnipotent, the
Trinity itself; and whatsoever else is said of
them not relatively in respect to each other,
but individually in respect to themselves.
For they are thus spoken of according to
essence, since in them to be is the same as to
be great, as to be good, as to be wise, and
whatever else is said of each person individually therein, or of the Trinity itself, in respect

to themselves. And that therefore they are
called three persons, or three substances, not
in order that any difference of essence may be
understood, but that we may be able to answer
by some one word, should any one ask what
three, or what three things ? And that there is
so great an equality in that Trinity, that not
only the Father is not greater than the Son,
as regards divinity, but neither are the Father
and Son together greater than
the Holy
Spirit; nor is each individual person, whichever it be of the three, less than the Trinity
This is what we have said; and if it
itself.
is handled and repeated frequently, it becomes, no doubt, more familiarly known: yet
some limit, too, must be put to the discussion, and we must supplicate God with most
devout piety, that He will open our understanding, and take away the inclination of
disputing, in order that our minds may discern the essence of the truth, that has neither
Now, therefore, so
bulk nor moveableness.
far as the Creator Himself aids us in His
marvellous mercy, let us consider these subjects, into which we will enter more deeply than
we entered into those which preceded, although they are in truth the same; preserving
the while this rule, that what has not yet been
made clear to our intellect, be nevertheless
not loosened from the firmness of our faith.

n6

[Book VI I L

not

truly is.

CHAP. I.

also more of

truth, whatsoever

IT IS SHOWN BY REASON THAT IN
GOD THREE ARE NOT ANYTHING GREATER
THAN ONE PERSON.
2. For we say that in this Trinity two or
three persons are not anything greater than
one of them; which carnal perception does
not receive, for no other reason except because it perceives as it can the true things
which are created, but cannot discern the
truth itself by which they are created; for if
it could, then the very corporeal light would
in no way be more clear than this which we
For in respect to the substance
have said.
of truth, since it alone truly is, nothing is
greater, unless because it more truly is.
1 But
in respect to whatsoever is intelligible and unchangeable, no one thing is more truly than another, since all alike are unchangeably eternal;
and that which therein is called great, is not
great from any other source than from that
Wherefore, where
by which it
has
magnitude itself is
more of magnitude must needs have more of
truth; whatsoever therefore has not more of
truth, has
magnitude.
Further, whatsoever has more of truth is certainly more true, just as that is greater which
has more of magnitude; therefore in respect
to the substance of truth that is more great
which is more true.
But the Father and the
Son together are not more truly than the
Father singly, or the Son singly.
Both together, therefore, are not anything greater
And since also
than each of them singly.
the Holy Spirit equally is truly, the Father
and Son together are not anything greater
than He, since neither are they more truly.
The Father also and the Holy Spirit together,
since they do not surpass the Son in truth
(for they are not more truly), do not surpass
Him either in magnitude. And so the Son
and the Holy Spirit together are just as great
as 'the Father alone, since they are as truly.
So also the Trinity itself is as great as each
For where truth itseveral person therein.
self is magnitude, that is not more great which
is not more true: since in regard to the essence of truth, to be true is the same as to
be, and to be is the same as to be great;
therefore to be great is the same as to be
And in regard to it, therefore, what is
true.
equally true must needs also be
equally
great.

1 [In this and the following chapter, the meaning of Augustin
" vera" and " vere" are
will be clearer, if the Latin " Veritas ,"
"
really." He is
rendered, occasionally, by
reality,"
endeavoring to prove the equality of the three persons, by the fact
that they are equally real (true), and the degree of their reality
(truth) is the same.
In
common phraseology, truth and reality are synonymous. W. G.
T. S.]

Real being is true being; reality is truth.

: and "

real,'

"

tell

CHAP, 2.

EVERY CORPOREAL CONCEPTION MUST
BE REJECTED, IN ORDER THAT IT MAY BE UNDERSTOOD HOW GOD IS TRUTH.
3. But in respect to bodies, it may be the
case that this gold and that gold may be
equally true [real], but this may be greater
than that, since magnitude is not the same
thing in this case as truth; and it is one thing
So
for it to be gold, another to be great.
also in the nature of the soul; a soul is not
called great in the same respect in which it is
For he, too, has a true [real]
called true.
soul who has not a great soul; since the essence of body and soul is not the essence of
the truth [reality] itself;
as is the Trinity,
one God, alone, great, true,
truthful, the
Of whom if we endeavor to think, so
truth.
far as He Himself permits and grants, let us
not think of any touch or embrace in local
space, as if of three bodies, or of any compactness of conjunction, as fables
of
three-bodied Geryon; but let whatsoever may
occur to the mind, that is of such sort as to
be greater in three than in each singly, and
less in one than in two, be rejected without
for so everything corporeal is
any doubt;
But also in spiritual things let
rejected.
nothing changeable that may have occurred to
the mind be thought of God.
For when we
aspire from this depth to that height, it
is a
step towards no small knowledge, if, before
we can know what God is, we can already
know what He is not.
P'or certainly He is
neither earth nor heaven; nor, as it were,
earth and heaven; nor any such thing as we
see in the heaven; nor any such thing as we
do not see, but which perhaps is in heaven.
Neither if you were to magnify in the imagination of your thought the light of the sun as
much as you are able, either that it may be
greater, or that it may be brighter, a thousand
times as much, or times without number;
neither is this God. Neither as 2 we think of the
pure angels as spirits animating celestial bodies, and changing and dealing with them after
the will by which they serve God; not even if
all, and there are
thousands of thousands," 3
were brought together into one, and became
one; neither is any such thing God.
Neither
if you were to think of the same spirits as
a thing indeed most difficult
without bodies
Behold and see, if
for carnal thought to do.
thou canst, O soul pressed down by the corruptible body, and weighed down by earthly
thoughts, many and various; behold and see,
if thou canst, that God is truth. 4
written that "God is light;'' 5 not in such

For it

"

is

2 Read si for sic it t, i/ior as.
3 Apoc. v. n.

4 Wisd. ix. 15.

Bened. ed.

5 1 John i. 5.

Chap. 1 1 1. J

ON THE TRINITY.

truth

Ask not what is

way as these eyes see, but in such way as the
heart sees, when it is said, He is truth [real-
[reality] ;
ity].
for immediately the darkness of corporeal
images and the clouds of phantasms will
put themselves in the way, and will disturb
that calm which at the first twinkling shone
forth to thee, when I said truth [reality].
See that thou remainest, if thou canst, in that
first twinkling with which thou art dazzled,
as it were, by a flash, when it is said to thee,
But thou canst not; thou
Truth [Reality].
wilt glide back into those usual and earthly
And what weight, pray, is
it that
things.
will cause thee so to glide back, unless it be
the bird-lime of the stains of appetite thou
hast contracted, and the errors of thy wandering from the right path ?

CHAP. 3. HOW GOD MAY BE KNOWN TO BE THE
THE MIND DOES NOT BECOME

CHIEF GOOD.
GOOD UNLESS BY TURNING TO GOD.

4. Behold again, and see if

thou canst.
Thou certainly dost not love anything except
what is good, since good is the earth, with
the loftiness of its mountains, and the due
measure of its hills, and the level surface of
its plains; and good is an estate that is pleasant and fertile; and good is a house that is
arranged in due proportions, and is spacious
and bright; and good are animal and animate
bodies; and good is
air that is temperate
and salubrious; and good is food that is
agreeable and fit for health; and good is
health, without pains or lassitude; and good is
the countenance of man that is disposed in fit
proportions, and is cheerful in look, and
bright in color; and good is the mind of a
friend, with the sweetness of agreement, and
with the confidence of love; and good is a righteous man; and good are riches, since they
are readily useful; and good is the heaven, with
its sun, and moon, and stars; and good are
the angels, by their holy obedience; and
good is discourse that sweetly teaches and
suitably admonishes the hearer; and good is
a poem that is harmonious in its numbers and
weighty in its sense. And why add yet more
and more ?
This thing is good and that
good, but take away this and that, and regard
good itself if thou canst; so wilt thou see
God, not good by a good that is other than
For in
Himself, but the good of all good.
all these good things, whether those which
I have mentioned, or any else that are to be
discerned or thought, we couTd not say that
one was better than another, when we judge
truly, unless a conception of the good itself
had been impressed upon us, such that ac-

one whereby it

cording to it we might both approve some
things as good, and prefer one good to anSo God is to be loved, not this and
other.
that good, but the good itself. For the good
that must be sought for the soul is not one
above which it
is to fly by judging, but to
which it is to cleave by loving; and what can
this be except God ?
Not a good mind, or a
good angel, or the good heaven, but the good
For perhaps what I wish to say may
good.
be more easily perceived in this way.
For
when, for instance, a mind is called good, as
there are two words, so from these words I
understand two things
is
mind, and another whereby it is good. And
itself had no share in making itself a mind,
for there was nothing as yet to make itself to
be anything; but to make itself to be a good
mind, I see, must be brought about by the
is mind is
will: not because that by which it
for how else is it
not itself anything good;
already called, and most truly called, better
than the body ?
but it
is not yet called a
good mind, for this reason, that the action of
the will still is wanted, by which it is to become more excellent; and if it has neglected
is justly blamed, and is rightly
this, then it
For it then differs
called not a good mind.
from the mind which does perform this; and
since the latter is praiseworthy, the former
doubtless, which does
is
But when it does this of set purblameable.
pose, and becomes a good mind, it yet cannot
attain to being so unless it turn itself to something which itself is not. And to what can it
turn itself that it may become a good mind,
except to the good which it loves, and seeks,
And if it turns itself back
and obtains ?
again from this, and becomes not good, then
by the very act of turning away from the
it from
good, unless that good remain in
which it turns away, it cannot again turn itself back thither if it should wish to amend.

not perform, it

5. Wherefore there would be no changeable
goods, unless there were the unchangeable
Whenever then thou art told of this
good.
good thing and that good thing, which things
can also in other respects be called not good,
if thou canst put aside those things which are
good by the participation of the good, and
discern that good itself by the participation
of which they are good (for when this or that
good thing is spoken or, thou understandest
together with them the good itself also): if,
then, I say thou canst remove these things,
then
and canst discern the good in itself,
And if thou
thou wilt have discerned God.
shalt cleave to Him with love, thou shalt be
But whereas other things
forthwith blessed.
are not loved, except because they are good,

n8

[Book VIII.

be ashamed, in cleaving to them, not to love
That
the good itself whence they are good.
also, which is a mind, only because it
is a
is not yet also good by the
mind, while it
turning itself to the unchangeable good, but,
as I said, is only a mind; whenever it so
pleases us, as that we prefer it even, if we
understand aright, to all corporeal" light, does
not please us in itself, but in that skill by
For it is thence approved
which it was made.
is seen to have been to
as made, wherein it
This is truth, and simple good:
be made.
for it is nothing else than the good itself, and
For no
for this reason also the chief good.
good can be diminished or increased, except
that which is good from some other good.
Therefore the mind turns itself, in order to
be good, to that by which it comes to be a
Therefore the will is then in harmony
mind.
with nature, so that the mind maybe perfected
in good, when that good is loved by the turning of the will to it, whence that other good
also comes which is not lost by the turning
For by turning itaway of the will from it.
self from the chief good, the mind loses the
being a good mind; but it does not lose the
And this, too, is a good albeing a mind.
The
ready, and one better than the body.
will, therefore, loses that which the will obFor the mind already was, that could
tains.
wish to be turned to that from which it was:
but that as yet was not, that could wish to be
And herein is our [supreme]
before it was.
good, when we see whether the thing ought
to be or to have been, respecting which we
comprehend that it ought to be or to have
been, and when we see that the thing could
not have been unless it ought to have been,
of which we also do not comprehend in what
manner it ought to have been.
This good
then is not far from every one of us: for in it
we live, and move, and have our being.

CHAP. 4.

GOD MUST FIRST BE KNOWN BY AN

UNERRING FAITH, THAT HE MAY BE LOVED.
6. But it is by love that we must stand firm
to this and cleave to this, in order that we
may enjoy the presence of that by which we
are, and in the absence of which we could not
" we walk as yet by faith,
For as
be at all.
2 we certainly do not yet see
and not by sight,"
God, as the same [apostle] saith,
face to
" 3 whom however we shall never see,
face:
unless now already we love.
But who loves
what he does not know ?
For it is possible
something maybe known and not loved: but I
is possible that what is not
ask whether it
known can be loved; since if
it cannot, then

"

"

no one loves God before he knows Him. And
what is it to know God except to behold Him
and steadfastly perceive Him with the mind ?
For He is not a body to be searched out by
But before also that we have
carnal eyes.
power to behold and to perceive God, as He
can be beheld and perceived, which is permitted to the pure in heart; for
blessed are
" *
the pure in heart, for they shall see God;
except He is loved by faith, it will not be possible for the heart to be cleansed, in order
that it may be apt and meet to see Him. For
where are there those three, in order to build
up which in the mind the whole apparatus of
the divine Scriptures has been raised up, namely Faith, Hope, and Charity, 5 except in a mind
believing what it does not yet see, and hoping
Even He thereand loving what it believes ?
fore who is not known, but yet is believed,
can be loved. But indisputably we must take
care, lest the mind believing that which it does
not see, feign to itself something which is not,
and hope for and love that which is false.
For in that case, it will not be charity out of
a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and
of faith unfeigned, which is the end of the
commandment, as the same apostle says.

7. But it must needs be, that, when by
-reading or hearing of them we believe in any
corporeal things which we have not seen, the
mind frames for itself something under bodily
features and forms, just as it may occur to
our thoughts; which either is not true, or even
if it be true, which can most rarely happen,
yet this is of no benefit to us to believe in by
faith, but it is useful for some other purpose,
For who
which is intimated by means of it.
is there that reads or hears what the Apostle
Paul has written, or what has been written of
him, that does not imagine to himself the
countenance both of the apostle himself, and of
all those whose names are there mentioned ?
And whereas, among such a multitude of men
to whom these books are known, each imagines
in a different way those bodily features and
forms, it is assuredly uncertain which it is that
imagines them more nearly and more like the
Nor, indeed, is our faith busied
reality.
therein with the bodily countenance of those
men; but only that by the grace of God they
so lived and so acted as that Scripture witis which it
is both useful to
nesses:
believe, and which must not be despaired of,
For even the counteand must be sought.
nance of our Lord Himself in the flesh is variously fancied by the diversity of countless
imaginations, which yet was one, whatever it
Nor in our faith which we have of our
was.

this it

1 Acts xvii. 27, 28.

2 2 Cor. v. 7.

3 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

4 Matt. v. 8.

5 1 Cor. xiii. 13.

6 1 Tim. i. 5.

Chap. V.]

ON THE TRINITY.

II 9

Lord Jesus Christ, is that wholesome which
the mind imagines for itself, perhaps far other
than the reality, but that which we think of
man according to his kind: for we have a notion of human nature implanted in us, as it
were by rule, according to which we know
forthwith, that whatever such thing we see is
a man or the form of a man.

CHAP. 5. HOW THE TRINITY MAY BE LOVED
THOUGH UNKNOWN.

Our conception is framed according to this
notion, when we believe that God was made
man for us, as an example of humility, and to
show the love of God towards us.
For this
it is which it is good for us to believe, and to
retain firmly and unshakenly in our heart, that
the humility by which God was born of a
woman, and was led to death through contumelies so great by mortal men, is the chiefest remedy by which the swelling of our pride
may be cured, and the profound mystery by
which the bond of sin may be loosed. So also,
because we know what omnipotence is, we believe concerning the omnipotent God in the
power of His miracles and of His resurrection,
and we frame conceptions respecting actions
of this kind, according to the species and
genera of things that are either ingrafted in
us by nature, or gathered by experience, that
For neither
our faith may not be feigned.
do we know the countenance of the Virgin
Mary; from whom, untouched by a husband,
nor tainted in the birth itself, He was wonNeither have we seen what
derfully born.
were the lineaments of the body of Lazarus;
nor yet Bethany; nor the sepulchre, and that
stone which He commanded to be removed
when He raised Him from the dead; nor the
new tomb cut out in the rock, whence He
Himself arose; nor the Mount of Olives, from
whence He ascended into heaven.
And, in
short, whoever of us have not seen these
things, know not whether they are as we conceive them to be, nay judge them more probFor when the aspect either
ably not to be so.
of a place, or a man, or of any other body,
which we happened to imagine before we saw
it, turns out to be the same when it occurs to
our sight as it was when it occurred to our
mind, we are moved with no little wonder.
So scarcely and hardly ever does it happen.
And yet we believe those things most steadfastly, because we imagine them according to a
special and general notion, of which we are cerFor we believe our Lord Jesus Christ to
tain.
be born of a virgin who was called Mary.
But
what a virgin is, or what it is to be born, and
what is a proper name, we do not believe, but

And whether that was the
certainly know.
countenance of Mary which occurred to the
mind in speaking of those things or recollecting them, we neither know at all, nor believe.
It is allowable, then, in this case to say without
violation of the faith, perhaps she had such
or such a countenance, perhaps she had not:
but no one could say without violation of the
Christian faith, that perhaps Christ was born
of a virgin.

8. Wherefore, since we desire to understand
the eternity, and equality, and unity of the
Trinity, as much as is permitted us, but ought
to believe before we understand; and since
we must watch carefully, that our faith be not
feigned; since we must have the fruition of
the same Trinity, that we may live blessedly;
but if we have believed anything false of it,
our hope would be worthless, and our charity
not pure: how then can we love, by believing,
that Trinity which we do not know ?
Is it according to the special or general notion, according to which we love the Apostle Paul ?
In whose case, even if he was not of that
countenance which occurs to us when we think
of him (and this we do not know at all), yet
we know what a man is.
For not to go far
away, this we are; and it is manifest he, too,
was this, and that his soul joined to his body
lived after the manner of mortals.
Therefore we believe this of him, which we find in
ourselves, according to the species or genus
under which all human nature alike is comWhat then do we know, whether
prised.
specially or generally, of that most excellent
Trinity, as if there were many such trinities,
some of which we had learned by experience,
so that we may believe that Trinity, too, to
have been such as they, through the rule of
similitude, impressed upon us, whether a
special or a general notion; and thus love also
that thing which we believe and do not yet
know, from the parity of the thing which we
do know ?
But this certainly is not so. Or is
it that, as we love in our Lord Jesus Christ,
that He rose from the dead, although we never
saw any one rise from thence, so we can believe in and love the Trinity which we do not
see, and the like of which we never have seen ?
But we certainly know what it
is to die, and
what it is to live; because we both live, and
from time to time have seen and experienced
And what else
both dead and dying persons.
is it to rise again, except to live again, that is,
to return to life from death? When, therefore, we say and believe that there is a Trinity, we know what a Trinity is, because we
know what three are; but this is not what we
For we can easily have this whenever
love.
we will, to pass over other things, by just hold-

[Book VIII.

Or do we indeed love,
ing up three fingers.
not every trinity, but the Trinity, that is
God ? We love then in the Trinity, that it is
God: but we never saw or knew any other
God, because God is One; He alone whom we
have not yet seen, and whom we love by beBut the question is, from what likelieving.
ness or comparison of known things can we
believe, in order that we may love God, whom
we do not yet know ?

CHAP. 6. HOW THE MAN NOT YET RIGHTEOUS
CAN KNOW THE RIGHTEOUS MAN WHOM HE
LOVES.

Assuredly not; for if

9. Return then with me, and let us consider why we love the apostle.
Is it at all on account of his human kind, which we know
right well, in that we believe him to have been
a man ?
it were so, he
now is not him whom we love, since he is no
longer that man, for his soul is separated
from his body. But we believe that which we
love in him to be still living, for we love his
righteous mind. From what general or special rule then, except that we know both what
a mind is, and what it is to be righteous ? And
we say, indeed, not unfitly, that we therefore
know what a mind is, because we too have a
For neither did we ever see it with
mind.
our eyes, and gather a special or general
notion from the resemblance of more minds
than one, which we had seen; but rather, as
I have said before, because we too have it.
For what is known so intimately, and so perceives itself to be itself, as that by which also
all other things are perceived, that is, the
mind itself ? For we recognize the movements
of bodies also, by which we perceive that
others live besides ourselves, from the resemblance of ourselves ; since we also so move
our body in living as we observe those bodies
For even when a living body
to be moved.
is moved, there is no way opened to our eyes
to see the mind, a thing which cannot be seen
by the eyes ; but we perceive something to be
contained in that bulk, such as is contained
in ourselves, so as to move in like manner ourown bulk, which is the life and the soul.
Neither is this, as it were, the property of
human foresight and reason, since brute animals also perceive that not only they themselves live, but also other brute animals interchangeably, and the one the other, and that we
ourselves do so.
Neither do they see our
souls, save from the movements of the body,
and that immediately and most easily by some
Therefore we both know
natural agreement.
the mind of any one from our own, and believe also from our own of him whom we do

For not only do we perceive that
not know.
there is a mind, but we can also know what a
mind is, by reflecting upon our own : for we
But whence do we know what
have a mind.
a righteous man is ?
For we said above that
we love the apostle for no other reason except
that he is a righteous mind. We know, then,
what a righteous man also is, just as we know
But what a mind is, as has
what a mind is.
been said, we know from ourselves, for there
is a mind in us.
But whence do we know
what a righteous man is, if we are not rightBut if no one but he who is righteous
eous ?
knows what is a righteous man, no one but a
righteous man loves a righteous man; for one
cannot love him whom one believes to be righteous, for this very reason that one does believe
him to be righteous, if one does not know
what it is to be righteous ; according to that
which we have shown above, that no one
loves what he believes and does not see, except by some rule of a general or special noAnd if for this reason no one but a
tion.
righteous man loves a righteous man, how will
any one wish to be a righteous man who is
For no one wishes to be that
not yet so ?
which he does not love.
But, certainly, that
he who is not righteous may be so, it is necessary that he should wish to be righteous ;
and in order that he may wish to be righteous,
he loves the righteous man.
Therefore, even
he who is not yet righteous, loves the rightBut he cannot love the righteous
eous man. 1
man, who is ignorant what a righteous man
Accordingly, even he who is not yet
righteous man
Does
he see it with his eyes ?
Is any corporeal
thing righteous, as it is white, or black, or
square, or round ? Who could say this ?
Yet
with one's eyes one has seen nothing except
But there is nothing rightcorporeal things.
eous in a man except the mind; and when a
man is called a righteous man. he is called so
from the mind, not from the body. For righteousness is in some sort the beauty of the
mind, by which men are beautiful; very many
too who are misshapen and deformed in body.
And as the mind is not seen with the eyes, so
neither is its beauty. From whence then does
he who is not yet righteous know what a righteous man is, and love the righteous man that
he may become righteous ? Do certain signs
shine forth by the motion of the body, by

Whence then does he know this ?

righteous, knows what a

is.

is.

1 [The

" wish

" and " love

" which Augustin here attributes
to the non-righteous man is not true and spiritual, but selfish.
In
chapter vii. 10, he speaks of true love as distinct from that kind
of desire which is a mere wish. The latter he calls cupiditas.
" That is to be called love which is true, otherwise it is desire (1 upiditas): and so those who desire (cupidi) are improperly said to
love (dilzgere), just as they who love (diligunt) are said improperly to desire (c upcre) ." W'. G. T. S.]

Chap. VI. J

ON THE TRINITY.

Therefore he does know.

which this or that man is manifested to be
But whence does any one know
righteous ?
that these are the signs of a righteous mind,
when he is wholly ignorant what it
is to be
But
righteous ?
whence do we know what it is to.be righteous,
If we
even when we are not yet righteous ?
know from without ourselves, we know it by
some bodily thing. But this is not a thing of the
Therefore we know in ourselves what
body.
For I find this nowhere
it is to be righteous.
else when I seek to utter it, except within
myself ; and if I ask another what it is to
be righteous, he seeks within himself what
to answer ; and whosoever hence can answer
truly, he has found within himself what to
answer. And when indeed I wish to speak of
Carthage, I seek within myself what to speak,
and I find within myself a notion or image of
Carthage ; but I have received this through
the body, that is, through the perception of
the body, since I have been present in that city
in the body, and I saw and perceived it, and
retained it in my memory, that I might find
within myself a word concerning it, whenever
For its word is
I might wish to speak of it.
the image itself of it in my memory, not that
sound of two syllables when Carthage is
named, or even when that name itself
is
thought of silently from time to time, but that
which I discern in my mind, when I utter that
dissyllable with my voice, or even before I
So also, when I wish to speak of
utter it.
Alexandria, which I never saw, an image of it
is present with me. For whereas I had heard
from many and had believed that city to be
great, in such way as it could be told me, I
formed an image of it in my mind as I was
able ; and this is with me its word when I wish
to speak of it, before I utter with my voice
the five syllables which make the name that
almost every one knows. And yet if I could
bring forth that image from my mind to the
eyes of men who know Alexandria, certainly all
either would say, It is not it
; or if they said,
It is, I should greafly wonder ; and as I gazed
at it in my mind, that is, at the image which
was as it were its picture, I should yet not
know it to be it, but should believe those who
retained an image they had seen.
But I do
not so ask what it is to be righteous, nor do
I so find it, nor do I so gaze upon it, when I
utter it ; neither am I so approved when I am
heard, nor do I so approve when I hear ; as
though I have seen such a thing with my eyes,
or learned it by some perception of the body,
or heard it from those who had so learned it.
For when I say, and say knowingly,
that
mind is righteous which knowingly and of purpose assigns to every one his due in life and

behavior, I do not think of anything absent, as
Carthage, or imagine it as I am able, as Alexandria, whether it be so or not ; but I discern
something present, and I discern it within
myself, though I myself am not that which I
discern ; and many if they hear will approve
it. And whoever hears me and knowingly approves, he too discerns this same thing within
himself, even though he himself be not what
But when a righteous man says
he discerns.
this, he discerns and says that which he himAnd whence also does he discern it,
self is.
But this is not to be
except within himself ?
wondered at ; for whence should he discern
himself except within himself ? The wonderful thing is, that the mind should see within
itself that which it has seen nowhere else,
and should see truly, and should see the very
true righteous mind, and should itself be a
mind, and yet not a righteous mind, which
nevertheless it sees within itself.
Is there
another mind that is righteous in a mind that
is not yet righteous ? Or if there is not, what
docs it there see when it sees and says what
is a righteous mind, nor sees it anywhere else
itself, when itself is not a righteous
but in
mind ?
Is that which it sees an inner truth
present to the mind which has power to beYet all have not that power ; and
hold it ?
they who have power to behold it, are not all
also that which they behold, that is, they are
not also righteous minds themselves, just
as they are able to see and to say what is
And whence will they
a righteous mind.
be able to be
so, except by cleaving to
that very same form itself which they behold, so that from thence they may be formed and may be righteous minds ; not only
discerning and saying that the mind is righteous which knowingly and of purpose assigns
to every one that which is his due in life and
behavior, but so likewise that they themselves
may live
in
character, by assigning to every one that which
is his due, so as to owe no man anything, but
to love one another. 1 And whence can any
one cleave to that form but by loving it ?
Why then do we love another whom we believe
to be righteous, and do not love that form itself wherein we see what is a righteous mind,
that we also may be able to be righteous ? Is
it that unless we loved that also, we should not
love him at all, whom through it we love ; but
whilst we are not righteous, we love that form
too little to allow of our being able to be
righteous ? The man therefore who is believed
to be righteous, is loved through that form
and truth which he who loves discerns and

righteously and be righteous

i Rom. xiii. 8.

[Book VIII.

understands within himself; but that very form
and truth itself cannot be loved from any
For we do not find
other source than itself.
any other such thing besides itself, so that by
believing we might love it when it is unknown,
in that we here already know another such
For whatsoever of such a kind one
thing.
may have seen, is itself ; and there is not any
other such thing, since itself alone is such as
itself is. He therefore who loves men, ought
to love them either because they are righteous, or that they may become righteous.
For so also he ought to love himself, either
because he is righteous, or that he may become righteous ; for in this way he loves his
For
neighbor as himself without any risk.
he who loves himself otherwise, loves himself
wrongfully, since he loves himself to this end
that he may be unrighteous ; therefore to this
end that he may be wicked ; and hence it
follows next that he does not love himself ;
for, "He who loveth iniquity,
1 hateth his own
soul." 2

CHAP. 7.

OF TRUE LOVE, BY WHICH WE ARRIVE AT THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE TRINITY.
GOD IS TO BE SOUGHT, NOT OUTWARDLY, BY
SEEKING TO DO WONDERFUL THINGS WITH
THE ANGELS, BUT INWARDLY, BY IMITATING
THE PIETY OF GOOD ANGELS.
10. No other thing, then, is chiefly to be regarded in this inquiry, which we make concerning the Trinity and concerning knowing
God, except what is true love, nay, rather
For that is to be called love
what is love.
which is true, otherwise it is desire ; and so
those who desire are said improperly to love,
just as they who love are said improperly to
But this is true love, that cleaving
desire.
to the truth we may live righteously, and so
may despise all mortal things in comparison
with the love of men, whereby we wish them
For so we should be preto live righteously.
pared also to die profitably for our brethren,
as our Lord Jesus Christ taught us by His exFor as there are two commandments
ample.
on which hang all the Law and the prophets,
love of God and love of our neighbor ;
3 not
without cause the Scripture mostly puts one
for both : whether it be of God only, as is
" For we know that all things work
that text,
together for good to them that love God;" 4
"
But if any man love God, the
and again,
same is known of Him;" 5 and that, "Because the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto
" 6 and many other passages ; because he
us ;

1 Violence A. V.
3 Matt. xxii. 37-40.
5 1 Cor. viii. 3.

zPs. xi.6.
4 Rom. viii. 28
6 Rom. v. 5.

"

who loves God must both needs do what God
has commanded, and loves Him just in such
proportion as he does so ; therefore he must
needs also love his neighbor, because God has
commanded it : or whether it be that Scripture only mentions the love of our neighbor,
Bear ye one another's buras in that text,
" 7 and
dens, and so fulfill the law of Christ ;
" For all the law is fufilled in one word,
again,
even in this, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
8 and in the Gospel^ "All things
thyself;"
whatsoever ye would that men should do to
you, do ye even so to them ; for this is the
Law and the prophets." 9 And many other
passages occur in the
in
which only the love of our neighbor seems
to be commanded for perfection, while the
love of God is passed over in silence ; whereas the Law and the prophets hang on both
But this, too, is because he who
precepts.
loves his neighbor must needs also love above
all else love itself. But " God is love ; and he
love, dwelleth in God." r>
that dwelleth in
Therefore he must needs above all else love
God.

writings,

sacred

11. Wherefore they who seek God through
those Powers which rule over the world, or
parts of the world, are removed and cast
away far from Him; not by intervals of space,
but by difference of affections: for they endeavor to find a path outwardly, and forsake
their own inward things, within which is God.
Therefore, even although they may either
have heard some holy heavenly Power, or in
some way or another may have thought of it,
yet they rather covet its deeds at which human weakness marvels, but do not imitate
the piety by which divine rest is acquired.
For they prefer, through pride, to be able to
do that which an angel does, more than,
through devotion, to be that which an angel
For no holy being rejoices in his own
power, but in His from whom he has the
power which he fitly can have; and he knows
it to be more a mark of power to be united
to the Omnipotent by a pious will, than to be
able, by his own power and will, to do what
they may tremble at who are not able to do
Therefore the Lord Jesus
such things.
Christ Himself, in doing such things, in order
that He might teach better things to those
who marvelled at them, and might turn those
who were intent and in doubt about unusual
temporal things to eternal and inner things,
" Come unto me, all ye that labor and
says,
are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest.
Take my yoke upon you." And He does
not say, Learn of me, because I raise those

is.

7 Gal. vi. 2.
9 Matt. vii. 12.

8 Gal. v. 14.
10 1 John iv. 6.

Chap. VIII.]

ON THE TRINITY

who have been dead four days; but He says,
''Learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in
For humility, which is most solid,
heart."
is more powerful and safer than pride, that
And so He goes on to say,
is most inflated.
" And ye shall find rest unto your souls,"
" 3 and "God
for "Love 2
is not puffed up;
is Love;" 4 and "such as be faithful in love
rest in 5 Him," 6 called back from the
shall
din which is without to silent joys.
Behold,
" God is Love: "
why do we go forth and run
to the heights of the heavens and the lowest
parts of the earth, seeking Him who is within
us, if we wish to be with Him ?

CHAP. 8.

THAT HE WHO LOVES HIS BROTHER,
LOVES GOD ; EECAUSE HE LOVES LOVE ITSELF,
WHICH IS OF GOD, AND IS GOD.

In

together

12. Let no one say, I do not know what I
Let him love his brother, and he will
love.
For he knows the love
love the same love.
with which he loves, more than the brother
whom he loves.
So now he can know God
more than he knows his
brother:
clearly
known more, because more present; known
more, because more within him; known more,
Embrace the love of
because more certain.
That is love
God, and by love embrace God.
itself, which associates
all good
angels and all the servants of God by the
bond of sanctity, and joins together us and
them mutually with ourselves, and joins us
subordinately to Himself.
proportion,
therefore, as we are healed from the swelling
of pride, in such proportion are we more
filled with love; and with what is he full, who
is full of love, except with God? Well, but
you will say, I see love, and, as far as I am
able, I gaze upon it with my mind, and I besaying, that "God is
lieve the Scripture,
love; and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth
in God;" 7 but when I see love, I do not see
Nay, but thou dost see the
in it the Trinity.
But if I can I will
Trinity if thou seest love.
put you in mind, that thou mayest see that
thou seest it; only let itself be present, that
we may be moved by love to something good.
Since, when we love love, we love one who
loves something, and that on account of this
very thing, that he does love
something;
therefore what does love love, that love itself
For that is not love
also may be loved ?
But if it loves itself it
which loves nothing.
must love something, that it may love itself
For as a word indicates something,
as love.
and indicates also itself, but does not indicate

is

set

brotherly

this same brotherly love

itself to be a word, unless it indicates that it
does indicate something; so love also loves
indeed itself, but except it love itself as loving
What
something, it loves itself not as love.
therefore does love love, except that which
But this, to begin from
we love with love ?
that which is nearest to us, is our brother.
And listen how greatly the Apostle John
" He that loveth
commends brotherly love:
his brother abideth in the light, and there is
none occasion of stumbling in him." 8
It
is manifest that he placed the perfection of
righteousness in the love of our brother; for he
certainly is perfect, in whom "there is no occasion of stumbling." And yet he seems to have
passed by the love of God in silence; which
he never would have done, unless because
he intends God to be understood in brotherly
For in this same epistle, a little
love itself.
further on, he says most plainly thus: "Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of
God; and every one that loveth is born of
God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not,
And
knoweth not God; for God is love."
this passage declares sufficiently and plainly,
that
itself (for
love by which we love
that
is
forth by so great aueach other)
thority, not only to be from God, but also
When, therefore, we love our
to be God.
brother from love, we love our brother from
God ; neither can it be that we do not love above
all else that same love by which we love our
brother: whence it may be gathered that
these two commandments cannot exist unless
For since "God is love,"
interchangeably.
he who loves love certainly loves God; but he
must needs love love, who loves his brother.
" For he that
And so a little after he says,
loveth not his brother whom he hath seen,
how can he love God whom he hath not
9 because the reason that he does not
seen
see God is, that he does not love his brother.
For he who does not love his brother, abideth
not in love; and he who abideth not in love,
abideth not in God, because God is
love.
Further, he who abideth not in God, abideth
not in light; for "God is light, and in Him
is no darkness at all." 10 He therefore who
abideth not in light, what wonder is
if he
does not see light, that is, does not see God,
But he sees his
because he is in darkness ?
brother with human sight, with which God
But if he loved with spiritual
cannot be seen.
love him whom he sees with human sight, he
would see God, who is love itself, with the
inner sight by which He can be seen.
Therefore he who does not love his brother whom

"

it

?

1 Matt. xi. 28, 29.
4 1 John iv. 8.
6 Wisd. iii. 9.

= Chanty. A.V.
5 Abide with. A.V.
7 1 John iv. 16.

3 1 Cor. xiii. 4.

8 1 John ii. 10.

9 1 John iv. 7, 8, 20.

10 1 John i. 5.

[Book VIII.

he sees, how can he love God, whom on that
account he does not see, because God is love,
which he has not who does not love his broNeither let that further question disther?
turb us, how much of love we ought to spend
upon our brother, and how much upon God:
incomparably more upon God than upon
ourselves, but upon our brother as much as
upon ourselves; and we love ourselves so
much the more, the more we love God.
Therefore we love God and our neighbor
from one and the same love; but we love
God for the sake of God, and ourselves and
our neighbors for the sake of God.

CHAP. 9.

OUR LOVE OF THE RIGHTEOUS IS
KINDLED FROM LOVE ITSELF OF THE UNCHANGEABLE FORM OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.

"

13. For why is it, pray, that we burn when
Behold, now is the acwe hear and read,
cepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation: giving no offense in anything, that the
ministry be not blamed: but in all things approving ourselves as the ministers of God, in
much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in
distresses, in stripes,
in imprisonments, in
tumults, in labors, in watchings, in fastings;
by pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering,
by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the power
of God, by the armor of righteousness on the
right hand and on the left, by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report: as deceivers, and yet true; as unknown, and yet
well known; as dying, and, behold, we live;
as chastened, and not killed; as sorrowful, yet
alway rejoicing; as poor, yet making many
as having nothing, and yet possessing
rich;
" z Why is it that we are inflamed
all things ?
with love of the Apostle Paul, when we read
these things, unless that we believe him so to
But we do not believe that the
have lived ?
ministers of God ought so to live because we
have heard it from any one, but because we
behold it inwardly within ourselves, or rather
above ourselves, in the truth itself.
Him,
therefore, whom we believe to have so lived,
And except
we love for that which we see.
we loved above all else that form which we
discern as alwavs steadfast and unchangeable,
we should not for that reason love him, because we hold fast in our belief that his life,
when he was living in the flesh, was adapted
But someto, and in harmony with, this form.

1 2 Cor. vi. 2-10.

how we are stirred up the more to the love of
this form itself, through the belief by which
we believe some one to have so lived; and to
the hope by which we no more at all despair,
that we, too, are able so to live; we who are
men, from this fact itself, that some men have
so lived, so that we both desire this more ardently, and pray for it more confidently.
So
both the love of that form, according to which
they are believed to have lived, makes the life
of these men themselves to be loved by us;
and their life thus believed stirs up a more
burning love towards that same form; so that
the more ardently we love God, the more certainly and the more calmly do we see Him,
because we behold in God the unchangeable
form of righteousness, according to which we
judge that man ought to live.
Therefore faith
avails to the knowledge and to the love of God,
not as though of one altogether unknown, or
altogether not loved; but so that thereby He
may be known more clearly, and loved more
steadfastly.

CHAP. IO.

THERE ARE THREE THINGS IN

LOVE, AS IT WERE A TRACE OF THE TRINITY.

14. But what is love or charity, which divine Scripture so greatly praises and proBut love
claims, except the love of good ?
is of some one that loves, and with love someBehold, then, there are three
thing is loved.
things: he that loves, and that which is loved,
and love.
What, then, is love, except a certain life which couples or seeks to couple together some two things, namely, him that
loves, and that which is loved ? And this
is so even in outward and carnal loves.
But
that we may drink in something more pure
and clear, let us tread down the flesh and asWhat does the mind love
cend to the mind.
in a friend except the mind ?
There, then,
also are three things: he that loves, and that
which is loved, and love.
It remains to ascend also from hence, and to seek those
things which are above, as far as is given to
man.
But here for a little while let our purpose rest, not that it may think itself to have
found already what it seeks; but just as usually
the place has first to be found where anything
is to be sought, while the thing itself is not
yet found, but we have only found already
where to look for it; so let it suffice to have
said thus much, that we may have, as it were,
the hinge of some starting-point, whence to
weave the rest of our discourse.

BOOK IX.
THAT A KIND OF TR,N,TV EX.STS IN MAN, WHO IS THE .MAGE OF GOD, VIZ. THE MIND, AND THE
KNOWLEDGE WHEREWITH THE MIND KNOWS ITSELF, AND THE LOVE WHEREWITH IT LOVES
^Z"self AND ITS OWN knowledge; AND THESE THREE ARE SHOWN TO BE MUTUALLY
EQUAL, AND OF ONE ESSENCE.

CHAP. x

IN WHAT WAY WE MUST INQUIRE

"

CONCERNING THE TRINITY.
i We certainly seek a trinity,

" Seek God," he says,

not any
trinity, but that Trinity which is God, and
Let
the true and supreme and only God.
my hearers then wait, for we are still seeking.
finds fault with such a
And no one justly
search, if at least he who seeks that which
either to know or to utter is most difficult, is
But whosoever either
steadfast in the faith.
sees or teaches better, finds fault quickly and
iustly with any one who confidently affirms
and
concerning it.
1 and lest any one
your heart shall live;"
should rashly rejoice that he has, as it were,
Seek," he says" His face
apprehended it,
evermore." 2 And the apostle: "If any man,
he says, "think that he knoweth anything,
he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know.
But if any man love God, the same is known
He has not said, has known
of Him" 3
Him which is dangerous presumption, but
So also in another
"is 'known of Him."
" But now after that
place, when he had said,
ye have known God;" immediately correct-
"
or rather are known of
ing himself, he says,
God " 4 And above all in that other place,
"
"
I count not myself to
have apprehended: but this one thing I do
foro-etting those things which are behind, and
reaching forth unto those things which are
before, I press in purpose 5 toward the mark,
for the prize of the high calling of God in
Let us therefore, as many as
Christ Jesus.
be perfect, be thus minded." 6
Perfection in
life, he tells us, is nothing else than to
foro-et those things which are behind, and to

Brethren," he says,

this

reach forth and press in purpose toward those
For he that seeks
things which are before.
has the safest purpose, [who seeks] until that
is taken hold of whither we are tending, and
But that is
for which we are reaching forth.
the right purpose which starts from faith.
For a certain faith is in some way the startingpoint of knowledge; but a certain knowledge
will not be made perfect, except after this life,
when we shall see face to face.' Let us therefore be thus minded, so as to know that the
disposition to seek the truth is more safe than
that which presumes things unknown to be
Let us therefore so seek as if we
known
should find, and so find as if we were about
" when a man hath done, then
For
to seek
" 8
Let us doubt without unbehe beginneth.
lief of things to be believed; let us affirm
without rashness of things to be understood:
authority must be held fast in the former,
As regards
truth sought out in the latter.
this question, then, let us believe that the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit is
one God, the Creator and Ruler of the whole
creature; and that the Father is not the Son,
nor the Holy Spirit either the Father or the
Son, but a trinity of persons mutually interrelated, and a unity of an equal essence.
And let us seek to understand this, praying
for help from Himself, whom we wish to understand; and as much as He grants, desiring
to explain what we understand with so mucii
pious care and anxiety, that even if in any
case we say one thing for another we may at
As, for the sake
least say nothing unworthy.
of example, if we say anything concerning the
Father that does not properly belong to the
Father, or does belong to the Son, or to the

J Ps. lxix. 32.
3 1 Cor. viii. 2.
Sin purpose, oin. in A.V.

2 Ps. cv. 4.
4 Gal. iv. 19.
6 Phil. iii. i3- I 5-

7 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

8 Ecclus. xviii. 7.

[Book IX.

Holy Spirit, or to the Trinity itself; and if
anything of the Son which does not properly
suit with the Son, or at all events which does
suit with the Father, or with the Holy Spirit,
or with the Trinity; or if, again, anything
concerning the Holy Spirit, which is not fitly
a property of the Holy Spirit, yet is not alien
from the Father, or from the Son, or from
Even as now
the one God the Trinity itself.
our wish is to see whether the Holy Spirit is
properly that love which is most excellent;
which if He is not, either the Father is love,
or the Son, or the Trinity itself; since we canthe most certain faith and
not withstand
" God
weighty authority of Scripture, saying,
is love." 1 And yet we ought not to deviate
into profane error, so as to say anything of
the Trinity which does not suit the Creator,
but rather the creature, or which is feigned
outright by mere empty thought.

CHAP. 2.

THE THREE THINGS WHICH ARE

FOUND IN LOVE MUST BE CONSIDERED. 2
2. And this being so, let us direct our attention to those three things which we fancy
we have found. We are not yet speaking of
heavenly things, nor yet of God the Father,
and Son, and Holy Spirit, but of that inadequate image, which yet is an image, that is,
man; for our feeble mind perhaps can gaze
upon this more familiarly and more easily.
Well then, when I, who make this inquiry,
love anything, there are three things conmyself, and that which I love, and
cerned
For I do not love love, except I
love itself.
love a lover; for there is no love where nothTherefore there are three
loved.
ing
he who loves, and that which is loved,
things

is

namely, the lover, the loved, and love

1 i John iv. 16.
2 [Augustin here begins his discussion of some ternaries that are
found in the Finite, that illustrate the trinality of the Infinite.
In the case
Like all finite analogies, they fail at certain points.
the first two are
chosen
substances, the last is not. The mind is a substance, but its activlove
In chapter iv. 5, Augustin asserts that
ity in loving is not.
and knowledge exist substantially, as the mind itself does."
But
no psychology, ancient or modern, has ever maintained that the
agencies of a spiritual entity or substance are themselves spiritual
entities or substances. The activities of the human mind in cognizing, loving, etc., are only its energizing, not its substance.
The ambiguity of the Latin contributes to this error.

The
mind and its loving, and also the mind and its cognizing, are denominated " duo qucedam" the mind, love, and knowledge, are
denominated " tria qucedam.'
1 By bringing the mind and its
love and knowledge under the one term " qiuedam" and then
giving the meaning of " substance
something,"
" substanthe result follows that all three are alike and equally
tial."

thing," in "

to

"

"

"

'

This analogy taken from the mind and its activities illustrates
the trinality of the Divine essence, but fails to illustrate the substantiality of the three persons. The three Divine persons are not
the Divine essence together with two of its activities (such, e. g-., as
creation and redemption), but the essence in three modes, or
"

forms," as St. Paul denominates them in Phil. iii. 6.
"

If Augustin could prove his assertion that the activities of the
human spirit in knowing and loving are strictly
substantial,"
then this ternary would illustrate not only the trinality of the essence, but the essentiality and objectivity of the persons. The
fact which he mentions, that knowledge and love are inseparable
from the knowing and loving mind, does not prove their equal
substantiality with the mind. W. G. T. S.]

and love.

Rut what if I love none except

Will there not then be two things

myself ?
that which I love, and love ?
For he who
loves and that which is loved are the same
when any one loves himself; just as to love
and to be loved, in the same way, is the very
same thing when any one loves himself. Since
the same thing is said, when it is said, he loves
himself, and he is loved by himself.
For in
that case to love and to be loved are not two
different things: just as he who loves and he
who is loved are not two different persons.
But yet, even so, love and what is loved are
still two things.
For there is no love when
any one loves himself, except when love itself
But it is one thing to love one's
is loved.
self, another to love one's own love.
For love
is not loved, unless as already loving something; since where nothing is loved there is
no love.
Therefore there are two things when
any one loves himself
love, and that which
For then he that loves and that
is loved.
Whence it seems that
which is loved are one.
it does not follow that three things are to be
understood wherever love is.
For let us put
aside from the inquiry all the other many
things of which a man consists; and in order
that we may discover clearly what we are now
seeking, as far as in such a subject is possiThe mind,
ble, let us treat of the mind alone.
then, when it loves itself, discloses two things
But what is to love one's
self, except to wish to help one's self to the
enjoyment of self ? And when any one wishes
himself to be just as much as he is, then the
will is on a par with the mind, and the love
is equal to him who loves. And if love is a
substance, it is certainly not body, but spirit;
and the mind also is not body, but spirit.
Yet love and mind are not two spirits, but one
spirit; nor yet two essences, but one: and yet
here are two things that are one, he that loves
and love; or, if you like so to put it, that
which is loved and love. And these two, indeed, are mutually said relatively.
Since he
who loves is referred to love, and love to him
who loves.
For he who loves, loves with
some love, and love is the love of some one
who loves.
But mind and spirit are not said
For mind
relatively, but express essence.
and spirit do not exist because the mind and
spirit of some particular man exists.
For if
we subtract the body from that which is man,
which is so called with the conjunction of body,
the mind and spirit remain.
But if we subtract him that loves, then there is no love;
and if we subtract love, then there is no one
And therefore, in so far as they
that loves.
are mutually referred to one another, they
are two; but whereas they are spoken in re-

mind and love.

Chai\ IV.]

ON THE TRINITY.

spect to themselves, each are spirit, and both
together also are one spirit; and each are
mind, and both together one mind.
Where,
Let us attend as much
then, is the trinity ?
as we can, and let us invoke the everlasting
light, that He may illuminate our darkness,
and that we may see in ourselves, as much as
we are permitted, the image of God.

or

CHAP. 3.

THE IMAGE OF THE TRINITY IN THE
MIND OF MAN WHO KNOWS HIMSELF AND
THE MIND KNOWS ITSELF
LOVES HIMSELF.
THROUGH ITSELF.
3. For the mind cannot love itself, except
also it know itself; for how can it love what
it does not know ? Or if any body says that
the mind, from 'either general
special
knowledge, believes itself of such a character
as it has by experience found others to be,
and therefore loves itself, he speaks most
For whence does a mind know
foolishly.
another mind, if it does not know itself ?
For
the mind does not know other minds and not
know itself, as the eye of the body sees other
eyes and does not see itself; for we see bodies
through the eyes of the body, because, unless we are looking into a mirror, we cannot
refract and reflect the rays into themselves,
which shine forth through those eyes, and
touch whatever we discern,
a. subject, indeed, which is treated of most subtlely and
obscurely, until it be clearly demonstrated
whether the fact be so, or whether it be not.
But whatever is the nature of the power by
which we discern through the eyes, certainly,
whether it be rays or anything else, we cannot
discern with the eyes that power itself; but
we inquire into it with the mind, and if possiAs
ble, understand even this with the mind.
the mind, then, itself gathers the knowledge
of corporeal things through the senses of the
body, so of incorporeal things through itself.
Therefore it knows itself also through itself,
since it is incorporeal; for if it does not know
itself, it does not love itself.

CHAP. 4.

THE THREE ARE ONE, AND ALSO
EQUAL, VIZ. THE MIND ITSELF, AND THE
THAT
LOVE, AND THE KNOWLEDGE OF IT.
THE SAME THREE EXIST SUBSTANTIALLY, AND
THAT THE
ARE PREDICATED RELATIVELY.
THAT THE
SAME THREE ARE INSEPARABLE.
SAME THREE ARE NOT JOINED AND COMMINGLED LIKE PARTS, BUT THAT THEY ARE OF
ONE ESSENCE, AND ARE RELATIVES.
4. But as there are two things {duo quozdam), the mind and the love of it, when it
loves itself; so there are two things, the mind
and the knowledge of it, when it knows itself.

But it

then it

Therefore the mind itself, and the love of it,
and the knowledge of it, are three things
(tria qucedani), and these three are one; and
when they are perfect they are equal.
For if
one loves himself less than as he is,
as for
example, suppose that the mind of a man
only loves itself as much as the body of a man
ought to be loved, whereas the mind is more
is in fault, and its
than the body,
Again, if it loves itself
love is not perfect.
more than as it is,
as if, for instance, it loves
itself as much as God is to be loved, whereas
the mind is incomparably less than God,
is exceedingly in fault, and its
here also it
love of self is not perfect.
is in fault
more perversely and wrongly still, when it
loves the body as much as God is to be loved.
Also, if knowledge is less than that thing
which is known, and which can be fully known,
then knowledge is not perfect; but if
it is
greater, then the nature which knows is above
that which is known, as the knowledge of the
body is greater than the body itself, which is
For knowledge
known by that knowledge.
is a kind of life in the reason of the knower,
but the body is not life; and any life is greater
than any body, not in bulk, but in power.
its own
But when the mind knows itself,
knowledge does not rise above itself, because
itself knows, and itself
When,
therefore, it knows itself entirely, and no other
thing with itself, then its knowledge is equal
to itself; because its knowledge is not from
another nature, since it knows itself. And
when it perceives itself entirely, and nothing
more, then it is neither less nor greater. We
said therefore rightly, that these three things,
[mind, love, and knowledge], when they are
perfect, are by consequence equal.

is known.

5. Similar reasoning suggests to us, if indeed we can any way understand the matter,
that these things [i.e. love and knowledge]
exist in the soul, and that, being as it were
involved in it, they are so evolved from it as
to be perceived and reckoned up substantiNot as though
ally, or. so to say, essentially.
in a subject; as color, or shape, or any other
For
quality or quantity, are in the body.
anything of this [material] kind does not go
beyond the subject in which it is;
for the
color or shape of this particular body cannot
But the mind
be also those of another body.
can also love something besides itself, with
And
that love with which it loves itself.
further, the mind does not know itself only,
Wherefore love
but also many other things.
and knowledge are not contained in the mind
as in a subject, but these also exist substantially, as the mind itself does; because, even if
they are mutually predicated relatively, yet

[Book IX.

a

is

a

are

not

they exist each severally in their own subNor are they so mutually predicated
stance.
relatively as color and the colored subject
are; so that color is in the colored subject,
but has not any proper substance in itself,
since colored body is a substance, but color
is in a substance; but as two friends are also
two men, ' which are substances, while they
are said to be men not relatively, but friends
relatively.

spirit

relatives,

substance, and love

6. But, further, although one who loves
or one who knows is
substance, and
a
knowledge is
substance, but he that loves and love, or,
he that knows and knowledge, are spoken
of relatively to each other, as are friends:
yet mind or
as
neither are men relatives: nevertheless he
that loves and love, or he that knows and
knowledge, cannot exist separately from each
other, as men can that are friends.
Although
it would seem that friends, too, can be separated in body, not in mind, in as far as they
are friends: nay, it can even happen that a
friend may even also begin to hate a friend,
and on this account cease to be a friend,
while the other does not know it, and still
But if the love with which the
loves him.
mind loves itself ceases to be, then the mind
at the same time cease to love.
also will
Likewise, if the knowledge by which the mind
knows itself ceases to be, then the mind will
also at the same time cease to know itself.
Just as the head of anything that has a head
is certainly a head, and they are predicated
relatively to each other, although they are
also substances: for both a head is a body,
and so is that which has a head; and if there
be no head, then neither will there be that
Only these things can be
which has a head.
separated from each other by cutting off,
those cannot.

both

part and whole

7. And even if there are some bodies which
cannot be wholly separated and divided, yet
they would not be bodies unless they consisted of their own proper parts. A part
then is predicated relatively to a whole, since
every part is a part of some whole, and a
whole is a whole by having all its parts.
But
since
these things are not only predicated
tively, but exist also substantially.
Perhaps,
then, the mind is a whole, and the love with
which it loves itself, and the knowledge with
which it knows itself, are as it were its parts,
of which two
that whole consists.
Or are there three equal parts which make
But no part embraces the
up the one whole ?
is a part; whereas, when
whole, of which it
the mind knows itself as a whole, that is,

bodies,
rela-

parts

are

knows itself perfectly, then the knowledge of
it extends through the whole of it; and when
it loves itself perfectly, then it loves itself as
a whole, and the love of it extends through
the whole of it.
Is it, then, as one drink is
made from wine and water and honey, and
each single part extends through the whole,
and yet they are three things (for there is no
part of the drink which does not contain
these three things; for they are not joined as
if they were water and oil, but are entirely
commingled: and they are all substances,
and the whole of that liquor which is composed of the three is one substance),
is it, I
say, in some such way as this we are to think
these three to be together, mind, love, and
But water, wine, and honey are
knowledge ?
not of one substance, although one substance
results in the drink made from the commingling of them. And I cannot see how those
other three are not of the same substance,
since the mind itself loves itself, and itself
knows itself; and these three so exist, as that
the mind is neither loved nor known by any
These three, therefore,
other thing at all.
must needs be of one and the same essence;
and for that reason, if they were confounded
together as it were by a commingling, they
could not be in any way three, neither could
they be mutually referred to each
other.
Just as if you were to make from one and
the same gold three similar rings, although
connected with each other, they are mutually
referred to each other, because they are simisimilar to
lar.
something, and there is a trinity of rings,
and one gold.
But if they are blended with
each other, and each mingled with the other
through the whole of their own bulk, then
that trinity will fall through, and it will not
exist at all; and not only will it be called one
gold, as it was called in the case of those
three rings, but now it will not be called three
things of gold at all.

For everything similar is

CHAP. 5.

THAT THESE THREE ARE SEVERAL IN

THEMSELVES, AND MUTUALLY ALL IN ALL.

8. But in these

three, when the mind
knows itself and loves itself, there remains a
trinity: mind, love, knowledge; and this trinity is not confounded together by any commingling: although they are each severally
in themselves and mutually all in all, or each
severally in each two, or each two in each.
For certainly the
Therefore all are in all.
mind is in itself, since it
is called mind in
is said to be
respect to itself: although it
knowing, or known, or knowable, relatively
to its own knowledge; and although also as

Chap. VI. 1

ON THE TRINITY.

loving, and loved, or lovable, it is referred to
love, by which it loves itself. And knowledge, although it is referred to the mind that
knows or is known, nevertheless is also predicated both as known and knowing in respect
to itself: for the knowledge by which the mind
knows itself is not unknown to itself. And although love is referred to the mind that loves,
whose love it is; nevertheless it is also love
in respect to itself, so as to exist also in itself: since love too is loved, yet cannot be
loved with anything except with love, that is
So these things are severally in
with itself.
But so are they in each other;
themselves.
because both the mind that loves is in love,
and love is in the knowledge of him that
loves, and knowledge is in the mind that
knows. And each severally is in like manner
in each two, because the mind which knows
and loves itself, is in its own love and knowledge: and the love of the mind that loves
and knows itself, is in the mind and in
knowledge: and the knowledge of the mind
that knows and loves itself is in the mind
and in its love, because it loves itself that
And
knows, and knows itself that loves.
hence also each two is in each severally, since
the mind which knows and loves itself, is
together with its own knowledge in love, and
together with its own love in knowledge; and
love too itself and knowledge are together in
the mind, which loves and knows itself.
But
in what way all are in all, we have already
shown above; since the mind loves itself as
a whole, and knows itself as a whole, and
knows its own love wholly, and loves its own
knowledge wholly, when these three things
Thereare perfect in respect to themselves.
fore these three things are marvellously inseparable from each other, and yet each of
them is severally a substance, and all together
are one substance or essence, whilst they are
mutually predicated relatively.

its

"

1 [Augustin here illustrates, by the ternary- of mind, love, and
knowledge, what the Greek Trinitarians denominate the wepix^PVcts of the divine essence. By the figure of a circulation, they describe the eternal inbeing and indwelling of one person in another.
" Believest thou
This is founded on John xiv. 10, n; xvii. 21, 23.
not that I am in the Father, and the Father in Me ?
I pray that
they all may be one, as thou Father art m Me, and T in Thee."
Atnanasius(<?ra^/V>, iii. 21) remarks that Christ here prays that the
may imitate the trinitarian unity of essence, in their
disciples
unity of affection. Had it been possible for the disciples to be in
the essence of the Father as the Son is, he would have prayed that
they all may be " one in Thee" instead of " one in Qs."

The Platonists, also, employed this figure of circulatory movement, to explain the self-reflecting and self-communing nature of
the human mind.
It is not possible for us to know what our
souls are, but only by their KipTJcrei? kvkAikcu, their circular and reflex motions and converse with themselves, which only can steal
from them their own secrets." J.Smith: Immortality 0/ the
Sou/, Ch. ii.
Augustin's illustration, however, is imperfect, because " the
three things" which circulate are not " each of them severally a
Only one of them, namely, the mind, is a substance.
substance."

"

W. G. T. S.l

CHAP. 6.

in

but defines

THERE IS ONE KNOWLEDGE OF THE
THING IN THE THING ITSELF, AND ANOTHER
THAT CORPOIN ETERNAL TRUTH ITSELF.
REAL THINGS, TOO, ARE TO BE JUDGED BY
THE RULES OF ETERNAL TRUTH.
9. But when the human mind knows itself
and loves itself, it does not know and love
anything unchangeable: and each individual
man declares his own particular mind by one
manner of speech, when he considers what
the
takes place
himself;
human mind abstractly by special or general
And so, when he speaks to me
knowledge.
of his own individual mind, as to whether he
understands this or that, or does not understand it, or whether he wishes or does not
wish this or that, I believe; but when he
speaks the truth of the mind of man generI recognize and approve.
ally or specially,
Whence it is manifest, that each sees a thing
in himself, in such way that another person
may believe what he says of it, yet may not
see it; but another [sees a thing] in the
truth itself, in such way that another person
also can gaze upon it; of which the former
undergoes changes at successive times, the
latter consists in an unchangeable eternity.
For we do not gather a generic or specific
knowledge of the human mind by means of
resemblance by seeing many minds with the
eyes of the body: but we gaze upon indestructible truth, from which to define perfectly,
as far as we can, not of what sort is the mind
of any one particular man, but of what sort it
ought to be upon the eternal plan.

10. Whence also, even in the case of the
images of things corporeal which are drawn
in through the bodily sense, and in some way
infused into the memory, from which also
those things which have not been seen are
thought under a fancied image, whether otherwise than they really are, or even perchance
even here too, we are proved
as they are;
either to accept or reject, within ourselves,
by other rules which remain altogether unchangeable above our mind, when we approve
For both when I
or reject anything rightly.
recall the walls of Carthage which I have seen,
and imagine to myself the walls of Alexandria which I have not seen, and, in preferring this to that among forms which in both
cases are imaginary, make that preference
upon grounds of reason; the judgment of
truth from above is still strong and clear, and
rests firmly upon the utterly indestructible
rules of its own right; and if it is covered as
it were by cloudiness of corporeal images, yet
is not wrapt up and confounded in them.

11. But it makes a difference, whether,

[Book IX.

under that or in that darkness, I am shut off
as it were from the clear heaven; or whether
(as usually happens on lofty mountains), enjoying the free air between both, I at once
look up above to the calmest light, and down
For whence
below upon the densest clouds.
is the ardor of brotherly love kindled in me,
when I hear that some man has borne bitter
torments for the excellence and steadfastness
of faith ? And if that man is shown to me
with the finger, I am eager to join myself to
him, to become acquainted with him, to bind
And accordhim to myself in friendship.
ingly, if opportunity offers, I draw near, I address him, I converse with him, I express my
goodwill towards him in what words I can,
and wish that in him too in turn should
be brought to pass and expressed goodwill
towards me; and I endeavor after a spiritual
embrace in the way of belief, since I cannot
search out so quickly and discern altogether
I love therefore the
his innermost heart.
faithful and courageous man with a pure and
But if he were to confess to
genuine love.
me in the course of conversation, or were
through unguardedness to show in any way,
that either he believes something unseemly
of God, and desires also something carnal in
Him, and that he bore these torments on behalf of such an error, or from the desire of
money for which he hoped, or from empty
greediness of human praise: immediately it
follows that the love with which I was borne
towards him, displeased, and as it were repelled, and taken away from an unworthy
man, remains in that form, after which, believing him such as I did, I had loved him;
unless perhaps I have come to love him to
this end, that he may become such, while I
And
have found him not to be such in fact.
in that man, too, nothing is changed : although
it can be changed, so that he may become
that which I had believed him to be already.
But in my mind there certainly is something
changed, viz., the estimate I had formed of
him, which was before of one sort, and now
is of another: and the same love, at the bidding from above of unchangeable righteousness, is turned aside from the purpose of enBut
joying, to the purpose of taking counsel.
the form itself of unshaken and stable truth,
wherein I should have enjoyed the fruition
of the man, believing him to be good, and
wherein likewise I take counsel that he may
be good, sheds in an immoveable eternity the
same light of incorruptible and most sound
reason, both upon the sight of my mind, and
upon that cloud of images, which I discern
from above, when I think of the same man
whom I had seen.
Again, when I call back

to my mind some arch, turned beautifully and
symmetrically, which, let us say, I saw at
a certain reality that had been
Carthage;
made known to the mind through the eyes,
and transferred to the memory, causes the
But I behold in my mind
imaginary view.
yet another thing, according to. which that
work of art pleases me; and whence also, if
it displeased me, I should correct it. We
judge therefore of those particular things according to that [form of eternal truth], and
discern that form by the intuition of the raBut those things themselves we
tional mind.
either touch if present by the bodily sense,
or if absent remember their images as fixed
in our memory, or picture, in the way of likeness to them, such things as we ourselves also,
if we wished and were able, would laboriously build up: figuring in the mind after one
fashion the images of bodies, or seeing bodies
through the body; but after another, grasping
by simple intelligence what is above the eye
of the mind, viz., the reasons and the unspeakably beautiful skill of such forms.
CHAP. 7. WE CONCEIVE AND BEGET THE WORD
WITHIN, FROM THE THINGS WE HAVE BEHELD
IN THE
WORD,
WHETHER OF THE CREATURE OR OF THE
CREATOR, IS CONCEIVED BY LOVE.
12. We behold, then, by the sight of the
mind, in that eternal truth from which all
things temporal are made, the form according
to which we are, and according to which we
do anything by true and right reason, either
in ourselves, or in things corporeal; and we
have the true knowledge of things, thence
conceived, as it were as a word within us,
and by speaking we beget it from within; nor
by being born does it depart from us. And
when we speak to others, we apply to the
word, remaining within us, the ministry of the
voice or of some bodily sign, that by some
kind of sensible remembrance some similar
thing may be wrought also in the mind of him
similar, I say, to that which does
that hears,
not depart from the mind of him that speaks.
We do nothing, therefore, through the members of the body in our words and actions, by
which the behavior of men is either approved
or blamed, which we do not anticipate by a
For no one
word uttered within ourselves.
willingly does anything, which he has not first
said in his heart.

ETERNAL TRUTH.

THE

13. And this word is conceived by love,
either of the creature or of the Creator, that
is, either of changeable nature or of unchangeable truth. 1

1 [The inward production of a thought in the finite essence of
the human spirit which is expressed outwardly in a spoken word,

Chap. X.]

ON THE TRINITY.

CHAP. S.

IN WHAT DESIRE AND LOVE DIFFER.

[Conceived] therefore, either by desire or
by love: not that the creature ought not to
be loved; but if that love [of the creature] is
referred to the Creator, then it will not be
For it
desire (cupiditas), but love {charitas).
is desire when tiie creature is loved for itself.
And then it does not help a man through
making use of it, but corrupts him in the enWhen, therefore, the creature is
joying it.
either equal to us or inferior, we must u::j the
inferior in order to God, but we must enjoy the
equal only in God. For as thou oughtest to enjoy thyself, not in thyself, but in Him who made
thee, so also him whom thou lovest as thyself.
Let us enjoy, therefore, both ourselves and
our brethren in the Lord; and hence let us
not dare to yield, and as it were to relax,
ourselves to ourselves in the direction downwards. Now a word is born, when, being
thought out, it pleases us either to the effect
Thereof sinning, or to that of doing right.
fore love, as it were a mean, conjoins our
word and the mind from which it is conceived,
and without any confusion binds itself as a
third with them, in an incorporeal embrace.

CHAP. 9.

IX THE LOVE OF SPIRITUAL THINGS
THE WORD BORN IS THE SAME AS THE WORD
IT IS OTHERWISE IN THE LOVE
CONCEIVED.
OF CARNAL THINGS.

14. But the word conceived and the word
born are the very same when the will finds rest
in knowledge itself, as is the case in the love
For instance, he who
of spiritual things.
knows righteousness perfectly, and loves it
perfectly, is already righteous; even if no
necessity exist of working according to it outwardly through the members of the body.
But in the love of carnal and temporal things,
as in the offspring of animals, the conception
of the word is one thing, the bringing forth
For here what is conceived by deanother.
siring is born by attaining.
Since it does
not suffice to avarice to know and to love
gold, except it also have it; nor to know and
love to eat, or to lie with any one, unless
also one does it; nor to know and love honors
and power, unless they actually come to pass.
Nay, all these things, even if obtained, do
"Whosoever drinketh of this
not suffice.
water," He says,
1 And
" He hath conceived
so also the Psalmist,
2 And he
pain and brought forth iniquity."

shall thirst again."

"

is analogous to the eternal generation of the Eternal Wisdom in
the infinite essence of God expressed in the Eternal Word.
Both
are alike, in that something spiritual issues from something spiritual, without division or diminution of substance.
But a thought
of the human mind is not an objective thing or substance; while
the Eternal Word is. W. G. T. S.]

" John iv. 13.

2 ps . v ;,. I4 .

speaks of pain or labor as conceived, when
those things are conceived which it
is not
sufficient to know and will, and when the
mind burns and grows sick with want, until it
arrives at those things, and, as it were, brings
them forth.
Whence in the Latin language
we have the word "parta" used elegantly
for both "reperta" and "
comperta," which
words sound as if derived from bringing forth. 3
Since "lust, when it hath conceived, bringeth
Wherefore the Lord proclaims.
forth sin." 4
" Come unto me all ye that labor and are
heavy laden;" 5 and in another place "Woe
unto them that are with child, and to them
" 6 And when
that give suck, in those days !
therefore He referred all either right actions
or sins to the bringing forth of the word,
By
thy mouth," 7 He says, "thou shalt be justified, and by thy mouth 8 thou shalt be condemned," 9 intending thereby not the visible
mouth, but that which is within and invisible,
of the thought and of the heart.

"

CHAP. IO.

WHETHER ONLY KNOWLEDGE THAT

IS LOVED IS THE WORD OF THE MIND.

15. It is rightly asked then, whether all
knowledge is a word, or only knowledge that
For we also know the things which
is loved.
we hate ; but what we do not like, cannot be
said to be either conceived or brought forth
For not all things which in anyby the mind.
way touch it, are conceived by it ; but some
only reach the point of being known, but yet
are not spoken as words, as for instance those
of which we speak now. For those are called
words in one way, which occupy spaces of
time by their syllables, whether they are pronounced or only thought; and in another way,
all that is known is called a word imprinted
on the mind, as long as it can be brought
forth from the memory and defined, even
though we dislike the thing itself ; and in
another way still, when we like that which
is conceived in the mind. And that which
the apostle says, must be taken according to
" No man can say that
this last kind of word,
Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost;" 10
since those also say this, but according to
another meaning of the term "word." of
" Not every one
whom the Lord Himself says,
that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven." 11
Nay, even in
the case of things which we hate, when we
rightly dislike and rightly censure them, we
approve and like the censure bestowed upon
them, and it becomes a word.
it the
knowledge of vices that displeases us, but the

Nor is

3 Partus.
6 Matt. xxiv. 19.
9 Matt. xii. 37.

4 Jas. i. 15.
7 Words.
10 1 Cor. xii. 3.

5 Matt. xi. 28.
8 Words.
" Matt. vii. 21.

A. V.

[Book IX.

For I like to know and
vices themselves.
; and this is its
define what intemperance is
Just as there are known faults in art,
word.
and the knowledge of them is rightly approved, when a connoisseur discerns the species or the privation of excellence, as to affirm
and deny that it is or that it is not ; yet to be
without excellence and to fall away into fault,
And to define
is worthy of condemnation.
intemperance, and to say its word, belongs
to the art of morals ; but to be intemperate
belongs to that which that art censures. Just
as to know and define what a solecism is,
belongs to the art of speaking ; but to be
guilty of one, is a fault which the same art
reprehends. A word, then, which is the point
we wish now to discern and intimate, is knowledge together with love.
Whenever, then,
the mind knows and loves itself, its word is
And since it loves
joined to it by love.
knowledge and knows love, both the word is
in love and love is in the word, and both are
in him who loves and speaks.

CHAP. II.

THAT THE IMAGE OR BEGOTTEN
WORD OF THE MIND THAT KNOWS ITSELF IS
EQUAL TO THE MIND ITSELF.
1 6. But all knowledge according to species
For there is
is like the thing which it knows.
another knowledge according to privation, according to which we speak a word only when
And this condemnation of a
we condemn.
privation is equivalent to praise of the species,
The mind, then, conand so is approved.
tains some likeness to a known species, whether
when liking that species or when disliking its
privation. And hence, in so far as we know
God, we are like Him, but not like to the
point of equality, since we do not know Him
to the extent of His own being. And as, when
we speak of bodies by means of the bodily
sense, there arises in our mind some likeness
of them, which is a phantasm of the memory;
for the bodies themselves are not at all in the
mind, when we think them, but only the likenesses of those bodies ; therefore, when we
approve the latter for the former, we err, for
the approving of one thing for another is an
error ; yet the image of the body in the mind
is a thing of a better sort than the species of
the body itself, inasmuch as the former is
in a better nature, viz. in a living substance,
as the mind is : so when we know God, although we are made better than we were be-

1 [The meaning of this obscure chapter seems to be, that only
what the mind is pleased with, is the real expression and index of
the mind its true " word." The true nature of the mind is reBut this requires some qualification.
vealed in its sympathies.
For in the case of contrary qualities, like right and wrong, beauly
and ugliness, the real nature of the mind is seen also in its antipathy as well as in its sympathy; in its hatred of wrong as well as in
Each alike is a true index of the mind, because
its love of right.
each really implies the other. W. G. T. S-]

fore we knew Him, and above all when the
same knowledge being also liked and worthily
loved becomes a word, and so that knowledge
becomes a kind of likeness of God ; yet that
knowledge is of a lower kind, since it is in a
lower nature ; for the mind is creature, but
And from this it may be
God is Creator.
that when the mind knows and
inferred,
approves itself, this same knowledge is in
such way its word, as that it is altogether on
a par and equal with it, and the same ; because
it is neither the knowledge of a lower essence,
as of the body, nor of a higher, as of God.
And whereas knowledge bears a likeness to
that which it knows, that is, of which it is the
in this case it has perfect and
knowledge ;
equal likeness, when the mind itself, which
knows, is known. And so it
is both image
and word ; because it
is uttered concerning
that mind to which it is equalled in knowing,
and that which is begotten is equal to the
begetter.
CHAP. 12. WHY LOVE IS NOT THE OFFSPRING
OF THE MIND, AS KNOWLEDGE IS SO.
THE
THE MIND
SOLUTION OF THE QUESTION.
WITH THE KNOWLEDGE OF ITSELF AND THE
LOVE OF ITSELF IS THE IMAGE OF THE TRINITY.
17. What then is love?

Will it not be an
Will it not
image?
For why does the mind beget
be begotten ?
its knowledge when it knows itself, and not
beget its love when it loves itself?
For if it
is the cause of its own knowing, for the reason
is also the cause of its
that it
own love because it is lovable.
It is hard,
then, to say why it does not beget both. For
there is a further question also respecting the
supreme Trinity itself, the omnipotent God
the Creator, after whose image man is made,
which troubles men, whom the truth of God
invites to the faith by human speech ; viz. why
the Holy Spirit is not also to be either believed
or understood to be begotten by God the
Father, so that He also may be called a Son.
And this question we are endeavoring in some
way to investigate in the human mind, in order
that from a lower image, in which our own
nature itself as it were answers, upon being
questioned, in a way more familiar to ourselves, we may be able to direct a more practised mental vision from the enlightened
creature to the unchangeable light ; assuming,
however, that the truth itself has persuaded
us, that as no Christian doubts the Word of
God to be the Son, so that the Holy Spirit is
Let us return, then, to a more careful
love.
questioning and consideration upon this subject of that image which is the creature, that
is, of the rational mind ; wherein the knowl-

Will it not be a word?

is knowable, it

Chap. XII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

oo

edge of some things coming into existence
in time, but which did not exist before, and
the love of some things which were not loved
before, opens to us more clearly what to say:
because to speech also itself, which must be
disposed in time, that thing is easier of explanation which is comprehended in the order of
time.

it

is

1 8. First, therefore, it is clear that a thing
may possibly be knowable, that is, such as can
be known, and yet that it may be unknown ;
but that it is not possible for that to be known
Wherefore it must
which is not knowable.
be clearly held that everything whatsoever
that we know begets at the same time in us the
knowledge of itself; for knowledge is brought
forth from both, from the knower and from
the thing known. When, therefore, the mind
knows itself, it alone is the parent of its own
itself both the thing
knowledge ; for
known and the knower of it. But it was knowable to itself also before it knew itself, only
the knowledge of itself was not in itself so
long as it did not know itself.
In knowing
itself, then, it begets a knowledge of itself
equal to itself ; since it does not know itself
as less than itself is, nor is its knowledge the
knowledge of the essence of some one else,
not only because itself knows, but also because it knows itself, as we have said above.
What then is to be said of love ; why, when
the mind loves itself, it should not seem also
to have begotten the love of itself? For it was
lovable to itself even before it loved itself,
since it could love itself ; just as it was knowable to itself even before it knew itself, since it
could know itself.
it were not knowFor if
able to itself, it never could have known itself; and so, if it were not lovable to itself, it
never could have loved itself. Why therefore may it not be said by loving itself to
have begotten its own love, as by knowing itself it has begotten its own knowledge ?
Is
it because it is thereby indeed plainly shown
that this is the principle of love, whence it
proceeds? for it proceeds from the mind itself, which is lovable to itself before it loves
itself, and so is the principle of its own love
by which it loves itself : but that this love is
not therefore rightly said to be begotten by
the mind, as is the knowledge of itself by
which the mind knows itself, because in the
case of knowledge the thing has been found
already, which is what we call brought forth
or discovered; 1 and this is commonly preceded by an inquiry such as to find rest when
that end is attained.
For inquiry is the desire of finding, or, what is the same thing, of

1 " Partzun "

or "

repertum"

2 But those things which are disdiscovering.
covered are as it were brougnt forth, whence
they are like offspring; but wherein, except
For in that
in the case itself of knowledge ?
case they are as it were uttered and fashioned.
For although the things existed already which
we found by seeking, yet the knowledge of
them did not exist, which knowledge we regard as an offspring that is born.
Further,
the desire (appctitus) which there is in seeking proceeds from him who seeks, and is in
some way in suspense, and does not rest in
the end whither it is directed, except that
which is sought be found and conjoined with
him who seeks. And this desire, that is, inalthough it does not seem to be love,
quiry,
by which that which is known is loved, for in
this case we are still striving to know,
yet it
is something of the same kind.
For it can
be called will {voluntas), since every one who
seeks wills (vult) to find; and if that is sought
which belongs to knowledge, every one who
But if he wills ardently
seeks wills to know.
and earnestly, he is said to study (studere):
a word that is most commonly employed in the
case of pursuing and obtaining any branches
Therefore, the bringing forth of
of learning.
the mind is preceded by some desire, by
which, through seeking and finding what we
wish to know, the offspring, viz. knowledge itself, is born. And for this reason, that desire
by which knowledge is conceived and brought
forth, cannot rightly be called the bringing
forth and the offspring; and the same desire
which led us to long for the knowing of the
thing, becomes the love of the thing when
known, while it holds and embraces its acis, knowledge, and
cepted offspring, that
And so there is a
unites it to its begetter.
kind of image of the Trinity in the mind itself, and the knowledge of it, which is its offspring and its word concerning itself, and love
as a third, and these three are one, and one
Neither is the offspring less,
substance. 3
since the mind knows itself according to the
measure of its own being; nor is the love less,
since it loves itself according to the measure
both of its own knowledge and of its own
being.

Reperiendi."

2 "
3 [It is not these three together that constitute the one substance. The mind alone is the substance
the knowledge and the
love being only two activities of it. When the mind is not cognizing or loving, it is still an entire mind. As previously remarked in
the annotation on IX. ii. this ternary will completely illustrate a
trinality of a certain kind, but not that of the Trinity; in which the
" tria qucedam
are three subsistences, each of which is so substantial as to be the subject of attributes, and to be able to employ
them. The human mind is substantial enough to possess and employ the attributes of knowledge and love. We say that the mind
But an activity o{ the mind is not substantial
knows and loves.
enough to possess and employ the attributes of knowledge and
love. We cannrt say that the loving loves; or the loving knows;
or the knowing loves, etc. W. G. T. S.]

"

BOOK X.
IN WHICH THERE IS SHOWN TO BE ANOTHER TRINITY IN THE MIND OF MAN, AND ONE THAT APPEARS MUCH MORE EVIDENTLY, VIZ. IN HIS MEMORY, UNDERSTANDING, AND WILL.

CHAP. I.

THE LOVE OF THE STUDIOUS MIND,
THAT IS, OF ONE DESIROUS TO KNOW, IS NOT
THE LOVE OF A THING WHICH IT DOES NOT
KNOW.
i. Let us now proceed, then, indue order,
with a more exact purpose, to explain this
And first,
same point more thoroughly.
since no one can love at all a thing of which
he is wholly ignorant, we must carefully consider of what sort is the love of those who
are studious, that is, of those who do not
already know, but are still desiring to know
Now certainly, in
any branch of learning.
those things whereof the word study is not
commonly used, love often arises from hearsay, when the reputation of anything
for
beauty inflames the mind to the seeing and
enjoying it; since the mind knows generically
wherein consist the beauties
corporeal
things, from having seen them very frequently, and since there exists within a faculty of
approving that which outwardly is longed for.
And when this happens, the love
called forth is not of a thing wholly unBut
known, since its genus is thus known.
when we love a good man whose face we
never saw, we love him from the knowledge of
his virtues, which virtues we know [abstractly]
But in the case of learnin the truth itself.
ing, it is for the most part the authority of
others who praise and commend it that kindles our love of it; although nevertheless we
could not burn with any zeal at all for the
study of it, unless we had already in our
mind at least a slight impression
the
For
knowledge of each kind of learning.
who, for instance, would devote any care and
labor to the learning of rhetoric, unless he
knew before that it was the science of speakSometimes, again, we marvel at the
ing?
results of learning itself, which we have heard
of or experienced; and hence burn to obtain,

that

of

of

is

I by learning, the power of attaining these
Just as if it were said to one who
i results.
did not know his letters, that there is a kind
of learning which enables a man to send
words, wrought with the hand in silence, to
one who is ever so far absent, for him in turn
to whom they are sent to gather these words,
not with his ears, but with his eyes; and if
the man were to see the thing actually done,
is not that man, since he desires to know how
he can do this thing, altogether moved to
study with a view to the result which he already knows and holds ?
is that the
studious zeal of those who learn is kindled:
for that of which any one is utterly ignorant,
he can in no way love.

So it

is which it

2. So also, if any one hear an unknown sign,
as, for instance, the sound of some word of
which he does not know the signification, he
desires to know what it is; that is, he desires
to know what thing it
is agreed
shall be brought to mind by that sound: as
if he heard the word temetum '
uttered, and
not knowing, should ask what it is. He must
then know already that it
is a sign, i.e. that
the word is not an empty sound, but that something is signified by it; for in other respects
this trisyllabic word is known to him already,
and has already impressed its articulate form
upon his mind through the sense of hearing.
And then what more is to be required in him,
that he may go on to a greater knowledge of
that of which all the letters and all the spaces
of its several sounds are already known, unless that it shall at the same time have become known to him that it is a sign, and shall
have also moved him with the
of
knowing of what it is the sign ? The more,
then, the thing is known, yet not fully known,
the more the mind desires to know concerning it what remains to be known.
For if he

desire

i Wir

Chap. I.]

ON THE TRINITY.

it

knew it to be only such and such a spoken
word, and did not know that it was the sign
of something, he would seek nothing further,
since the sensible thing is already perceived
But because
as far as it can be by the sense.
he knows it to be not only a spoken word,
but also a sign, he wishes to know it perfectly; and no sign is known perfectly, except
it be known of what it is the sign. He then
who with ardent carefulness seeks to know
this, and inflamed by studious zeal perseveres
in the search; can such an one be said to be
What then does he love ?
without love ?
For certainly nothing can be loved unless it is
For that man does not love those
known.
three syllables which he knows already.
But
if he loves this in them, that he knows them
to signify something, this is not the point
now in question, for it
is not this which he
But we are now asking what
seeks to know.
is he loves, in that which he is desirous
to know, but which certainly he does not yet
know; and we are therefore wondering why
he loves, since we know most assuredly that
nothing can be loved unless it be known.
What then does he love, except that he knows
and perceives in the reason of things what
excellence there i's in learning, in which the
knowledge of all signs is contained; and what
benefit there is in the being skilled in these,
since by them human fellowship mutually
communicates its own perceptions, lest the
assemblies of men should be actually worse
than utter solitude, if they were not to mingle
their thoughts by conversing together ? The
soul, then, discerns this fitting and serviceable species, and knows it, and loves it; and
he who seeks the meaning of any words of
which he is ignorant, studies to render that
species perfect in himself as much as he can:
for it is one thing to behold it in the light of
truth, another to desire it
his
own capacity.
For he beholds in the light of
truth how great and how good a thing it
to understand and to speak all tongues of all
nations, and so to hear no tongue and to be
The
heard by none as from a foreigner.
beauty, then, of this knowledge is already
discerned by thought, and the thing being
known is loved; and that thing is so regarded,
and so stimulates the studious zeal of learners, that they are moved with respect to it,
and desire it eagerly in all the labor which
they spend upon the attainment of such a
capacity, in order that they may also embrace
in practice that which they know beforehand
And so every one, the nearer he
by reason.
approaches that capacity in hope, the more
fervently desires it
those
branches of learning are studied the more

as within

love;

with

for

is

eagerly, which men do not despair of being
able to attain; for when any one entertains no
hope of attaining his end, then he either loves
lukewarmly or does not love at all, howsoever
he may see the excellence of it.
Accordingly, because the knowledge of all languages
is almost universally felt to be
hopeless,
every one studies most to know that of his
own nation; but if he feels that he is not
sufficient even to comprehend this perfectly,
yet no one is so indolent in this knowledge
as not to wish to know, when he hears an unknown word, what it is, and to seek and learn
it if he can. And while he is seeking it, certainly he has a studious zeal of learning, and
seems to love a thing he does not know; but
For that species
the case is really otherwise.
touches the mind, which the mind knows and
thinks, wherein the fitness is clearly visible
which accrues from the associating of minds
with one another, in the hearing and returnAnd this
ing of known and spoken words.
species kindles studious zeal in him, who
seeks what indeed he knows not, but gazes
upon and loves the unknown form to which
If then, for example, any one
that pertains.
were to ask, What is temctum (for I had instanced this word already), and it were said
to him, What does this matter to you ? he
will answer, Lest perhaps I hear some one
speaking, and understand him not; or perhaps read the word somewhere, and know
not what the writer meant.
Who, pray,
would say to such an inquirer, Do not care
about understanding what you hear; do not
For
care about knowing what you read ?
almost every rational soul quickly discerns
the beauty of that knowledge, through which
the thoughts of men are mutually made
known by the enunciation of significant words;
and it is on account of this fitness thus known,
and because known therefore loved, that such
an unknown word is studiously sought out.
When then he hears and learns that wine was
by our forefathers, but
called
that the word is already quite obsolete in our
of language, he will think
present usage
perhaps that he has still need of the word on
account of this or that book of those foreBut if he holds these also to be
fathers.
superfluous, perhaps he does now come to
think the word not worth remembering, since
he sees it has nothing to do with that species
of learning which he knows with the mind,
and gazes upon, and so loves.

" temetum "

3. Wherefore in all cases the love

of a
studious mind, that is, of one that wishes to
know what it does not know, is not the love
of that thing which it does not know, but of
that which it knows; on account of which it

[Book X.

Or
wishes to know what it does not know.
if it is so inquisitive as to be carried away,
not for any other cause known to it, but by
the mere love of knowing things unknown;
then such an inquisitive person is, doubtless,
distinguishable from an ordinary student, yet
does not, any more than he, love things he
does not know; nay, on the contrary, he is
more fitly said to hate things he knows not,
of which he wishes that there should be none,
in wishing to know everything.
But lest any
one should lay before us a more difficult
question, by declaring that it is just as impossible for any one to hate what he does
not know, as to love what he does not know,
we will not withstand what is true; but it
is not the same
must be understood that it
thing to say he loves to know things unknown, as to say he loves things unknown.
is possible that a man may love to
For it
know things unknown; but it is not possible
For
that he should love things unknown.
the word to know is not placed there without
meaning; since he who loves to know things
unknown, does not love the unknown things
And
themselves, but the knowing of them.
unless he knew what knowing means, no one
could say confidently, either that he knew or
For not only he who
that he did not know.
says I know, and says so truly, must needs
know what knowing is; but he also who says,
I do not know, and says so confidently and
truly, and knows that he says so truly, certainly knows what knowing is;
for he both
distinguishes him who does not know from
him who knows, when he looks into himself,
and says truly I do not know; and whereas he
knows that he says this truly, whence should
he know it, if he did not know what knowing
is?

CHAP. 2.

NO ONE AT ALL LOVES THINGS UN-

KNOWN.
4. No studious person, then, no inquisitive
person, loves things he does not know, even
while he is urgent with the most vehement
desire to know what he does not know.
For
he either knows already generically what he
loves, and longs to know it also in some individual or individuals, which perhaps are praised, but not yet known to him; and he pictures
in his mind an imaginary form by which he
may be stirred to love. And whence does he
picture this, except from those things which he
has already known ? And yet perhaps he will
not love it, if he find that form which was
praised to be unlike that other form which
was figured and in thought most fully known
And if he has loved it, he will
to his mind.
it from that time when he
beinn to love

learned it; since a little before, that form
which was loved was other than that which
the mind that formed it had been wont to
But if he shall find it simiexhibit to itself.
lar to that form which report had proclaimed,
and to be such that he could truly say I was
already loving thee; yet certainly not even
then did he love a form he did not know,
since he had known it in that likeness.
Or
else we see somewhat in the species of the
eternal reason, and therein love it; and when
this is manifested in some image of a temporal thing, and we believe the praises of
those who have made trial of it, and so love
it, then we do not love anything unknown,
according to that which we have already sufOr else, again,
ficiently discussed above.
we love something known, and on account of
it seek something unknown; and so it
is by
no means the love of the thing unknown that
possesses us, but the love of the thing known,
to which we know the unknown thing belongs, so that we know that too which we
seek still as unknown; as a little before I said
Or else, again, every
of an unknown word.
one loves the very knowing itself, as no one
can fail to know who desires to know anyFor these reasons they seem to love
thing.
things unknown who wish to know anything
which they do not know, and who, on account
of their vehement desire of inquiry, cannot
But how differbe said to be without love.
ent the case really is, and that nothing at all
can be loved which is not known, I think I
must have persuaded every one who carefully
But since the examples
looks upon truth.
which we have given belong to those who
desire to know something which they themselves are not, we must take thought lest
perchance some new notion appear, when the
mind desires to know itself.

CHAP. 3.

THAT WHEN THEJMIND LOVES ITSELF,

IT IS NOT UNKNOWN TO ITSELF.

5. What, then, does the mind love, when

it seeks ardently to know itself, whilst it
is
still unknown to
For, behold, the
itself?
mind seeks to know itself, and is excited
thereto by studious zeal.
It loves, therefore;
Is it itself? But how
but what does it love ?
can this be when it does not yet know itself,
and no one can love what he does not know ?
its own
,Ts it that report has declared to it
species, in like way as we commonly hear of
people who are absent?
Perhaps, then, it
does not love itself, but loves that which it
imagines of itself, which is perhaps widely
different from what itself is: or if the phantasy in the mind is like the mind itself, and

Chap. IV.]

ON THE TRINITY.

'37

it

itself.

generically.

For eyes can never

so when it loves this fancied image, it loves
itself before it knew itself, because it gazes
upon that which is like itself; then it knew
other minds from which to picture itself, and
so is known to itself
Why,
then, when it knows other minds, does it not
know itself, since nothing can possibly be
more present to it than itself? /But if, as
other eyes are more known to the eyes of the
body, than those eyes are to themselves;
then let it not seek itself, because it never
see
will find
themselves except in looking-glasses; and it
cannot be supposed in any way that anything
of that kind can be applied also to the contemplation of incorporeal things, so that the
mind should know itself, .as
it were, in a
Or does it see in the reason
lookincr.crlass.
is to know
of eternal truth how beautiful it
one's self, and so loves this which it sees, and
studies to bring it to pass in itself? because,
although it is not known to itself, yet it
is
known to it how good it is, that it should be
And this, indeed, is very
known to itself.
wonderful, that it does not yet know itself,
and yet knows already how excellent a thing
is to know itself. / Or does it see some
most excellent end, viz. its own serenity and
blessedness, by some hidden remembrance,
which has not abandoned it, although it has
gone far onwards, and believes that it cannot
attain to that same end unless it know itself ?
And so while it loves that, it seeks this; .and
loves that which is known, on account of
But
which it seeks that which is unknown.
its own
why should the remembrance of
blessedness be able to last, and the remembrance of itself not be able to last as well;
that so it should know itself which wishes to
as well as ' know that to which it
attain,
wishes to attain ? /Or when it loves to know
itself, does it love, not itself, which it does
not yet know, but the very act of knowing;
and feel the more annoyed that itself is wanting to its own knowledge wherewith it wishes
to embrace all things ? And it knows what it
is to know; and whilst it loves this, which it
knows, desires also to know itself.
Whereby,
then, does it know its own knowing, if it does
not know itself?
For it knows that it knows
other things, but that it does not know itself;
for it is from hence that it knows also what
In what way, then, does that
knowing is.
which does not know itself, know itself as
For it does not know
knowing anything?
that some other mind knows, but that itself
Therefore it knows itself.
does so.
Further,
when it seeks to know itself, it knows itself
now as seeking.
Therefore again it knows
And hence it cannot altogether not

itself.

know itself, when certainly it does so far
know itself as that
it knows itself as not
But if it does not know itself
knowing itself.
not to know itself, then it does not
seek to
And therefore, in the very fact
know itself.
that it seeks itself, it
is clearly convicted of
being more known to itself than unknown.
For it knows itself as seeking and as not
knowing itself, in that it seeks to know itself.

CHAP. 4. HOW THE MIND KNOWS ITSELF, NOT
IN PART, BUT AS A WHOLE.

Further, what in it

6. What then shall we say?

Does that
which knows itself in part, not know itself
in part?/ But it is absurd to say, that it does
not as a whole know what it knows.
I do not
say, it knows wholly; but what it knows, it
as a whole knows. When therefore it knows
anything about itself, which it can only know
as a whole, it knows itself as a whole.
But
it does know that itself knows something,
while yet except as a whole it cannot know
Therefore it knows itself as a
anything.
is so known to
whole.
itself, as that it lives ? And it cannot at once
be a mind, and not live, while it has also something over and above, viz., that it understands:
for trie souls of beasts also live, but do not
As therefore a mind is a whole
understand.
But it knows that
mind, so it lives as a whole.
Therefore it knows itself as a whole/'
it lives.
Lastly, when the mind seeks to know itself,
it already knows that it is a mind: otherwise
it knows not whether it seeks itself, and perhaps seeks one thing while intending to seek
For it might happen that itself was
another.
not a mind, and so, in seeking to know a mind,
that it did not seek to know itself.
Wherefore since the mind, when it seeks to know
what mind is, knows that it seeks itself, certainly it knows that itself is a mind.
Furthermore, if it knows this in itself, that it is
a mind, and a whole mind, then it knows itself as a whole. /But suppose it did not know
itself to be a mind, but in seeking itself only
knew that it did seek itself.
For so, too, it
may possibly seek one thing for another, if
it does not know this: but that it may not
seek one thing for another, without doubt it
But if it knows what
knows what it seeks.
it seeks, and seeks itself, then certainly it
What therefore more does it
knows itself.
But if it knows itself in part, but still
seek ?
seeks itself in part, then it seeks not itself,
For when we speak of
but part of itself.
the mind itself, we speak of it as a whole/
Further, because it knows that it is not yet
found by itself as a whole, it knows how
much the whole is. And so it seeks that

[Book X.

itself.

Therefore

as a whole it

which is wanting, as we are wont to seek to
recall to the mind something that has slipped
from the mind, but has not altogether gone
away from it; since we can recognize it, when
it has come back, to be the same thing that
But how can mind come
we were seeking.
into mind, as though it were possible for the
mind not to be in the mind p/Add to this,
it does not
that if, having found a part,
seek itself as a whole, yet it as a whole
seeks
present to itself, and there is nothing left
to be sought: for that is wanting which is
sought, not the mind which seeks.
Since
therefore it as a whole seeks itself, nothing
Or if it does not as a whole
of it is wanting.
seek itself, but the part which has been found
seeks the part which has not yet been found;
then the mind does not seek itself, of which
no part seeks itself.
For the part which has
been found, does not seek itself; nor yet does
the part itself which has not yet been found,
seek itself; since it
is sought by that part
which has been already found.
Wherefore,
since neither the mind as a whole seeks itself,
nor does any part of it seek itself, the mind
does not seek itself at all.

is

CHAP. 5. WHY THE SOUL IS ENJOINED TO KNOW
WHENCE COME THE ERRORS OF THE

ITSELF.
MIND CONCERNING ITS OWN SUBSTANCE.

7. Why therefore is

it enjoined upon it,
that it should know itself ?
I suppose, in
order that it may consider itself, and live according to its own nature; that is, seek to be
regulated according to its own nature, viz.,
under Him to whom it ought to be subject,
and above those things to which it
is to be
preferred; under Him by whom it ought to
be ruled, above those things which it ought
For it does many things through
to rule.
vicious desire, as though in forgetfulness of
For it sees some things intrinsically
itself.
excellent, in that more excellent nature which
is God: and whereas it ought to remain steadfast that it may enjoy them, it is turned away
from Him, by wishing to appropriate those
things to itself, and not to be like to Him by
His gift, but to be what He is by its own, and
it begins to move and slip gradually down
into less and less, which it thinks to be more
and more; for it
is neither sufficient for itself, nor is anything at all sufficient for it, if
it withdraw from Him who is alone sufficient:
and so through want and distress it becomes
too intent upon its own actions and upon the
unquiet delights which it obtains through
them: and thus, by the desire of acquiring

whereas, then, I say it

knowledge from those things that are without,
the nature of which it knows and loves, and
which it feels can be lost unless held fast with
anxious care, it loses its security, and thinks
of itself so much the less, in proportion as it
feels the more secure that it cannot lose itself.
So, whereas it is one thing not to know oneself, and another not to think of oneself (for
we do not say of the man that is skilled in
much learning, that he is ignorant of grammar, when he is only not thinking of it, because
he is thinking at the time of the art of mediis one thing
cine);
not to know oneself, and another not to think
of oneself, such is the strength of love, that
the mind draws in with itself those things
which it has long thought of with love, and
has grown into them by the close adherence
of diligent study, even when it returns in
And because
some way to think of itself.
these things are corporeal which it loved externally through the carnal senses; and because it has become entangled with them by
a kind of daily familiarity, and yet cannot
carry those corporeal things themselves with
itself internally as it were into the region of
incorporeal nature; therefore it combines certain images of them, and thrusts them thus
made from itself into itself.
For it gives to
the forming of them somewhat of its own substance, yet preserves the while something by
which it may judge freely of the species of
those images; and this something is more
properly the mind, that is, the rational understanding, which is preserved that it may
For we see that we have those parts
judge.
of the soul which are informed by .the likenesses of corporeal things, in common also
with beasts.

CHAP. 6.

THE OPINION WHICH THE MIND HAS
OF ITSELF IS DECEITFUL.

is

For so it

8. But the mind errs, when it so lovingly
and intimately connects itself with these images, as even to consider itself to be something of the same kind.
is conformed to them to some extent, not by being
this, but by thinking it
so: not that it
thinks itself to be an image, but outright that
very thing itself of which it entertains the
For there still lives in it the power
image.
of distinguishing the corporeal thing which
it leaves without, from the image of that corporeal thing which it contains therefrom within itself: except when these images are so
projected as if felt without and not thought
within, as in the case of people who are
asleep, or mad, or in a trance.

Chap. VII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

CHAP. 7.

THE OPINIONS OF PHILOSOPHERS RESPECTING THE SUBSTANCE OF THE SOUL.
THE ERROR OF THOSE WHO ARE OF OPINION
THAT THE SOUL IS CORPOREAL, DOES NOT
ARISE FROM DEFECTIVE KNOWLEDGE OF THE
SOUL, BUT FROM THEIR ADDING THERETO
SOMETHING FOREIGN TO IT. WHAT IS MEANT
BY FINDING.

"

and,

9. When, therefore, it thinks itself to be
something of this kind, it thinks itself to be
a corporeal thing; and since it
is perfectly
conscious of its own superiority, by which it
rules the body, it has hence come to pass
that the question has been raised what part
of the body has the greater power in the body;
and the opinion has been held that this is the
mind, nay, that it is even the whole soul altogether. And some accordingly think it to be
the blood, others the brain, others the heart;
not as the Scripture says, "I will praise Thee,
" Thou
O Lord, with my whole heart;
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine
heart;" 1 for this word by misapplication or
metaphor is transferred from the body to the
soul; but they have simply thought it to be
that small part itself of the body, which we
see when the inward parts are rent asunder.
Others, again, have believed the soul to be
made up of very minute and individual corpuscules, which they call atoms, meeting in
Others have said
themselves and cohering.
Others
that its substance is air, others fire.
is no substance
have been of opinion that it
at all, since they could not think any substance unless it is body, and they did not find
that the soul was body; but it was in their
opinion the tempering together itself of our
body, or the combining together of the elements, by which that flesh is as it were conjoined. And hence all of these have held the
soul to be mortal; since, whether it were body,
or some combination of body, certainly it
could not in either case continue always withBut they who have held its subout death.
stance to be some kind of life the reverse of
corporeal, since they have found it to be a
life that animates and quickens every living
body, have by consequence striven also, according as each was able, to prove it immortal, since life cannot be without life.

For as to that fifth kind of body, I know
not what, which some have added to the four
well-known elements of the world, and have
said that the soul was made of this, I do not
think we need spend time in discussing it in
For either they mean by body
this place.

1 Ps. ix. cxi., and cxxxviii., Deut. vi. s^and Matt. xxii. 37.

what we mean by it, viz., that of which a part
is less than the whole in extension of place,
and they are to be reckoned among those who
have believed the mind to be corporeal: or
if they call either all substance, or all changeable substance, body, whereas they know that
not all substance is contained in extension of
place by any length and breadth and height,
we need not contend with them about a question of words.

10. Now, in the case of all these opinions,
any one who sees that the nature of the mind
is at once substance, and yet not corporeal,
that is, that it does not occupy a less extension of place with a less part of itself, and
must needs see at
a greater with a greater,
the same time that they who are of opinion
2 do not err from defect of
that it is corporeal,
knowledge concerning mind, but because they
associate with it qualities without which they
are not able to conceive any nature at all.
For if you bid them conceive of existence
that is without corporeal phantasms, they hold
And so the mind would
it merely nothing.
not seek itself, as though wanting to itself.
For what is so present to knowledge as that
which is present to the mind ? Or what is so
present to the mind as the mind itself ? And
"
invention," if we conhence what is called
sider the origin of the word, what else does it
mean, unless that to find out 3 is to "come
Those things
into "that which is sought?
accordingly which come into the mind as it
were of themselves, are not usually said to be
4 although they may be said to be
found out,
known; since we did not endeavor by seeking
to come into them, that is, to invent or find
them out. And therefore, as the mind itself
really seeks those things which are sought by
the eyes or by any other sense of the body
(for the mind directs even the carnal sense,
and then finds out or invents, when that sense
comes to the things which are sought); so,
too, it finds out or invents other things which
it ought to know, not with the medium of
corporeal sense, but through itself, when it
" comes into
them; and this, whether in the
case of the higher substance that is in God,
or of the other parts of the soul; just as it
does when it judges of bodily images themselves, for it finds these within, in the soul,
impressed through the body.

"

= [The distinction between corporeal and incorporeal substance
See Confessions VII.
is one that A ugustin often insists upon.
i-iii. The doctrine that all substance is extended body, and that
there is no such entity as spiritual unextended substance, is comFor a history of the contest,
batted by Plato in the Theatetus.
and an able defence of the substantiality of spirit, see Cud worth s
Intellectual System, III. 384 sq. Harrison s Ed. W . G. 1 . b.J

3 Invenire.

4 Inventa.

[Book X.

CHAP. 8. HOW THE SOUL INQUIRES INTO ITWHENCE COMES THE ERROR OF THE

SELF.
SOUL CONCERNING ITSELF.

11. It is then a wonderful question, in what
manner the soul seeks and finds itself; at what
it aims in order to seek, or whither it comes,
that it may come into or find out.
For what
is so much in the mind as the mind itself?
But because it
is in those things which it
thinks of with love, and is wont to be in sensible, that is, in corporeal things with love, it
is unable to be in itself without the images of
And hence shameful
those corporeal things.
error arises to block its way, whilst it cannot
separate from itself the images of sensible
things, so as to see itself alone.
For they
have marvellously cohered with it by the close
And herein consists its unadhesion of love.
cleanness; since, while it strives to think of
itself alone, it fancies itself to be that, without which it cannot think of itself.
When,
therefore, it is bidden to become acquainted
with itself, let it not seek itself as though it
were withdrawn from itself; but let it withdraw that which it has added to itself.
For
itself lies more deeply within, not only than
those sensible things, which are clearly without, but also than the images of them; which
are indeed in some part of the soul, viz., that
which beasts also have, although these want
understanding, which is proper to the mind.
As therefore the mind is within, it goes forth
in some sort from itself, when it exerts the
affection of love towards these, as it were,
And
footprints of many acts of attention.
these footprints are, as it were, imprinted on
the memory, at the time when the corporeal
things which are without are perceived in such
way, that even when those corporeal things
are absent, yet the images of them are at
hand to those who think of them.
Therefore
let the mind become acquainted with itself,
and not seek itself as if it were absent; but fix
upon itself the act of [voluntary] attention,
by which it was wandering among other
things, and let it think o f
So it will
see that at no time did it ever not love itself,
at no time did it ever not know itself; but by
loving another thing together with itself it
has confounded itself with it, and in some
And so, while
sense has grown one with it.
it embraces diverse things, as though they
were one, it has come to think those things
to be one which are diverse.

itself.

CHAP. 9.

THE MIND KNOWS ITSELF, BY THE
VERY ACT OF UNDERSTANDING THE PRECEPT
TO KNOW ITSELF.

12. Let it not therefore seek to discern

Since

itself as though absent, but take pains to
discern itself as present.
Nor let it take
knowledge of itself as if it did not know itself,
but let it distinguish itself from that which it
knows to be another.
For how will it take
pains to obey that very precept which is given
it, "Know thyself," if
it knows not either
what "know" means or what "thyself"
means?
But if it knows both, then it knows
" know thyself" is not so
also itself.
" Know the cherubim
said to the mind as is
"
and the seraphim ;
for they are absent, and
we believe concerning them, and according
to that belief they are declared to be certain
Nor yet again as it is said,
celestial powers.
Know the will of that man: for this it is not
within our reach to perceive at all, either by
sense or understanding, unless by corporeal
signs actually set forth; and this in such a
way that we rather believe than understand.
Nor again as it is said to a man, Behold thy
own face; which he can only do in a lookingFor even our own face itself is out of
glass.
the reach of our own seeing it; because it is
not there where our look can be directed.
But when it is said to the mind, Know thyself; then it knows itself by that very act by
which it understands the word "thyself;"
and this for no other reason than that it
is
But if
present to itself.
it does not understand what is said, then certainly it does not
do as it
And therefore it is
bidden to do that thing which it does do,
when it understands the very precept that
bids it.

is bid to do.

CHAP. IO.

EVERY MIND KNOWS CERTAINLY
THREE THINGS CONCERNING ITSELF THAT IT
UNDERSTANDS, THAT IT IS, AND THAT IT
LIVES.

13. Let it not then add anything to that
which it knows itself to be, when it is bidden
to know itself.
For it knows, at any rate,
that this is said to itself; namely, to the self
that is, and that lives, and that understands.
But a dead body also is, and cattle live; but
neither a dead body nor cattle understand.
Therefore it so knows that it so is, and that
it so lives, as an understanding is and lives.
When, therefore,
for example's sake, the
mind thinks itself air, it thinks that air understands; it knows, however, that itself understands, but it does not know itself to be air,
but only thinks so.
Let it separate that
which it thinks itself; let it discern that which
it knows; let this remain to it. about which
not even have they doubted who have thought
the mind to be this corporeal thing or that.
For certainly every mind does not consider

Chap. X.]

ON THE TRINITY.

itself to be air; but some think themselves fire,
others the brain, and some one kind of corporeal thing, others another, as I have mentioned before; yet all know that they themselves understand, and are, and live; but they
refer understanding to that which they understand, but to be, and to live, to themselves.
And no one doubts, either that no one understands who does not live, or that no one lives
of whom it
is not true that he is; and that
therefore by consequence that which understands both is and lives; not as a dead body is
which does not live, nor as a soul lives which
does not understand, but in some proper and
Further, they know
more excellent manner.
that they will, and they equally know that no
one can will who is not and who does not
live ; and they also refer that will itself to
something which they will with that
will.
They know also that they remember ; and
they know at the same time that nobody could
remember, unless he both was and lived; but
we refer memory itself also to something, in
that we remember those things.
Therefore
the knowledge and science of many things
are contained in two of these three, memory
and understanding; but will must be present,
For we enthat we may enjoy or use them.
joy things known, in which things themselves
the will finds delight for their own sake, and
so reposes; but we use those things, which
we refer to some other thing which we are to
Neither is the life of man vicious and
enjoy.
culpable in any other way, than as wrongly
is no
using and wrongly enjoying.
place here to discuss this.

But it

14. But since we treat of the nature of the
mind, let us remove from our consideration
all knowledge which is received from without,
through the senses of the body; and attend
more carefully to the position which we have
laid down, that all minds know and are cerFor men certain concerning themselves.
tainly have doubted whether the power of living, of remembering, of understanding^ willing, of thinking, of knowing, of judging, be of
air, or of fire, or of the brain, or of the blood,
or of atoms, or besides the usual four elements
of a fifth kind of body, I know not what; or
whether the combining or tempering together
of this our flesh itself has power to accomplish
And one has attempted to esthese things.
tablish this, and another to establish that.
Yet who ever doubts that he himself lives, and
remembers, and understands, and wills, and
thinks, and knows, and judges?
Seeing that
even if he doubts, he lives; if he doubts,
he remembers why he doubts; if he doubts,
he understands that lie doubts; if he doubts,
he wishes to be certain;
if he doubts, he

thinks; if he doubts, he knows that he does not
know; if he doubts, he judges that he ought
Whosoever therefore
not to assent rashly.
doubts about anything else, ought not to
doubt of all these things; which if they were
not, he would not be able to doubt of anything.

is in

15. They who think the mind to be either
a body or the combination or tempering of the
body, will have all these things to seem to be
in a subject, so that the substance is air, or
fire, or some other corporeal thing, which
they think to be the mind; but that the underthis corporeal
standing (intelligcntia)
thing as its quality, so that this
corporeal
thing is the subject, but the understanding is
in the subject: viz. that the mind is the subject, which they judge to be a corporeal thing,
but the understanding [intelligence], or any
other of those things which we have mentioned
as certain to us, is in that subject. They also
hold nearly the same opinion who deny the
mind itself to be body, but think it to be the
combination or tempering together of the body;
for there is this difference, that the former say
that the mind itself is the substance, in which
the understanding [intelligence] is, as in a subject; but the latter say that the mind itself is
in a subject, viz. in the body, of which it
the combination or tempering together. And
hence, by consequence, what else can they
think, except that the understanding also is
in the same body as in a subject ?

16. And all these do not perceive that the
mind knows itself, even when it seeks for itself, as we have already shown.
But nothing
is at all rightly said to be known while its subAnd therefore, when
stance is not known.
the mind knows itself, it knows its own substance; and when it is certain about itself, it
is certain about its own substance.
But it is
certain about itself, as those things which are
said above prove convincingly; although it is
not at all certain whether itself is air, or fire,
or some body, or some function of body.
And to
Therefore it is not any of these.
that whole which is bidden to know itself, belongs this, that it is certain that it is not any
is uncertain, and
of those things of which it
is certain tlsat it is that only, which only it is
For it thinks in this way of
certain that it is.
fire, or air, and whatever else of the body it
Neither can it in any way be
thinks of.
brought to pass that it should so think that
which itself is, as it thinks that which itself is
Since it thinks all these things through
not.
an imaginary phantasy, whether fire, or air,
or this or that body, or that part or combination and tempering together of the body: nor
assuredly is it said to be all those things, but

is

[Book X.

as

some one of them.
But if it were any one of
them, it would think this one in a different
manner from the rest, viz. not through an
absent things are
imaginary phantasy,
thought, which either themselves or some
of like kind have been touched by the bodily
sense; but by some inward, not feigned, but
true presence (for nothing is more present to
it than itself) ; just as it thinks that itself lives,
and remembers, and understands, and wills.
For it knows these things in itself, and does
not imagine them as though it had touched
them by the sense outside itself, as corporeal
things are touched. And if it attaches nothing to itself from the thought of these things,
so as to think itself to be something of the
kind, then whatsoever remains to it from itself,
that alone is itself.

CHAP. II.

IN MEMORY, UNDERSTANDING [OR
intelligence], AND WILL, WE HAVE TO
NOTE ABILITY, LEARNING, AND USE.
MEMORY, UNDERSTANDING, AND WILL ARE ONE
ESSENTIALLY, AND THREE RELATIVELY.

17. Putting aside, then, for a little while
all other things, of which the mind is certain
let us especially consider
concerning itself,
and discuss these three
memory, understandFor we may commonly discern in
ing, will.
these three the character of the abilities of
the young also; since the more tenaciously
and easily a boy remembers, and the more
acutely he understands, and the more ardently he studies, the more praiseworthy is he in
But when the question is
point of ability.
about any one's learning, then we ask not how
he remembers, or how
solidly and easily
shrewdly he understands; but what it
is that
he remembers, and what it is that he underAnd because the mind is regarded
stands.
as praiseworthy, not only as being learned,
but also as being good, one gives heed not
only to what he remembers and what he
understands, but also to what he wills (velit);
not how ardently he wills, but first what it is
he wills, and then how greatly he wills it.
For the mind that loves eagerly is then to be
praised, when it loves that which ought to be
loved eagerly. Since, then, we speak of these
three
the first of
these is to be considered under the three
heads, of what a man can do in memory, and
The second of
understanding, and will.
them is to be considered in regard to that
which any one has in his memory and in his
understanding, which he has attained by a
But the third, viz. use, lies in
studious will.
the will, which handles those things that are
contained in the memory and understanding,

ability, knowledge, use

whether it refer them to anything further, or
rest satisfied with them as an end.
For to
use, is to take up something into the power
of the will; and to enjoy, is to use with joy,
not any longer of hope, but of the actual
Accordingly, every one who enjoys,
thing.
uses; for he takes up something into the
power of the will, wherein he also is satisfied
But not every one who uses,
as with an end.
enjoys, if he has sought after that, which he
takes up into the power of the will, not on
account of the thing itself, but on account of
something else.

to something.

18. Since, then, these three, memory, understanding, will, are not three lives, but one
life; nor three minds, but one mind; it follows certainly that neither are they three substances, but one substance.
Since memory,
which is called life, and mind, and substance,
is so called in respect to itself ; but it is called
And I
memory, relatively
should say the same also of understanding
ami of will, since they are called understanding and will relatively to something; but each
in respect to itself is life, and mind, and essence. And hence these three are one, in that
they are one life, one mind, one essence; and
whatever else they are severally called in respect to themselves, they are called also together, not plurally, but in the singular number. But they are three, in that wherein they
are mutually referred to each other; and if
they were not equal, and this not only each
to each, but also each to all, they certainly
could not mutually contain each other; for
not only is each contained by each, but also all
by each. For I remember that I have memory
and understanding, and will; and I understand that I understand, and will, and remember; and I will that I will, and remember, and
understand; and I remember together my
whole memory, and understanding, and will.
For that of my memory which I do not remember, is not in my memory; and nothing
is so much in the memory as memory itself.
Therefore I remember the whole memory.
Also, whatever I understand I know that I
understand, and I know that I will whatever I
I remember.
will;
Therefore I remember the whole of my understanding, and the whole of my will.
Likewise, when I understand these three things, I
understand them together as whole.
For
there is none of things intelligible which I
do not understand, except what I do not know;
but what I do not know, I neither remember,
nor will. Therefore, whatever of things intelligible I do not understand, it follows also that I
neither remember nor will. And whatever of
things intelligible I remember and will, it fol-

but whatever

I know

Chap. XII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

H5

lows that I understand. My will also embraces my whole understanding and my whole
memory, whilst I use the whole that I underAnd, therefore, while
stand and remember.
all are mutually comprehended by each, and as
wholes, each as a whole is equal to each as a
whole, and each as a whole at the same time
to all as wholes; and these three are one,
one life, one mind, one essence. 1

CHAP. 12.

THE MIND IS AN IMAGE OF THE
TRINITY IN ITS OWN MEMORY, AND UNDERSTANDING, AND WILL.
19. Are we, then, now to go upward, with
whatever strength of purpose we may, to that

1 [This ternary of meraorj^, understanding, and will, is a better

analogue to the Trinity than the preceding one in chapter IX
namely, mind, knowledge, and love.
Memory, understanding,
and will have equal substantiality, while mind, knowledge, and
love have not. The former are three faculties, in each of which
is the whole mind or spirit. The memory is the whole mind as remembering; the understanding is the whole mind as cognizing;
and the will is the whole mind as determining. The one essence
of the mind is in each of these three modes, each of which is distinct from the others; and yet there are not three essences or minds.
In the other ternary, of mind, knowledge, and love, the last two
are not faculties but single acts of the mind. A particular act of
cognition is not the whole mind in the general mode of cognition.
This would make it a faculty. A particular act of loving, or of
willing, is not the whole mind in the general mode of loving, or of
willing. This would make the momentary and transient act a perThis ternary fails, as we have noticed in a previmanent faculty.
ous annotation (IX. ii. 2), in that only the mind is a substance.

The ternary of memory, understanding, and will is an adequate
But it
analogue to the Trinity in respect to equal substantiality.
fails when the separate consciousness of the Trinitarian distinctions
is brought into consideration. The three faculties of memory, understanding, and will, are not so objective to each other as to admit of three forms of consciousness, of the use of the personal
pronouns, and of the personal actions that are ascribed to the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
It also fails, in that these three
There are other faculties:
are not all the modes of the mind.
e. g., the imagination. The whole essence of the mind is in this
also.-W. G. T. S.]

essence, of which the
chiefest and highest
human mind is an inadequate image, yet an
image ? Or are these same three things to be
yet more distinctly made plain in the soul, by
means of those things which we receive from
without, through the bodily sense, wherein
the knowledge of corporeal things is impressed
Since we found the mind
upon us in time?
itself to be such in its own memory, and understanding, and will, that since it was understood always to know and always to will itself,
it was understood also at the same time always to remember itself, always to understand and love itself, although not always to
think of itself as separate from those things
which are not itself; and hence its memory of
itself, and understanding of itself, are with
For in this case,
difficult discerned in it.
where these two things are very closely conjoined, and one is not preceded by the other
by any time at all, it looks as if they were not
two things, but one called by two names; and
love itself is not so plainly felt to exist when
the sense of need does not disclose it, since
what is loved is always at hand. And hence
these things may be more lucidly set forth,
even to men of duller minds, if such topics
are treated of as are brought within reach of
the mind in time, and happen to it in time;
while it remembers what it did not remember
before, and sees what it did not see before,
But this
and loves what it did not love before.
discussion demands now another beginning,
by reason of the measure of the present book.

BOOK XI.

A KIND OF IMAGE OF THE TRINITY IS POINTED OUT, EVEN IN THE OUTER MAN ; FIRST OF ALL,
IN THOSE THINGS WHICH ARE PERCEIVED FROM WITHOUT, VIZ. IN THE BODILY OBJECT THAT
IS SEEN, AND IN THE FORM THAT IS IMPRESSED BY IT UPON THE SIGHT OF THE SEER, AND
IN THE PURPOSE OF THE WILL THAT COMBINES THE TWO ; ALTHOUGH THESE THREE ARE
NEITHER MUTUALLY EQUAL, NOR OF ONE SUBSTANCE.
NEXT, A KIND OF TRINITY, IN THREE
SOMEWHATS OF ONE SUBSTANCE, IS OBSERVED TO EXIST IN THE MIND ITSELF, AS IT WERE
INTRODUCED THERE FROM THOSE THINGS THAT ARE PERCEIVED FROM WITHOUT ; VIZ. THE
IMAGE OF THE BODILY OBJECT WHICH IS IN THE MEMORY, AND THE IMPRESSION FORMED
THEREFROM WHEN THE MIND'S EYE OF THE THINKER IS TURNED TO IT, AND THE PURPOSE
AND THIS LATTER TRINITY IS ALSO SAID TO PERTAIN TO
OF THE WILL COMBINING BOTH.
THE OUTER MAN, IN THAT IT IS INTRODUCED INTO THE MIND FROM BODILY OBJECTS, WHICH
ARE PERCEIVED FROM WITHOUT.

CHAP. I.

A TRACE OF THE TRINITY ALSO IN

THE OUTER MAN.

the

i. No one doubts that, as the inner man
is endued with understanding, so is the outer
Let us try, then, if we
with bodily sense.
can, to discover in this outer man also, some
trace, however slight, of
Trinity, not
that itself also is in the same manner the
For the opinion of the aposimage of God.
tle is evident, which declares the inner man
to be renewed in the knowledge of God after
the image of Him that created him: 1 whereas
he says also in another place, "But though
our outer man perish, yet the inward man is
renewed day by day."
Let us seek, then,
so far as we can, in that which perishes, some
image of the Trinity, if not so express, yet
perhaps more easy to be discerned.
For
that outer man also is not called man to no
purpose, but because there is in it some likeAnd owing to that
ness of the inner man.
very order of our condition whereby we are
made mortal and fleshly, we handle things
visible more easily and more familiarly than
things intelligible; since the former are outward, the latter inward; and the former are
perceived by the bodily sense, the latter are

1 Col. iii. 10.

2 2 Cor. iv. 16.

life.

the

from

understood by the mind ; and we ourselves, i.e.
our minds, are not sensible things, that is,
bodies, but intelligible things, since we are
And yet, as I said, we are so familiarly
occupied with bodies, and our thought has
projected itself outwardly with so wonderful
a proclivity towards bodies, that, when it has
been withdrawn
uncertainty of
things corporeal, that it may be fixed with a
much more certain and stable knowledge in
flies back to those
that which is spirit, it
bodies, and seeks rest there whence it has
And to this its feebleness
drawn weakness.
we must suit our argument; so that, if we
would endeavor at any time to distinguish
more aptly, and intimate more readily, the
inward spiritual thing, we must take examples
of likenesses from outward things pertaining
The outer man, then, endued
to the body.
as he is with the bodily sense, is conversant
And this bodily sense, as is
with bodies.
easily observed, is fivefold; seeing, hearing,
But it is both a
smelling, tasting, touching.
good deal of trouble, and is not necessary,
that we should inquire of all these five senses
about that which we seek.
For that which
one of them declares to us, holds also good
Let us use, then, principally
in the rest.
For this bodily
the testimony of the eyes.

Chap. II.]

ON THE TRINITY.

sense far surpasses the rest; and in proportion to its difference of kind, is nearer to the
sight of the mind.

CHAP. 2.

A CERTAIN TRINITY IN THE SIGHT.
THAT THERE ARE THREE THINGS IN SIGHT,
WHICH DIFFER IN THEIR OWN NATURE.
IN
WHAT MANNER FROM A VISIBLE THING VISION
IS PRODUCED, OR THE IMAGE OF THAT THING
THE MATTER IS SHOWN
WHICH IS SEEN.
MORE CLEARLY BY AN EXAMPLE. HOW THESE
THREE COMBINE IN ONE.

2. When, then, we see any corporeal object, these three things, as is most easy to
do, are to be considered and distinguished:
First, the object itself which we see; whether
a stone, or flame, or any other thing that can
be seen by the eyes; and this certainly might
exist also already before it was seen; next,
vision or the act of seeing, which did not exist before we perceived the object itself which
is presented to the sense; in the third place,
that which keeps the sense of the eye in the
object seen, so long as it is seen, viz. the atIn these three, then,
tention of the mind.
not only is there an evident distinction, but
also a diverse nature.
For, first, that visible
body is of a far different nature from the
sense of the eyes, through the incidence of
And what
which sense upon it vision arises.
plainly is vision itself other than perception
informed by that thing which is perceived ?
Although there is no vision if the visible object be withdrawn, nor could there be any
vision of the kind at all if there were no body
that could be seen; yet the body by which
the sense of the eyes is informed, when that
body is seen, and the form itself which is imprinted by it upon the sense, which is called
vision, are by no means of the same subFor the body that is seen is, in its
stance.
own nature, separable; but the sense, which
was already in the living subject, even before
it saw what it was able to see, when it fell in
or the vision which
with something visible,
comes to be in the sense from the visible
body when now brought into connection with
it and seen,
the sense, then, I say, or the
vision, that is, the sense informed from without, belongs to the nature of the living subject, which is altogether other than that body
which we perceive by seeing, and by which the
sense is not so formed as to be sense, but as
For unless the sense were also
to be vision.
in us before the presentation to us of the
sensible object, we should not differ from the
blind, at times when we are seeing nothing,
whether in darkness, or when our eyes are
But we differ from them in this, that
closed.

there is in us, even when we are not seeing,
that whereby we are able to see, which is
called the sense; whereas this is not in them,
nor are they called blind for any other reason
Further also,
than because they have it not.
that attention of the mind which keeps the
sense in that thing which we see, and connects both, not only differs from that visible
thing in its nature; in that the one is mind,
and the other body; but also from the sense
and the vision itself: since this attention is
the act of the mind alone; but the sense of
the eyes is called a bodily sense, for no other
reason than because the eyes themselves also
are members of the body; and although an
inanimate body does not perceive, yet the
soul commingled with the body perceives
through a corporeal instrument, and that inAnd this sense,
strument is called sense.
too, is cut off and extinguished by suffering
on the part of the body, when any one is
blinded; while the mind remains the same;
and its attention, since the eyes are lost, has
not, indeed, the sense of the body which it
may join, by seeing, to the body without it,
and so fix its look thereupon and see it, yet
by the very effort shows that, although the
bodily sense be taken away, itself can neither
For there remains
perish nor be diminished.
unimpaired a desire \appetitus\ of
seeing,
whether it can be carried into effect or not.
These three,
then, the body that is seen,
and vision itself, and the attention of mind
which joins both together, are manifestly distinguishable, not only on account of the properties of each, but also on account of the
difference of their natures.

3. And since, in this case, the sensation
does not proceed from that body which is
seen, but' from the body of the living being
that perceives, with which the soul is tempered together in some wonderful way of its
vision is produced, that is, the
own; yet
sense itself is informed, by the body which
is seen; so that now, not only is there the
power of sense, which can exist also unimpaired even in darkness, provided the eyes are
sound, but also a sense actually informed,
which is called vision.
Vision, then, is produced from a thing that is visible; but not
from that alone, unless there be present also
one who sees.
Therefore vision is produced
from a thing that is visible, together with one
who sees; in such way that, on the part of him
who sees, there is the sense of seeing and the
intention of looking and gazing at the object;
information
while yet that
sense,
which is called vision, is imprinted only by
the body which is seen, that is, by some visible thing; which being taken away, that form

the

of

[Book X.

remains no more which was in the sense so
long as that which was seen was present: yet
the sense itself remains, which existed also
before anything was perceived; just as the
trace of a thing in water remains so long as
the body itself, which is impressed on it, is
in the water; but if this has been taken away,
there will no longer be any such trace, although the water remains, which existed also
And
before it took the form of that body.
therefore we cannot, indeed, say that a visible
thing produces the sense; yet it produces the
form, which is, as it were, its own likeness,
which comes to be in the sense, when we
But we do not
perceive anything by seeing.
the same sense, the
distinguish, through
form of the body which we see, from the
form which is produced by it in the sense of
him who sees; since the union of the two is
so close that there is no room for distinguishBut we rationally infer that we
ing them.
could not have sensation at all, unless some
similitude of the body seen was wrought in
our own sense.
For when a ring is imprinted
on wax, it does not follow that no image is
produced, because we cannot discern it unless
when it has been separated.
But since, after
the wax is separated, what was made remains,
so that it can be seen; we are on that account
easily persuaded that there was already also
in the wax a form impressed from the ring
But if the
before it was separated from it.
ring were imprinted upon a fluid, no image
at all would appear when it was withdrawn;
and yet none the less for this ought the reason to discern that there was in that fluid
before the ring was withdrawn a form of the
ring produced from the ring, which is to be distinguished from that form which is in the ring,
whence that form was produced which ceases
to be when the ring is withdrawn, although
that in the ring remains, whence the other was
And so the [sensuous] perception
produced.
of the eyes may not be supposed to contain
no image of the body, which is seen as long
as it is seen, [merely] because when that is
And
withdrawn the image does not remain.
hence it is very difficult to persuade men of
duller mind that an image of the visible thing
is formed in our sense, when we see it, and
that this same form is vision.

4. But if any perhaps attend to what I am
about to mention, they will find no such
Commonly, when
trouble in this inquiry.
we have looked for some little time at a light,
and then shut our eyes, there seem to play
before our eyes certain bright colors variously changing themselves, and shining less and
less until they wholly cease; and these we
must understand to be the remains of that

form which was wrought in the sense, while
the shining body was seen, and that these
variations take place in them as they slowly
and step by step fade away. For the lattices,
too, of windows, should we happen to be
gazing at them, appear often in these colors;
so that it is evident that our sense is affected
by such impressions from that thing which is
seen. That form therefore existed also while
we were seeing, and at that time it was more
clear and express.
But it was then closely
joined with the species of that thing which
was being perceived, so that it could not be
at all distinguished from it; and this was visWhy, even when the little flame
ion itself.
of a lamp is in some way, as it were, doubled
by the divergent rays of the eyes, a twofold
vision comes to
pass, although the thing
For the same rays, as
which is seen is one.
they shoot forth each from its own eye, are
affected severally, in that they are not allowed
to meet evenly and conjointly, in regarding
that corporeal thing, so that one combined
And so,
view might be formed from both.
if we shut one eye, we shall not see two flames,
But why, if we shut
but one as it really is.
the left eye, that appearance ceases to be seen,
which was on the right; and if, in turn, we
shut the right eye, that drops out of existence
which was on the left, is a matter both tedious
in itself, and not necessary at all to our present subject to inquire and discuss.
For it is
enough for the business in hand to consider,
that unless some image, precisely like the thing
we perceive, were produced in our sense, the
appearance of the flame would not be doubled
according to the number of the eyes; since a
certain way of perceiving has been employed,
which could separate the union of rays. Certainly nothing that is really single can be seen
as if it were double by one eye, draw it down,
or press, or distort it as you please, if the
other is shut.

5. The case then being so, let us remember
how these three things, although diverse in
nature, are tempered together into a kind of
unity; that is, the form of the body which is
seen, and the image of it impressed on the
sense, which is vision or sense informed, and
the will of the mind which applies the sense
to the sensible thing, and retains the vision
The first of these, that is, the
itself in it.
visible thing itself, does not belong to the
nature of the living being, except when we
discern our own body.
But the second belongs to that nature to this extent, that it is
wrought in the body, and through the body
in the soul; for it is wrought in the sense,
which is neither without the body nor without
But the third is of the soul alone,
the soul.

Chap. III.]

ON THE TRINITY.

it

because it is the will. Although then the substances of these three are so different, yet they
coalesce into such a unity that the two former
can scarcely be distinguished, even with the
intervention of the reason as judge, namely
the form of the body which is seen, and the
image of it which is wrought in the sense,
And the will so powerfully
that is, vision.
combines these two, as both to apply the
sense, in order to be informed, to that thing
which is perceived, and to retain it when informed in that thing. And if
is so vehement that it can be called love, or desire, or
lust, it vehemently affects also the rest of the
body of the living being; and where a duller
and harder matter does not resist, changes it
One may see the
into like shape and color.
little body of a chameleon vary with ready
change, according to the colors which it sees.
And in the case of other animals, since their
grossness of flesh does not easily admit change,
the offspring, for the most part, betray the
particular fancies of the mothers, whatever it
is that they have beheld with special delight.
For the more tender,- and so to say, the more
formable, are the primary seeds, the more
effectually and capably they follow the bent
of the soul of the mother, and the phantasy
that is wrought in it through that body, which
Abundant instances
it has greedily beheld.
might be adduced, but one is sufficient, taken
from the most trustworthy books; viz. what
Jacob did, that the sheep and goats might give
birth to offspring of various colors, by placing
variegated rods before them in the troughs of
water for them to look at as they drank, at
the time they had conceived. 1

CHAP. 3.

THE UNITY OF THE THREE TAKES
PLACE IN THOUGHT, VIZ. OF MEMORY, OF INTERNAL VISION, AND OF WILL COMBINING BOTH.
6. The rational soul, however, lives in a
degenerate fashion,when it lives according to a
trinity of the outer man; that is, when it applies to those things which form the bodily
sense from without, not a praiseworthy will,
by which to refer them to some useful end,
but a base desire, by which to cleave to them.
Since even if the form of the body, which was
corporeally perceived, be withdrawn, its likeness remains in the memory, to which the will
may again direct its eye, so as to be formed
thence from within, as the sense was formed
from without by the presentation of the sensiAnd so that trinity is produced
ble body.
from memory, from internal vision, and from
the will which unites both. And when these
three things are combined into one, from that

things

combination 2 itself they are called conception. 3
And in these three there is no longer any diFor neither is the senversity of substance.
sible body there, which is altogether distinct
from the nature of the living being, nor is the
bodily sense there informed so as to produce
vision, nor does the will itself perform its office
of applying the sense, that is to be informed,
to the sensible body, and of retaining it in
it when informed; but in place of that bodily
species which was perceived from without,
there comes the memory retaining that species
which the soul has imbibed through the bodily sense; and in place of that vision which
was outward when the sense was informed
through the sensible body, there comes a
similar vision within, while the eye of the mind
is informed from that which the memory retains, and the
that are
corporeal
thought of are absent; and the will itself, as
before it applied the sense yet to be informed
to the corporeal thing presented from without, and united it thereto when informed, so
now converts the vision of the recollecting
mind to memory, in order that the mental sight
may be informed by that which the memory
has retained, and so there may be in the conception a like vision. And as it was the reason
that distinguished the visible appearance by
which the bodily sense was informed, from the
similitude of it, which was wrought in the
sense when informed in order to produce vision (otherwise they had been so united as to be
thought altogether one and the same); so,
although that phantasy also, which arises from
the mind thinking of the appearance of a
body that it has seen, consists of the similitude
of the body which the memory retains, together with that which is thence formed in the
eye of the mind that recollects; yet
so
seems to be one and single, that it can only
be discovered to be two by the judgment of
reason, by which we understand that which
remains in the memory, even when we think
it from some other source, to be a different
thing from that which is brought into being
when we remember, that is, come back again
to the memory, and there find the same apAnd if this were not now there,
pearance.
we should say that wr e had so forgotten as to
be altogether unable to recollect. And if the
eye of him who recollects were not informed
from that thing which was in the memory, the
vision of the thinker could in no way take
place; but the conjunction of both, that is, of
that which the memory retains, and of that
which is thence expressed so as to inform the
eye of him who recollects, makes them ap-

it

1 Cen. xxx. 37-41.

2 Coactus.

3 Cogitatio.

[Book XI.

pear as if they were one, because they are exceedingly like. But when the eye of the concipient is turned away thence, and has ceased
to look at that which was perceived in the
memory, then nothing of the form that was
impressed thereon will remain in that eye,
and it will be informed by that to which it had
bring about
again been turned, so as
another conception. Yet that remains which it
has left in the memory, to which it may again
be turned when we recollect it, and being
turned thereto may be informed by it, and
become one with that whence it is informed.

to

CHAP. 4. HOW THIS UNITY COMES TO PASS.

within.

7. But if that will which moves to and fro,
hither and thither, the eye that is to be informed, and unites it when formed, shall
have wholly converged to the inward phantasy, and shall have absolutely turned the
mind's eye from the presence of the bodies
which lie around the senses, and from the
very bodily senses themselves, and shall have
wholly turned it to that image, which is perceived within; then so exact a likeness of the
bodily species expressed from the memory is
presented, that not even reason itself is permitted to discern whether the body itself is
seen without, or only something of the kind
For men sometimes
thought of
either allured or frightened by over-much
thinking of visible things, have even suddenly
uttered words accordingly, as if in real fact
they were engaged in the very midst of such
actions or sufferings. And I remember some
one telling me that he was wont to perceive
in thought, so distinct and as it were solid, a
form of a female body, as to be moved, as
Such power has
though it were a reality.
the soul over its own body, and such influence
has it in turning and changing the quality of
its [corporeal] garment; just as a man may
be affected when clothed, to whom his clothIt is the same kind of affection,
ing sticks.
too, with which we are beguiled
through
But it makes a very
imaginations in sleep.
great difference, whether the senses of the
body are lulled to torpor, as in the case of
inward
sleepers, or disturbed
structure, as in the case of madmen, or distracted in some other mode, as in that of
diviners or prophets; and so from one or
other of these causes, the intention of the
mind is forced by a kind of necessity upon
those images which occur to it, either from
memory, or by some other hidden force
through certain spiritual commixtures of a
similarly spiritual substance: or whether, as
sometimes happens to people in health and

from

their

awake, that the will occupied by thought
turns itself away from the senses, and so informs the eye of the mind by various images
of sensible things, as though those sensible
things themselves were actually perceived.
But these impressions of images not only
take place when the will is directed upon such
things by desiring them, but also when, in
order to avoid and guard against them, the
mind is carried away to look upon these very
And hence,
thing so as to flee from them.
not only desire, but fear, causes both the
bodily eye to be informed by the sensible
things themselves, and the mental eye (aeies)
Acby the images of those sensible things.
cordingly, the more vehement has been either
fear or desire, the more distinctly is the eye
informed, whether in the case of him who
[sensuously] perceives by means of the body
that which lies close to him in place, or in
the case of him who conceives from the image
of the body which is contained in the memWhat then a body in place is to the
ory.
bodily sense, that, the similitude of a body
in memory is to the eye of the mind; and
what the vision of one who looks at a thing
is to that appearance of the body from which
the sense is informed, that, the vision of a
concipient is to the image of the body established in the memory, from which the eye of
the mind is informed; and what the intention
of the will is towards a body seen and the
vision to be combined with it, in order that a
certain unity of three things may therein take
place, although their nature is diverse, that,
the same intention of the will
is towards
combining the image of the body which is in
the memory, and the vision of the concipient,
that is, the form which the eye of the mind
has taken in returning to the memory, in
order that here too a certain unity may take
place of three things, not now distinguished
by diversity of nature, but of one and the
same substance; because this whole is within,
and the whole is one mind.

CHAP. 5.

THE TRINITY OF THE OUTER MAN,
OR OF EXTERNAL VISION, IS NOT AN IMAGE
THE LIKENESS OF GOD IS DESIRED
OF GOD.
IN EXTERNAL VISION THE
EVEN IN SINS.
FORM OF THE CORPOREAL THING IS AS IT
WERE THE PARENT, VISION THE OFFSPRING ;
BUT THE WILL THAT UNITES THESE SUGGESTS
THE HOLY SPIRIT.

8. But as, when [both] the form and species
of a body have perished, the will cannot recall
to it the sense of perceiving; so, when the
image which memory bears is blotted out by
forgetfulness, the will will be unable to force

Chap. V.]

ON THE TRINITY.

back the eye of the mind by recollection, so
But because the
as to be formed thereby.
mind has great power to imagine not only
things forgotten, but also things that it never
saw, or experienced, either by increasing, or
diminishing, or changing, or compounding,
after its pleasure, those which have not dropped
out of its remembrance, it often imagines
things to be such as either it knows they are
And in
not, or does not know that they are.
this case we have to take care, lest it either
speak falsely that it may deceive, or hold an
And if it avoid
opinion so as to be deceived.
these two evils, then imagined phantasms do
not hinder it: just as sensible things experienced or retained by memory do not hinder
it, if they are neither passionately sought for
when pleasant, nor basely shunned when unBut when the will leaves better
pleasant.
things, and greedily wallows in these, then it
becomes unclean; and they are so thought of
hurtfully, when they are present, and also
more hurtfully when they are absent. And
he therefore lives badly and degenerately
who lives according to the trinity of the outer
man; because it is the purpose of using things
sensible and corporeal, that has begotten also
that trinity, which although it imagines within,
For no one
yet imagines things without.
could use those things even well, unless the
images of things perceived by the senses
And unless
were retained in the memory.
the will for the greatest part dwells in the
higher and interior things, and unless that
will itself, which is accommodated either to
bodies without, or to the images of them
within, refers whatever it receives in them to
a better and truer life, and rests in that end
by gazing at which it judges that those things
ought to be done; what else do we do, but
prohibits us from
that which the apostle
" Be not conformed to
doing, when he says,
this world "? x And therefore that trinity is
not an image of God since it is produced in
the mind itself through the bodily sense, from
the lowest, that is, the corporeal creature,
Yet neither
than which the mind is higher.
is it altogether dissimilar: for what is there
that has not a likeness of God, in proportion
to its kind and measure, seeing that God
made all things very good,
2 and for no other
reason except that He Himself is supremely
In so far, therefore, as anything that
good ?
is, is good, in so far plainly it has still some
likeness of the supreme good, at however,
great a distance; and if a natural likeness,
then certainly a right and well-ordered one;
but if a faulty likeness, then certainly a de-

1 Rom. xii. 2.

2 Ecclus. xxxix. 16.

based and perverse one.
For even souls in
their very sins strive after nothing else but
some kind of likeness of God, in a proud and
preposterous, and, so to say, slavish liberty.
So neither could our first parents have been
persuaded to sin unless it had been said,
"Ye shall be as gods." 3 No doubt everything in the creatures which is in any way
like God, is not also to be called His image;
but that alone than which He Himself alone
For that only is in all points copied
is higher.
from Him, between which and Himself no
nature is interposed.

Therefore

9. Of that vision then; that is, of the form
which is wrought in the sense of him who
sees; the form of the bodily thing from which
But
it is wrought, is, as it were, the parent.
it is not a true parent; whence neither is that a
true offspring; for it is not altogether born
therefrom, since something else is applied to
the bodily thing in order that it may be
formed from it, namely, the sense of him
who sees. And for this reason, to love this
is to be estranged. 4
the will
which unites both, viz. the quasi-parent and
the quasi-child, is more spiritual than either
For that bodily thing which is disof them.
But the vision
cerned, is not spiritual at all.
which comes into existence in the sense, has
something spiritual mingled with it, since it
cannot come into existence without the soul.
But it is not wholly spiritual; since that which
Therefore
is formed is a sense of the body.
the will which unites both is confessedly more
spiritual, as I have said; and so it begins to
suggest (insinuare), as it were, the person of
But it belongs
the Spirit in the Trinity.
more to the sense that is formed, than to
For
the bodily thing whence it
the sense and will of an animate being belongs to the soul, not to the stone or other
It does not therebodily thing that is seen.
fore proceed from that bodily thing as from a
parent; yet neither does it proceed from that
other as it were offspring, namely, the vision
For the will
and form that is in the sense.
existed before the vision came to pass, which
will applied the sense that was to be formed
to the bodily thing that was to be discerned;
For how could
but it was not yet satisfied.
that which was not yet seen satisfy? And
satisfaction means a will that rests content.
And, therefore, we can neither call the will
the quasi-offspring of vision, since it existed
before vision; nor the quasi-parent, since
that vision was not formed and expressed

is formed.

3 Gen. iii. 5.
4 Vid. Retract. Bk. II. c. 15, where Augustin adds that it is
possible to love the bodily species to the praise of the Creator, in
which case there is no "
estrangement.''

.

.

i5o

[Book XI.

from the will, but from the bodily thing that
was seen.

CHAP. 6.

OF WHAT KIND WE ARE TO RECKON
THE REST (RKQUIES), AND END (FINIS), OF
THE WILL IN VISION.

it

But if

is manifest.

10. Perhaps we can rightly call vision the
end and rest of the will, only with respect to
this one object [namely, the bodily thing that
For it will not will nothing else
is visible].
merely because it sees something which it
is
now willing.
It is not therefore the whole
will itself of the man, of which the end is
nothing else than blessedness; but the will
this one object,
provisionally directed to
which has as its end in seeing, nothing but
vision, whether it refer the thing seen to
For if it does not
any other thing or not.
refer the vision to anything further, but wills
only to see this, there can be no question
made about showing that the end of the will
is the vision; for it
does refer it to anything further, then certainly it does will something else, and it will
not be now a will merely to see; or if to see,
not one to see the particular thing.
Just as,
if any one wished to see the scar, that from
thence he might learn that there had been a
wound; or wished to see the window, that
through the window he might see the passersby: all these and other such acts of will have
their own proper [proximate] ends, which are
[final] end of the will by
referred to that
which we will to live blessedly, and to attain
to that life which is not referred to anything
else, but suffices of itself to him who loves it.
The will then to see, has as its end vision;
and the will to see this particular thing, has
as its end the vision of this particular thing.
Therefore the will to see the scar, desires its
own end, that is, the vision of the scar, and
does not reach beyond it;
for the will to
prove that there had been a wound, is a distinct will, although dependent upon that, of
which the end also is to .prove that there had
And the will to see the winbeen a wound.
dow, has as its end the vision of the window;
for that is another and further will which
depends upon it, viz. to see the passers-by
through the window, of which also the end is
the vision of the passers-by.
But all the
several wills that are bound to each other, are
at. once right, if that one is good, to which all
are referred; and if that is bad, then all are
And so the connected series of right
bad.
wills is a sort of road which consists as it
were of certain steps, whereby to ascend to
blessedness; but the entanglement of
depraved and distorted wills is a bond by which

it

is

he will be bound who thus acts, so as to be
cast into outer darkness. 1
Blessed therefore
are they who in act and character sing the
2 and woe to
song of the steps [degrees];
those that draw sin, as it were a long rope. 3
And it is just the same to speak of the will
being in repose, which we call
its end, if
still referred to something further, as if
we should say that the foot is at rest in walking, when it
is placed there, whence yet another foot may be planted in the direction of
the man's steps.
But if something so satisfies, that the will acquiesces in it with a
certain delight; it is nevertheless not yet that
to which the man ultimately tends; but this
too is referred to something further, so as to
be regarded not as the native country of a
citizen, but as a place of refreshment, or
even of stopping, for a traveller.

CHAP. 7.

THERE IS ANOTHER TRINITY IN THE
MEMORY OF HIM WHO THINKS OVER AGAIN
WHAT HE-HAS SEEN.

11. But yet again, take the case of another
trinity, more inward indeed than that which
is in things sensible, and in the senses, but
which is yet conceived from thence; while
now. it is no longer the sense of the body that
is informed from the body, but the eye of
the mind that is informed from the memory,
since the species of the body which we perceived from without has inhered in the memAnd that species, which is in the
ory itself.
memory, we call the quasi-parent of
that
which is wrought in the phantasy of one who
For it was in the memory also,
conceives.
before we conceived it, just as the body was
in place also before we [sensuously] perceived
it, in order that vision might take place. But
when it
is conceived, then from that form
which the memory retains, there is copied
in the mind's eye {acie) of him who conceives,
and by remembrance is formed, that species,
which is the quasi-offspring of that which
But neither is the one
the memory retains.
a true parent, nor the other a true offspring.
For the mind's vision which is formed from
memory when we think anything by recollection, does not proceed from that
species
which we remember as seen; since we could
not indeed have remembered those things,
unless we had seen them; yet the mind's
eye, which is informed by the recollection,
existed also before we saw the body that we
remember; and therefore how much more before we committed it to memory ?
Although
therefore the form which is wrought in the
mind's eye of him who remembers, is wrought

1 Matt. xxii. 13.

2 Psalmscxx., and following.

3 Isa. v. iS.

Chap. VIII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

from that form which is in the memory; yet
the mind's eye itself does not exist from
thence, but existed before it. And it follows,
that if the one is not a true parent, neither is
But both that
the other a true offspring.
quasi-parent and that quasi-offspring suggest
something, whence the inner and truer things
may appear more practically and more certainly.

12. Further, it is more difficult to discern
clearly, whether the will which connects the
vision to the memory is not either the parent
or the offspring of some one of them; and
the likeness and equality of the same nature
and substance cause this difficulty of distinFor it is not possible to do in this
guishing.
case, as with the sense that is formed from
without (which is easily discerned from the
sensible body, and again the will from both),
on account of the difference of nature which
is mutually in all three, and of which we have
For although this
treated sufficiently above.
trinity, of which we at present speak, is introduced into the mind from without; yet it is
transacted within, and there is no part of it
outside of the nature of the mind itself.
In
what way, then, can it be demonstrated that
the will is neither* the quasi-parent, nor the
quasi-offspring, either of the corporeal likeness which is contained in the memory, or
of that which is copied thence in recollecting;
when it so unites both in the act of conceiving, as that they appear singly as one, and
cannot be discerned except by reason ?
It
is then first to be considered that there cannot be any will to remember, unless we retain
in the recesses of the memory either the
whole, or some part, of that thing which we
For the very will to rewish to remember.
member cannot arise in the case of a thing
which we have forgotten altogether and absosince we have already remembered
lutely;
that the thing which we wish to remember is,
For example,
or has been, in our memory.
if I wish to remember what I supped on yesterday, either I have already remembered
that I did sup, or if not yet this, at least I
have remembered something about that time
if nothing else; at all events, I have
itself,
remembered yesterday, and that part of yesterday in which people usually sup, and what
For if I had not remembered
supping is.
anything at all of this kind, I could not wish
to remember what I supped on yesterday.
Whence we may perceive that the will of
remembering proceeds, indeed, from those
things which are retained in the memory, with
the addition also of those which, by the act
of discerning, are copied
through
recollection; that is, from the combination

thence

of something which we have remembered,
and of the vision which was thence wrought,
when we remembered, in the mind's eye of
him who thinks.
But the will itself which
unites both requires also some other thing,
which is, as it were, close at hand, and adjacent to him who remembers.
There are,
then, as many trinities of this kind as there
are remembrances; because there is no one
of them wherein there are not these three
things, viz. that which was stored up in the
memory also before it was thought, and that
which takes place in the conception when
this is discerned, and the will that unites
both, and from both and itself as a third,
Or is it rather
completes one single thing.
that we so recognize some one trinity in this
kind, as that we are to speak generally, of
whatever corporeal species lie hidden in the
memory, as of a single unity, and again of the
general vision of the mind which remembers
and conceives such things, as of a single
unity, to the combination of which two there
is to be joined as a third the will that combines them, that this whole may be a certain
unity made up from three ?

CHAP. 8.

DIFFERENT MODES OF CONCEIVING.

But since the eye of the mind cannot look
at all things together, in one glance, which
the memory retains, these trinities of thought
alternate- in a series of withdrawals and successions, and so that trinity becomes most
innumerably numerous; and yet not infinite,
if it pass not beyond the number of things
stored up in the memory. . For, although we
begin to reckon from the earliest perception
which any one has of material things through
any bodily sense, and even take in also those
things which he has forgotten, yet the number would undoubtedly be certain and deterFor we not
mined, although innumerable.
only call infinite things innumerable, but also
finite, exceed any
those, which, although
one's power of reckoning.
13. But we can hence

perceive a little
more clearly that what the memory stores up
and retains is a different thing from that
which is thence copied in the conception of
the man who remembers, although, when
both are combined together, they appear to
be one and the same; because we can only
remember just as many species of bodies as
we have actually seen, and so great, and
such, as we have actually seen; for the mind
imbibes them into the memory from the
bodily sense; whereas the things seen in conception, although drawn from those things
which are in the memory, yet are multiplied

[Book XI.

and varied innumerably, and altogether withFor I remember, no doubt, but
out end.
one sun, because according to the fact, I
have seen but one; but if I please, I conceive
of two, or three, or as many as I will; but
the vision of m)' mind, when I conceive of
many, is formed from the same memory by
which I remember one. And I remember it just
For if I remember it as
as large as I saw it.
larger or smaller than I saw it, then I no longer
remember what I saw, and so I do not remember it. But because I remember it, I remember
it as large as I saw it; yet I conceive of it as
And
greater or as less according to my will.
I remember it as I saw it; but I conceive of
it as running its course as I will, and as standing still where I will, and as coming whence
I will, and whither I will.
is in my
power to conceive of it as square, although
I remember it as round ;
of
what color I please, although I have never
seen, and therefore do not remember, a green
sun; and as the sun, so all other things.
But owing to the corporeal and sensible nature of these forms of things, the mind falls
into error when it imagines them to exist
without, in the same mode in which it conceives them within, either when they have
already ceased to exist without, but are still
retained in the memory, or when in any other
way also, that which we remember is formed
in the mind, not by faithful recollection, but
after the variations of thought.

For it

again,

and

14. Yet it very often happens that we believe also a true narrative, told us by others,
of things which the narrators have themselves
perceived by their senses. And in this case,
when we conceive the things narrated to us,
as we hear them, the eye of the mind does
not seem to be turned back to the memory,
in order to bring up visions in our thoughts;
for we do not conceive these things from our
own recollection, but upon the narration of
another; and that trinity does not here seem
to come to its completion, which is made
when the species lying hid in the memory,
and the vision of the man that remembers,
For I do
are combined by will as a third.
not conceive that which lay hid in my memory, but that which I hear, when anything is
I am not speaking of the
narrated to me.
words themselves of the speaker, lest any
one should suppose that I have gone off to
that other trinity, which is transacted without,
in sensible things, or in the senses: but I am
conceiving of those species of material things,
which the narrator signifies to me by words
and sounds; which species certainly I conceive of not by remembering, but by hearing.
But if we consider the matter more carefully,

it

And so

even in this case, the limit of the memory is not
overstepped. For I could not even understand
the narrator, if I did not remember generically the individual things of which he speaks,
even although I then hear them for the first
For
time as connected together in one tale.
he who, for instance, describes to me some
mountain stripped of timber, and clothed
with olive trees, describes it to me who
remembers the species both of mountains,
and of timber, and of olive trees; and if
had forgotten these, I should not know at all
of what he was speaking, and therefore could
not conceive that description.
comes to pass, that every one who conceives
things corporeal, whether he himself imagine
anything, or hear, or read, either a narrative
of things past, or a foretelling of things
future, has recourse to his memory, and finds
there the limit and measure of all the forms
For no
at which he gazes in his thought.
one can conceive at all, either a color or a
form of body, which he never saw, or a
sound which he never heard, or a flavor which
he never tasted, or a scent which he never
smelt, or any touch of a corporeal thing
But if no one conceives
which he never felt.
anything corporeal except What he has [sensuously] perceived, because no one remembers anything corporeal except what he has
thus perceived, then, as is the limit of perceiving in bodies, so is the limit of thinking
For the sense receives the
in the memory.
species from that body which we perceive,
and the memory from the sense; but the
concipient, from the
mental eye of
memory.

the

15. Further, as the will applies the sense
to the bodily object, so it applies the memory
to the sense, and the eye of the mind of the
But that which
concipient to the memory.
harmonizes those things and unites them,
itself also disjoins and separates them, that
But it separates the bodily senses
is, the will.
from the bodies that are to be perceived, by
movement of the body, either to hinder our
perceiving the thing, or that we may cease to
perceive it: as when we avert our eyes from
that which we are unwilling to see, or shut
them; so, again, the ears from sounds, or the
So also we turn away
nostrils from smells.
from tastes, either by shutting the mouth, or
by casting the thing out of the mouth.
In
touch, also, we either remove the
bodily
thing, that we may not touch what we do not
wish, or if we were already touching it, we
Thus the will acts by
fling or push it away.
movement of the body, so that the bodily
sense shall not be joined to the sensible
And it does this according to its
things.

Chap. X.]

ON THE TRINITY.

*53

result,

endurance.

power; for when it endures hardship in so
doing, on account of the condition of slavish
mortality, then torment is the
in
such wise that nothing remains to the will
But the will averts the
save
memory from ttie sense; when, through its
being intent on something else, it does not
As any
suffer things present to cleave to it.
one may see, when often we do not seem to
ourselves to have heard some one who was
speaking to us, because we were thinking of
But this is a mistake; for
something else.
we did hear, but we do not remember, because the words of the speaker presently
slipped out of the perception of our ears,
through the bidding of the will being diverted
elsewhere, by which they are usually fixed
Therefore, we should say
in the memory.
more accurately in such a case, we do not
remember, than, we did not hear; for it happens even in reading, and to myself very
frequently, that when I have read through a
page or an epistle, I do not know what I have
read, and I begin it again.
For the purpose
of the will being fixed on something else, the
memory was not so applied to the bodily
sense, as the sense itself was applied to the
So, too, any one who walks with
letters.
the will intent on something else, does not
know where he has got to; for if he had not
seen, he would not have walked thither, or
would have felt his way in walking with greater
attention, especially if he was passing through
a place he did not know; yet, because he
walked easily, certainly he saw; but because
the memory was not applied to the sense itself in the same way as the sense of the eyes
was applied to the places through which he
was passing, he could not remember at all
even the last thing he saw.
Now, to will to
turn away the eye of the mind from that
which is in the memory, is nothing else but
not to think thereupon.

CHAP. 9.

SPECIES IS PRODUCED BY SPECIES IN

SUCCESSION.

16. In this arrangement, then, while we
begin from the bodily species and arrive finally at the species which comes to be in the
intuition (contuitit) of the concipient, we find
four species born, as it were, step by step one
from the other, the second from the first,
the third from the second, the fourth from
the third: since from the species of the body
itself, there arises that which comes to be in
the sense of the percipient; and from this,
that which comes to be in the memory; and
from this, that which comes to be in the
And the will,
mind's eye of the concipient.

from

therefore, thrice combines as it were parent
with offspring: first the species of the body
with that to which it gives birth in the sense
of the body; and that again with that which
from it comes to be in the memory; and this
also, thirdly, with that which is born from
it in the intuition of the concipient's mind.
But the intermediate combination which is
the second, although it is nearer to the first,
is yet not so like the first as the third is.
For there are two kinds of vision, the one of
[sensuous] perception (smtientis), the other of
But in order that
conception {cogita?itis).
the vision of conception may come to be,
there is wrought for the purpose, in
the
the
memory,
[sensuous]
perception something like it, to which the
eye of the mind may turn itself in conceiving,
as the glance {acies) of the eyes turns itself in
[sensuously] perceiving to the bodily object.
I have, therefore, chosen to put forward two
trinities in this kind: one when the vision of
perception is formed from the
[sensuous]
bodily object, the other when the vision of
conception is formed from the memory.
But
I have refrained from commending an intermediate one; because we do not commonly
call it vision, when the form which comes to
be in the sense of him who perceives, is enYet in all cases the
trusted to the memory.
will does not appear unless as the combiner
as it were of parent and offspring; and so,
proceed from whence it may, it can be called
neither parent nor offspring.

vision

of

CHAP. IO.

THE IMAGINATION ALSO ADDS EVEN
TO THINGS WE HAVE NOT SEEN, THOSE
THINGS WHICH WE HAVE SEEN ELSEWHERE.
17. But if we do not remember except
what we have [sensuously] perceived, nor
conceive except what we remember; why
do we often conceive things that are false,
when certainly we do not remember falsely
those things which we have perceived, unless
it be because that will (which I have already
taken pains to show as much as I can to be
the uniter and the separater of things of this
kind) leads the vision of the conceiver that is
to be formed, after its own will and pleasure,

1 [Augustin's map of consciousness is as follows: (1). The

(2).

corporeal species=the external object (outward appearance).
The sensible species=the sensation (appearance for the sense).
(3). The mental species in its first form = present perception.
The mental species in its second form = remembered perception.
These three "species" or appearances of the object: namely,
corporeal, sensible, and mental, according to him, are combined in
one synthesis with the object by the operation of the will. By
"
will," he does not mean distinct and separate volitions : but the
spontaneity of the ego what Kant denominates the mechanism
of the understanding, seen in the spontaneous employment of the
categories of thought, as the mind ascends from empirical sensation to rational conception.

The English translator has failed to make clear the sharply defined psychology of these chapters, by loosely rendering "sentire,'' "to perceive," and "
cogitare"

1 to think. W.G.T.S.]

(4).

[Book XL

through the hidden stores of the memory;
and, in order to conceive [imagine] those
things which we do not remember, impels it
to take one thing from hence, and another
from thence, from those which we do remember; and these things combining into one
vision make something which is called false,
because it either does not exist externally in
the nature of corporeal things, or does not
seem copied from the memory, in that we do
not remember that we ever saw such a thing.
For who ever saw a black swan ? And therefore no one remembers a black swan; yet who
is there that cannot conceive it ? For it is easy
to apply to that shape which we have come to
know by seeing it, a black color, which we have
not the less seen in other bodies; and because we have seen both, we remember both.
Neither do I remember a bird with four feet,
because I never saw one; but I contemplate
such a phantasy very easily, by adding to
some winged shape such as I have seen, two
other feet, such as I have likewise seen. 1 And
therefore, in conceiving conjointly, what we
remember to have seen singly, we seem not
to conceive that which we remember; while
we really do this under the law of the memory, whence we take everything which we join
together after our own pleasure in manifold
For we do not conceive
and diverse ways.
even the very magnitudes of bodies, which
magnitudes we never saw, without help of the
memory; for the measure of space to which
gaze commonly reaches through the
our
magnitude of the world, is the measure also
to which we enlarge the bulk of bodies, whatever they may be, when we conceive them as
And reason, indeed, progreat as we can.
ceeds still beyond, but phantasy does not
follow her; as when reason announces the
infinity of number also, which no vision of
him who conceives according to corporeal
The same reason
things can apprehend.
also teaches that the most minute atoms are
infinitely divisible; yet when we have come
to those slight and minute particles which we
have seen, then we can no
remember to
longer behold phantasms more slender and
more minute, although reason does not cease
So we conceive
to continue to divide them.

no corporeal things, except either those we
remember, or from those things which we
remember.

is

NUMBER, WEIGHT, MEASURE.

CHAP. II.
18. But because those things which are
impressed on the memory singly, can be
according to number, measure
conceived
seems to belong to the memory, but number
to the vision; because, although the multiplicity of such visions is innumerable, yet a
limit not to be transgressed is prescribed for
Therefore, measure
each in the memory.
appears in the memory, number in the vision
of things: as there is some measure in visible
bodies themselves, to which measure the
sense of those who see is most numerously
adjusted, and from one visible object
formed the vision of many beholders, so that
even a single person sees commonly a single
thing under a double appearance, on account
of the number of his two eyes, as we have
Therefore there is some
laid down above.
measure in those things whence visions are
copied, but in the visions themselves there
But the will which unites and
is number.
regulates these things, and combines them
into a certain unity, and does not quietly rest
its desire of [sensuously] perceiving or of
things from
conceiving,
whence the visions are formed, resembles
And therefore I would just notice
weight.
by way of anticipation these three things,
measure, number, weight, which are to be
In the
perceived in all other things also.
meantime, I have now shown as much as I
can, and towhom I can, that the will is the
uniter of the visible thing and of the vision;
as it were, of parent and of offspring; whether
in [sensuous] perception or in conception,
and that it cannot be called either parent or
Wherefore time admonishes us
offspring.
to seek for this same trinity in the inner man,
and to strive to pass inwards from that animal and carnal and (as he is called) outward
man, of whom I have so long spoken. And
here we hope to be able to find an image of
God according to the Trinity, He Himself
helping our efforts, who as things themselves
show, and as Holy Scripture also witnesses,
all things in measure, and
has
regulated
number, and weight.

except in

those

i Vid. Retract. II. xv. 2.

[Augustin here says that when he
wrote the above, he forgot what is said in Leviticus xi. 20, of " fowls
that creep, going upon all four, which have legs above their feet
to leap withal upon the earth." W.G.T.S.]

2 Wisd. xi. 21.

BOOK XII.

COMMENCING WITH A DISTINCTION BETWEEN WISDOM AND KNOWLEDGE, POINTS OUT A KIND OF
TRINITY, OF A PECULIAR SORT, IN THAT WHICH IS PROPERLY CALLED KNOWLEDGE, A*ND
WHICH IS THE LOWER OF THE TWO ; AND THIS TRINITY, ALTHOUGH IT CERTAINLY PERTAINS
TO THE INNER MAN, IS STILL NOT YET TO BE CALLED OR THOUGHT AN IMAGE OF GOD.

CHAP. I.

OF WHAT KIND ARE THE OUTER AND

THE INNER MAN.
i. Come now, and let us see where lies, as
it were, the boundary line between the outer
For whatever we have in
and inner man.
the mind common with the beasts, thus much
is rightly said to belong to the outer man.
For the outer man is not to be considered
to be the body only, but with the addition
also of a certain peculiar life of the body,
whence the structure of the body derives its
vigor, and all the senses with which he is
equipped for the perception of outward things;
and when the images of these outward things
already perceived, that have been fixed in the
memory, are seen again by recollection, it is
still a matter pertaining to the outer man.
And in all these things we do not differ from
the beasts, except that in shape of body we
And we are adare not prone, but upright.
monished through this, by Him who made
us, not to be like the beasts in that which is
while we
our better part
differ from them by the uprightness of the
Not that we are to throw our mind
body.
into those bodily things which are exalted;
for to seek rest for the will, even in such
But as the
things, is to prostrate the mind.
body is naturally raised upright to those
bodily things which are most elevated, that
is, to things celestial; so the mind, which is
a spiritual substance, must be raised upright to
those things which are most elevated in spiritual things, not by the elation of pride, but by
the dutifulness of righteousness.

that is, the mind

CHAP. 2. MAN ALONE OF ANIMATE CREATURES
PERCEIVES THE ETERNAL REASONS OF THINGS
PERTAINING TO THE BODY.
2. And the beasts, too, are able both to per-

ceive things corporeal from without, through
the senses of the body, and to fix them in the
memory, and remember them, and in them
to seek after things suitable, and shun things
But to note these things, and
inconvenient.
to retain them not only as caught up naturally
but also as deliberately committed to memory, and to imprint them again by recollection and conception when now just slipping
away into forgetfulness; in order that as conception is formed from that which the memory
contains, so also the contents themselves of
the memory may be fixed firmly by thought:
to combine again imaginary objects of sight,
by taking this or that of what the memory
remembers, and, as it were, tacking them to
one another: to examine after what manner
it is that in this kind things like the true are
to be distinguished from the true, and this
not in things spiritual, but in corporeal things
these
like, althemselves;
though performed in reference
things
sensible, and those which the mind has deduced through the bodily senses, yet, as they
are combined with reason, so are not common
to men and beasts.
But it is the part of the
higher reason to judge of these corporeal
things according to incorporeal and eternal
reasons; which, unless they were above the
human mind, would certainly not be unand yet, unless something of
changeable;
our own were subjoined to them, we should
not be able to employ them as our measures
But
oy which to judge of corporeal things.
we judge of corporeal things from the rule of
dimensions and figures, which the mind knows
to remain unchangeably.

acts, and the

to

1 [The distinction drawn here is between that low form of intelligence which exists in the brute, and that high form characterIn the Kantian nomenclature, the brute has underistic of man.
standing, but unenlightened by reason ; either theoretical or

i?6

[Book XII.

is

CHAP. 3.

THE HIGHER REASON WHICH BELONGS TO CONTEMPLATION, AND THE LOWER
WHICH BELONGS TO ACTION, ARE IN ONE
MIND.
3. But that of our own which thus has to
do with the handling of corporeal and temporal things, is indeed rational, in that it
not common to us with the beasts; but it
is
drawn, as it were, out of that rational substance of our mind, by which we depend upon
and cleave to the intelligible and unchangeable truth, and which is deputed to handle
and direct the inferior things.
For as among
all the beasts there was not found for the
man a help like unto him, unless one were
taken from himself, and formed to be his
consort: so for that mind, by which we consult
the supernal and inward truth, there is no
like help for such employment as man's
nature requires among things corporeal out
of those parts of the soul which we have in
common with the beasts.
And so a certain
part of our reason, not separated so as to
sever unity, but, as it were, diverted so as to
be a help to fellowship, is parted off for the
And as the
performing of its proper work.
twain is one flesh in the case of male and
female, so in the mind one nature embraces
our intellect and action, or our counsel and
performance, or our reason and rational appetite, or whatever other more significant
terms there may be by which to express
them; so that, as it was said of the former,
"And they two shall be in one flesh,"
may be said of these, they two are in one
mind.

it

CHAP. 4.

THE TRINITY AND THE IMAGE OF
GOD IS IN THAT PART OF THE MIND ALONE
WHICH BELONGS TO THE CONTEMPLATION OF
ETERNAL THINGS.
4. When, therefore, we discuss the nature
of the human mind, we discuss a single subject, and do not double it into those two
which I have mentioned, except in respect
Therefore, when we seek
to its functions.
the trinity in the mind, we seek it in the
whole mind, without separating the action
of the reason in things temporal from the
contemplation of things
to
have further to seek some third thing, by
But this
which a trinity may be completed.
trinity must needs be so discovered in the
whole nature of the mind, as that even if

eternal, so as

practical. He has intelligence, but not as modified by the forms
of space and time and the categories of quantity, quality, relation
etc.; and still less as modified and exalted by the ideas of reason
namely, the mathematical ideas, and the moral ideas of God, freedom, and immortality. The animal has no rational intelligence.
He has mere understanding without reason. W. G. T. S."]

1 Gen. ii. 24.

action upon temporal things were to be withdrawn, for which work that help is necessary,
with a view to which some part of the mind is
diverted in order to deal with these inferior
things, yet a trinity would still be found in
the one mind that is no where parted off; and
that when this distribution has been already
made, not only a trinity may be found, but
also an image of God, in that alone which
eternal
belongs
things; while in that other which is diverted
from it in the dealing with temporal things,
although there may be a trinity, yet there
cannot be found an image of God.

the contemplation of

to

CHAP. 5.

THE OPINION WHICH DEVISES AN
IMAGE OF THE TRINITY IN THE MARRIAGE OF
MALE AND FEMALE, AND IN THEIR OFFSPRING.
5. Accordingly they do not seem to me to
advance a probable opinion, who lay it down
that a trinity of the image of God in three
persons, so far as regards human nature,
can so be discovered as to be completed in
the marriage of male and female and in their
offspring; in that the man himself, as it were,
indicates the person of the Father, but that
which has so proceeded from him as to be
born, that of the Son; and so the
third
person as of the Spirit,
is, they say, the
woman, who has so proceeded from the man
as not herself to be either son or daughter,
although it was by her conception that the
For the Lord hath said
offspring was born.
of the Holy Spirit that He proceedeth from
the Father, 3 and yet he is not a son.
In
this erroneous opinion, then, the only point
alleged, and indeed
probably
sufficiently
shown according to the faith of the Holy
the
Scripture, is
this,
that what
original creation of the woman,
so comes into existence from some person as
to make another person, cannot in every case
be called a son;
the
woman came into existence from the person
of the man, and yet she is not called
his
All the rest of this opinion is in
daughter.
truth so absurd, nay indeed so false, that it
is most easy to refute it.
For I pass over
such a thing, as to think the Holy Spirit to
be the mother of the Son of God, and the
wife of the Father; since perhaps it may be
answered that these things offend us in carnal things, because we think of bodily conceptions and births.
Although these very
things themselves are most chastely thought
of by the pure, to whom all things are pure;
but to the defiled and unbelieving, of whom

since the person of

in the account of

2 Gen. ii. 22.

3 John xv. 26.

Chap. VI.]

ON THE TRINITY.

both the mind and conscience are polluted,
1 so that even Christ, born
nothing is pure;
of a virgin according to the flesh, is a stumbling-block to some of them.
But yet in the
case of those supreme spiritual things, after
the likeness of which those kinds of the inferior creature also are made although most
remotely, and where there is nothing that
can be injured and nothing corruptible, nothing born in time, nothing formed from that
which is formless, or whatever like expressions
there may be; yet they ought not to disturb
the sober prudence of any one, lest in avoiding empty disgust he run into
pernicious
Let him accustom himself so to find
error.
in corporeal things the traces of things spiritual, that when he begins to ascend upwards
from thence, under the guidance of reason,
in order to attain to the unchangeable truth
itself through which these things were made,
he may not draw with himself to things above
For no
what he despises in things below.
one ever blushed to choose for himself wisdom
as a wife, because the name of wife puts into
a man's thoughts the corruptible connection
which consists
or
because in truth wisdom itself is a woman in
sex, since it is expressed in both Greek and
Latin tongues by a word of the feminine
gender.

begetting

children;

in

CHAP. 6.

WHY THIS OPINION IS TO BE RE-

"

For God said,

JECTED.
6. We do not therefore reject this opinion,
because we fear to think of that holy and
inviolable and unchangeable Love, as
the
spouse of God the Father, existing as it does
from Him, but not as an offspring in order
to beget the Word by which all things are
made; but because divine Scripture evidently
shows it to be false.
Let
us make man in our image, after our like-
" So God
" and a little after it is said,
ness;
created man in the image of God." 2
Certainly, in that it is of the plural number, the
word "our" would not be rightly used if
man were made in the image of one person,
whether of the Father, or of the Son, or of
the Holy Spirit; but because he was made
in the image of the Trinity, on that account
But again,
After our image."
it is said,
lest we should think that three Gods were to
be believed in the Trinity, whereas the same
So God
Trinity is one God, it
created man in the image of God," instead of
saying, "In His own image."

said,

7. For such expressions are customary in
the Scriptures; and yet some persons, while

"

"

is

"

For if

maintaining the Catholic faith, do not carefully attend to them, in such wise that they
think the words, "God made man in the
image of God," to mean that the Father
made man after the image of the Son; and
they thus desire to assert that the Son also
is called God in the divine Scriptures, as if
there were not other most true and clear
proofs wherein the Son is called not only
For whilst
God, but also the true God.
they aim at explaining another difficulty in
this text, they become so entangled that they
cannot extricate themselves.
the
Father made man after the image of the Son,
so that he is not the image of the Father, but
of the Son, then the Son is unlike the Father.
But if a pious faith teaches us, as it does,
that the Son is like the Father after an equality of essence, then that which is made in
the likeness of the Son must needs also be
made in the likeness of the Father.
Further,
if the Father made man not in His own
image, but in the image of His Son, why
does He not say,
Let us make man after
Thy image and likeness," whereas He does
say, "our;" unless it be because the image
of the Trinity was made in man, that in this
way man should be the image of the one
true God, because the Trinity itself is the
one true God ?
Such expressions are innumerable in the Scriptures, but it will suffice to
have produced these.
It is so said in the
Psalms, "Salvation belongeth unto the Lord;
Thy blessing is upon Thy people;" 3 as if
the words were spoken to some one else, not
to Him of whom it had been said,
Salvation
" For
belongeth unto the Lord." And again,
by Thee," he says, "I shall be delivered
from temptation, and by hoping in my God
" 4 as if he said to
I shall leap over the wall;
someone else,
By Thee I shall be delivered from temptation." And again,
In the
heart of the king's enemies; whereby the
people fall under Thee;" 5 as if he were to
For he
say, in the heart of Thy enemies.
had said to that King, that is, to our Lord
" The people fall under Thee/'
Jesus Christ,
whom he intended by the word King, when
he said, "In the heart of the king's eneThings of this kind are found more
mies."
rarely in the New Testament.
But yet the
says to the Romans,
Concerning
apostle
His Son who was made to Him of the seed
of David according to the flesh, and declared
to be the Son of God with power, according
to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection
" 6 as
of the dead of Jesus Christ our Lord;
though he were speaking above of some one

"

"

"

"

1 Tit. i. 15.

2 Gen. i. 26, 27.

3 Ps. iii. 8.
5 Ps. xlv. 5.

4 Ps. xviii. 29.
6 Rom. i. 3, 4.

[Book XTI.

For what is meant by the Son of God
else.
declared by the resurrection of the dead of
Jesus Christ, except of the same Jesus Christ
who was declared to be Son of God with
power? And as then in this passage, when
we are told, "the Son of God with power of
Jesus Christ/' or "the Son of God according
to the spirit of holiness of Jesus Christ," or
"the Son of God by the resurrection of the
dead of Jesus Christ," whereas it might have
been expressed in the ordinary way, In His
own power, or according to the spirit of His
own holiness, or by the resurrection of His
dead, or of their dead: as, I say, we are not
compelled to understand another person, but
one and the same, that is, the person of the
Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ; so, when
we are told that "God made man in the
image of God/' although it might have been
more usual to say, after His own image, yet
we are not compelled to understand any other
person in the Trinity, but the one and selfsame Trinity itself, who is one God, and after
whose image man is made.

8. And since the case stands thus, if we
are to accept the same image of the Trinity, as not in one, but in three human beings,
father and mother and son, then the man
was not made after the image of God before
a wife was made for him, and before they
procreated a son; because there was not yet
Will any one say there was ala trinity.
ready a trinity, because, although not yet in
their proper form, yet in their original nature,
both the woman was already in the side of
the man, and the son in the loins of his
father? Why then, when Scripture
had
said, "God made man after the image of
" God created him;
God," did it go on to say,
male and female created He them: and God
blessed them "
(Or if it is to be so divided,
"And God created man," so that thereupon
in the image of God created
is to be added,
He him," and then subjoined in the third
"
place,
for some have feared to say, He made him
male and female, lest something monstrous,
as it were, should be understood, as are
those whom they call hermaphrodites, although even so both might be understood not
falsely in the singular number, on account
" Two in one flesh.")
of that which is said,
Why then, as I began by saying, in regard
to the nature of man made after the imaare of
God, does Scripture specify nothing except
male and female ?
Certainly, in order to
complete the image of the Trinity, it ought
to have added also son, although still placed

" male and female created He them;

"

?

'

his

side.

in the loins of his father, as the woman was
Or was it perhaps that the
in
woman also had been already made, and that
Scripture had combined in a short and comprehensive statement, that of which it was
going to explain afterwards more carefully,
how it was done; and that therefore a son
could not be mentioned, because no son was
yet born ? As if the Holy Spirit could not
have comprehended this, too, in that brief
statement, while about to narrate the birth of
the son afterwards in its own place; as it
narrated afterwards in its own place, that the
woman was taken from the side of the man, 2
and yet has not omitted here to name her.

CHAP. 7. HOW MAN IS THE IMAGE OF GOD.
WHETHER THE WOMAN IS NOT ALSO THE IMHOW THE SAYING OF THE
AGE OF GOD.
APOSTLE, THAT THE MAN IS THE IMAGE OF
GOD, BUT THE WOMAN IS THE GLORY OF THE
MAN, IS TO BE UNDERSTOOD FIGURATIVELY
AND MYSTICALLY.
9. We ought not therefore so to understand that man is made in the image of the
in the image of
supreme Trinity, that is,
God, as that the same image should be understood to be in three human beings; especially
when the apostle says that the man is the
image of God, and on that account removes
the covering from his head, which he warns
" For a
the woman to use, speaking thus:
man indeed ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of God;
but the woman is the glory of the man.''
What then shall we say to this?
If the
woman fills up the image of the trinity after
the measure of her own person, why is the
man still called that image after she has been
taken out of his side ? Or if even one person
of a human being out of three can be called
the image of God, as each person also is God
in the supreme Trinity itself, why is the
woman also not the image of God ?
For she
is instructed for this very reason to cover her
head, which he is forbidden to do because he
is the image of God. 3

10. But we must notice how that which the
apostle says, that not the woman but the man
is the image of God, is not contrary to that,
which is written in Genesis, "God created
man: in the image of God created He him;
male and female created He them: and He
For this
blessed them."
says that
human nature itself, which is complete [only]
in both sexes, was made in the image of God;
and it does not separate the woman from the
image of God which it signifies.
For after

text

1 Gen i. 27, 28.

2 Gen. ii. 24, 22.

3 1 Cor. xi. 7, 5.

Chap. VII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

" He created him," it says,

saying that God made man in the image of
" male and
God,
female:" or at any rate, punctuating the words
" male and female created He
otherwise,
them." How then did the apostle tell us
that the man is the image of God, and therefore he is forbidden to cover his head; but
that the woman is not so, and therefore is
commanded to cover hers ? Unless, forsooth,
according to that which I have said already,
when I was treating of the nature of the
human mind, that the woman together with
her own husband is the image of God, so that
that whole substance may be one image; but
when she is referred separately to her quality
of help-meet, which regards the woman herself
alone, then she is not the image of God; but
as regards the man alone, he is the image of
God as fully and completely as when the
woman too is joined with him in one.
As
we said of the nature of the human mind,
that both in the case when as a whole it contemplates the truth it is the image of God;
and in the case when anything is divided
from it, and diverted in order to the cognition of temporal things; nevertheless on that
side on which it beholds and consults truth,
here also it is the image of God, but on that
is directed to the cognition
side whereby it
of the lower things, it
is not the image of
is so much the more
God.
formed after the image of God, the more it
has extended itself to that which is eternal,
and is on that account not to be restrained,
so as to withhold and refrain itself from
thence; therefore the man ought hot to cover
But because too great a progreshis head.
sion towards inferior things is dangerous to
conversant
that rational cognition that is
with things corporeal and temporal; this
ought to have power on its head, which the
covering indicates, by which it
is signified
For a holy
that it ought to be restrained.
and pious meaning is pleasing to the holy
For God sees not after the way of
angels.
time, neither does anything new take place
in His vision and knowledge, when anything
is done in time and transitorily, after the
way in which such things affect the senses,
whether the carnal senses of animals and
men, or even the heavenly senses of the
angels.

And since it

*

11. For that the Apostle Paul, when speaking outwardly of the sex of male and female,
figured the mystery of some more hidden
truth, may be understood from this, that
when he says in another place that she is a
widow indeed who is desolate, without chil-

dren and nephews, and yet that she ought to
trust in God, and to continue in prayers
night and day,
2 he here indicates, that the
woman having been brought into the transgression by being deceived, is brought to salvation by child-bearing; and then he has added, "If they continue in faith, and charity,
and holiness, with sobriety." 3 As if it could
possibly hurt a good widow, if either she had
not sons, or if those whom she had did not
choose to continue in good works.
But because those things which are
called good
works are, as it were, the sons of our life,
according to that sense of life in which it
answers to the question, What is a man's life ?
that is, How does he act in these temporal
things ? which life the Greeks do not call cwtj
but fttos; and because these good works are
chiefly performed in the way of offices of
mercy, while works of mercy are of no profit, either to Pagans, or to Jews who do not
believe in Christ, or to any heretics or schismatics whatsoever in whom faith and charity
and sober holiness are not found: what the
apostle meant to signify is plain, and in so
far figuratively and mystically, because he
was speaking of covering the head of the
woman, which will remain mere empty words,
unless referred to some hidden sacrament.

his

rational mind.

12. For, as not only most true reason but
also the authority of the apostle himself declares, man was not made in the image of
God according to the shape of his body, but
For the
according to
thought is a debased and empty one, which
holds God to be circumscribed and limited
by the lineaments of bodily members.
But
further, does not the same blessed apostle
" Be renewed in the spirit of your mind,
say,
and put on the new man, which is created
after God;" 4 and in another place more
clearly, "Putting off the old man," he says,
"with his deeds; put on the new man, which
is renewed to the knowledge of God after the
image of Him that created him ?
If, then,
vve are renewed in the spirit of our mind, and
he is the new man who is renewed to the
knowledge of God after the image of Him
that created him; no one can doubt, that man
was made after the image of Him that created
him, not according to the body, nor indiscriminately according to any part of the mind,
but according to the rational mind, wherein
the knowledge of God can exist And it
according to this renewal, also, that we are
made sons of God by the baptism of Christ;
and putting on the new man, certainly put on
Christ through faith. Who is there, then,

" 5

is

1 Cor. xi. 10.

2 1 Tim. v. 5.
4 Eph. iv. 23, 24.

3 1 Tim. ii. 15.
5 Col. iii. 9, 10,

i6o

|Book XII.

'' l

Pray,

Christ

Jesus ?

who will hold women to be alien from this
fellowship, whereas they are fellow-heirs of
grace with us; and whereas in another place
" For ye are all the
the same apostle says,
children of God by faith in Christ Jesus; for
as many as have been baptized into Christ
have put on Christ: there is neither Jew nor
Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there
is neither male nor female; for ye are all one
have
faithful
in
women then lost their bodily sex ?
But because they are there renewed after the image
of God, where there is no sex; man is there
made after the image of God, where there is
no sex, that is, in the spirit of his mind.
Why, then, is the man on that account not
bound to cover his head, because he is the
image and glory of God, while the woman is
bound to do so, because she is the glory of
the man; as though the woman were not renewed in the spirit of her mind, which spirit
is renewed to the knowledge of God after the
image of Him who created him ? But because
she differs from the man in boddy sex, it was
possible rightly to represent under her bodily
covering that part of the reason which is diverted to the government of temporal things;
so that the image of God may remain on that
side of the mind of man on which it cleaves
to the beholding or the consulting of the eternal reasons of things; and this, it is clear, not
men only, but also women have.

CHAP. 8.

TURNING ASIDE FROM THE IMAGE OF

GOD.

13. A common nature, therefore, is recognized in their minds, but in their bodies a diAs
vision of that one mind itself is figured.
we ascend, then, by certain steps of thought
within, along the succession of the parts of
the mind, there where something first meets
us which is not common to ourselves with the
beasts reason begins, so that here the inner
man can now be recognized. And if this inner man himself, through that reason to which
the administering of things temporal has been
delegated, slips on too far by over-much progress into outward things, that which is his
head moreover consenting, that is, the (so to
call it) masculine part which presides in the
watch-tower of counsel not restraining or
bridling it: then he waxeth old because of all
viz. the demons with their
his enemies, 2
prince the devil, who are envious of virtue;
and that vision of eternal things is withdrawn
also from the head himself, eating with his
spouse that which was forbidden, so that the
3 and so both
light of his eyes is gone from him ;

being naked from that enlightenment of truth,
and with the eyes of their conscience opened
to behold how they were left shameful and
unseemly, like the leaves of sweet fruits, but
without the fruits themselves, they so weave
together good words without the fruit of good
works, as while living wickedly to cover over
their disgrace as it were by speaking well. 4

itself.

CHAP. 9.

THE SAME ARGUMENT IS CONTINUED.
14. For the soul loving its own power, slips
onwards from the whole which is common, to
a part, which belongs especially to
And that apostatizing pride, which is called
"the beginning of sin," 5 whereas it might
have been most excellently governed by the
laws of God, if it had followed Him as its
ruler in the universal creature, by seeking
something more than the whole, and struggling to govern this by a law of its own, is
thrust on, since nothing is more than the
whole, into caring for a part; and thus by lusting after something more, is made less;
whence also covetousness is called
the root
6 And it administers that whole,
of all evil.-"
wherein it strives to do something of its own
against the laws by which the whole is governed, by its own body, which it possesses
only in part; and so being delighted by corporeal forms and motions, because it has not
the things themselves within itself, and because it is wrapped up in their images, which
it has fixed in the memory, and is foully polluted by fornication of the phantasy, while it
refers all
for
which it curiously seeks corporeal and temporal things through the senses of the body,
either it affects with swelling arrogance to be
more excellent than other souls that are given
up to the corporeal senses, or it
is plunged
into a foul whirlpool of carnal pleasure.

its functions to those ends,

"

CHAP. IO.

THE LOWEST DEGRADATION IS

REACHED BY DEGREES.

15. When the soul then consults either for
itself or for others with a good will towards
perceiving the inner and higher things, such
as are possessed in a chaste embrace, without any narrowness or envy, not individually,
but in common by all who love such things;
it be deceived
then even if
in anything,
through ignorance of things temporal (for its
action in this case is a temporal one), and if
it does not hold fast to that mode of acting
which it ought, the temptation is but one common to man.
And it is a great thing so to
pass through this life, on which we travel, as
it were, like a road on our return home, that

1 Gal. iii. 26-23.

2 Ps. vi. 7.

3 Ps. XXXVlll. 10

4 Gen. iii. 4.

5 Ecclus. x. 15.

6 1 Tim. vi. 10.

Chap. XII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

are

which

those things

no temptation may take us, but what is common to man. '
For this is a sin without the
body, and must not be reckoned fornication,
and on that account is very easily pardoned.
But when the soul does anything- in order to
attain
perceived
through the body, through lust of proving or
of surpassing or of handling them, in order
that it may place in them its final good, then
whatever it does, it does wickedly, and commits fornication, sinning against its own body:
and while snatching from within the deceitful
images of corporeal things, and combining
them by vain thought, so that nothing seems
to it to be divine, unless it be of such a kind
as this; by selfish greediness it is made fruitful in errors, and by selfish prodigality it
Yet it would not leap
emptied of strength.
on at once from the commencement to such
shameless and miserable fornication, but, as
" He that contemneth small
it is written,
things, shall fall by little and little." 3

is

CHAP. II.

THE IMAGE OF THE BEAST IN MAN.

Hence it

1 6. For as a snake does not creep on with
open steps, but advances by the very minutest
efforts of its several scales; so the slippery
motion of falling away [from what is good]
takes possession of the negligent only gradually, and beginning from a perverse desire for
the likeness of God, arrives in the end at the
is that being
likeness of beasts.
naked of their first garment, they earned by
For the true honor
mortality coats of skins. 4
of man is the image and likeness of God,
which is not preserved except it be in relation
to Him by whom it is impressed.
The less
therefore that one loves what is one's own,
the more one cleaves to God.
But through
the desire of making trial of his own power,
man by his own bidding falls down to himself
as to a sort of intermediate grade. And so,
while he wishes to be as God is, that is, under no one, he is thrust on, even from his own
middle grade, by way of punishment, to that
which is lowest, that is, to those things in
which beasts
his
honor is the likeness of God, but his dishonor
" Man being in
is the likeness of the beast,
honor abideth not: he is compared to the
beasts that are foolish, and is made like to
them." 5 By what path, then, could he pass
so great a distance from the highest to the
lowest, except through his own intermediate
For when he neglects the love of wisgrade ?
dom, which remains always after the same
fashion, and lusts after knowledge by experi-

delight: and thus, while

i. Cor. x. 13.
4 Gen. iii. 21.

= 1 Cor. vi. 18
5 Ps. xlix. 12.

3 Ecclus. xix. 1.

ment upon things temporal and mutable, that
knowledge puffeth up, it does not edify:
6 so
the mind is overweighed and thrust out, as it
were, by its own weight from blessedness;
and learns by its own punishment, through
that trial of its own intermediateness, what
the difference is between the good it has
abandoned and the bad to which it has committed itself; and having thrown away and
destroyed its strength, it cannot return, unless by the grace of its Maker calling it to reFor who
pentance, and forgiving its
will deliver the unhappy soul from the body
of this death, unless the grace of God through
Of which grace we
Jesus Christ our Lord ? 7
will discourse in its place, so far as He Himself enables us.

sins.

CHAP. 12.

THERE IS A KIND OF HIDDEN WEDLOCK IN THE INNER MAN. UNLAWFUL PLEASURES OF THE THOUGHTS.
17. Let us now complete, so far as the
Lord helps us, the discussion which we have
undertaken, respecting that part of reason to
which knowledge belongs, that is, the cognizthings temporal and changeable,
ance of
which is necessary for managing the affairs
For as in the case of that visible
of this life.
wedlock of the two human beings who were
made first, the serpent did not eat of the forbidden tree, but only persuaded them to eat
of it; and the woman did not eat alone, but
gave to her husband, and they eat together;
although she alone spoke with the serpent,
and she alone was led away by him: 8 so also
in the case of that hidden and secret kind of
wedlock, which is transacted and discerned
in a single human being, the carnal, or as I
may say, since it is directed to the senses of
the body, the sensuous movement of the soul,
which is common to us with beasts, is shut
For certainly
off from the reason of wisdom.
bodily things are perceived by the sense of
things, which are
the body; but spiritual
eternal and unchangeable, are understood by
But the reason of
the reason of wisdom.
knowledge has appetite very near to it: seeing that what is called the science or knowledge of actions reasons concerning the bodily
things which are
perceived by the bodily
sense; if well, in order that it may refer that
knowledge to the end of the chief good; but
if ill, in order that it may enjoy them as being such good things as those wherein it reposes with a false blessedness.
Whenever,
then, that carnal or animal sense introduces
into this purpose of the mind which is conversant about things temporal and corporeal,

6 1 Cor. viii. 1.

7 Rom. vii. 24, 25.

8 Gen. iii. 1-6.

l62

[Book XII.

with a view to the offices of a man's actions,
by the living force of reason, some inducement to enjoy itself, that is, to enjoy itself as
if it were some private good of its own, not as
the public and common, which is the unchangeable, good; then, as it were, the serpent discourses with the woman. And to
consent to this allurement, is to eat of the
But if that consent is satisforbidden tree.
fied by the pleasure of thought alone, but the
members are so restrained by the authority
of higher counsel that they are not yielded
as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin;
this, I think, is to be considered as if the
woman alone should have eaten the forbidden
But if, in this consent to use wickedly
food.
the things which are perceived through the
senses of the body, any sin at all is so determined upon, that if there is the power it
is
also fulfilled by the body; then that woman
must be understood to have given the unlawful food to her husband with her, to be eaten
For it is not possible for the mind
together.
to determine that a sin is not only to be
thought of with pleasure, but also to be effectually committed, unless also that intention of
the mind yields, and serves the bad action,
with which rests the chief power of applying
the members to an outward act, or of restraining them from one.

18. And yet, certainly, when the mind is
pleased in thought alone with unlawful things,
while not indeed determining that they are to
be done, but yet holding and pondering gladly
things which ought to have been rejected the
very moment they touched the mind, it cannot be denied to be a sin, but far less than
if it were also determined to accomplished it
in outward act. And therefore pardon must
be sought for such thoughts too, and the
breast must be smitten, and it must be said,
"Forgive us our debts;" and what follows
must be done, and must be joined in our
prayer, "As we also forgive our debtors." 2
For it is not as it was with those two first
human beings, of which each one bare his own
person; and so, if the woman alone had eaten
the forbidden food, she certainly alone would
have been smitten with the punishment of
death: it cannot, I say, be so said also in the
case of a single human being now, that if the
thought, remaining alone, be gladly fed with
unlawful pleasures, from which it ought to
turn away directly, while yet there is no determination that the bad actions are to be
done, but only that they are retained with
pleasure in remembrance, the woman as it
were can be condemned without the man.

1 Rom. vi. 13.

Matt. vi. 12.

Far be it from us to believe this.
For here
is one person, one human being, and he as a
whole will be condemned, unless those things
which, as lacking the will to do, and yet having the will to please the mind with them,
are perceived to be sins of thought alone, are
pardoned through the grace of the Mediator. 3
19. This reasoning, then, whereby we have
sought in the mind of each several human
being a certain rational wedlock of contemplation and action, with functions distributed
through each severally, yet with the unity of
the mind preserved in both; saving meanwhile
the truth of that history which divine testimony hands down respecting the first two
human beings, that is, the man and his wife,
from whom the human species is propagated; 4
this reasoning, I say, must be listened to
only thus far, that the apostle may be understood to have intended to signify something
to be sought in one individual man, by assigning the image of God to the man only, and
not also to the woman, although in the merely
different sex ui two human beings.

CHAP. 13.

THE OPINION OF THOSE WHO HAVE
THOUGHT THAT THE MIND WAS SIGNIFIED BY
THE MAN, THE BODILY SENSE BY THE WOMAN.
20. Nor does it escape me, that some who
before us were eminent defenders of the Catholic faith and expounders of the word of God,
while they looked for these two things in one
human being, whose entire
soul they perceived to be a sort of excellent paradise, asserted that the man was the mind, but that the
woman was the bodily sense. And according
to this distribution, by which the man is assumed to be the mind, but the woman the
bodily sense, all things seem aptly to agree
together if they are handled with due attention: unless that it is written, that in all the
beasts and flying things there was not found
for man an helpmate like to himself; and
then the woman was made out of his side. 5
And on this account I, for my part, have not
thought that the bodily sense should be taken
for the woman, which we see to be common
to ourselves and to the beasts; but I have
desired to find something which the beasts
had not; and I have rather thought the bodily
sense should be understood to be the serpent,
whom we read to have been more subtle than
For in those natural
all beasts of the field. 6
good things which we see are common to our-

; Acts viii. 21-22 ; Rom. vii. 7

as the outward action prompted by it.
Matt. v. 28

3 [Augustin here teaches that the inward lust is guilt as well
This is in accordance with
; James i. 14.
W.G.T.S.]
4 [Augustin means, that while he has given an allegorical and
mystical interpretation to the narrative of the fall, in Genesis, he
also holds to its historical sense. W. G. T. S."|
6 Gen. iii. 1.

5 Gen. ii. 20-22.

Chap. XIV.]

ON THE TRINITY.

selves and to the irrational animals, the sense
excels by a kind of living power; not the sense
of which it is written in the epistle addressed
to the Hebrews, where we read, that "
strong
meat belongeth to them that are of full age,
even those who by reason of use have their
senses exercised to discern both good and
senses ''
belong to the raevil;"
tional nature and pertain to the understanding;
but that sense which is divided into five parts
in the body, through which corporeal species
and motion is perceived not only by ourselves,
but also by the beasts.

5 for these

"

21. But whether that the apostle calls the
man the image and glory of God, but the
woman the glory of the man, -
is to be received in this, or that, or in any other way;
is clear, that when we live according
yet it
to God, our mind which is intent on the
invisible things of Him ought to be fashioned
proficiency from His eternity,
with
truth,
charity; but that something of our own rational purpose, that is, of the same mind,
must be directed to the using of changeable
and corporeal things, without which this life
does not go on; not that we may be conformed to this world, 3 by placing our end in
such good things, and by forcing the desire
of blessedness towards them, but that whatever we do rationally in the using of temporal
things, we may do it with the contemplation
of attaining eternal things, passing through
the former, but cleaving to the latter.

CHAP. 14. WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
WISDOM AND KNOWLEDGE.
THE WORSHIP OF
GOD IS THE LOVE OF HIM. HOW THE INTELLECTUAL COGNIZANCE OF ETERNAL THINGS
COMES TO PASS THROUGH WISDOM.

For knowledge also has

its own good
measure, if that in it which puffs up, or is
wont to puff up, is conquered by love of
eternal things, which does not puff up, but,
as we know, edifieth. 4
Certainly without
knowledge the virtues themselves, by which
one lives rightly, cannot be possessed, by
which this miserable life may be so governed,
that we may attain to that eternal life which
is truly blessed.

22. Yet action, by which we use temporal
differs from contemplation of
things well,
eternal things; and the latter is reckoned to
For alwisdom, the former to knowledge.
though that which is wisdom can also be
called knowledge, as the apostle too speaks,
" Now I know in part, but
where he says,
I am
then
shall

I know even

also

as

For in

known;" 5 when doubtless
he meant his
words to be understood of the knowledge of
the contemplation of God, which will be the
highest reward of the saints; yet where he says,
" For to one is given by the Spirit the word
of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge
by the same Spirit,"
certainly he distinguishes
without doubt these two things, although he
does not there explain the difference, nor in
what way one may be discerned from the
But having examined a great number
other.
of passages from the Holy Scriptures, I find
it written in the Book of Job, that holy man
being the speaker, "Behold, piety, that is
wisdom; but to depart from evil is knowlIn thus distinguishing, it must be
edge." 7
understood that wisdom belongs to contemplation, knowledge to action.
this
place he meant by piety the worship of God,
which in Greek is called deooifisia.
For the
sentence in the Greek mss. has that word.
And what is there in eternal things more
excellent than God, of whom alone the nature
And what is the worship
is unchangeable?
of Him except the love of Him, by which we
now desire to see Him, and we believe and
hope that we shall see Him; and in proportion as we make progress, see now through
a glass in an enigma, but then in clearness ?
For this is what the Apostle Paul means by
"face to face." 8
This is also what John
Beloved, now we are the sons of God,
says,
and it doth not yet appear /vhat we shall be;
but we know that, when He shall appear, we
shall be like Him; for we shall see Him as
He is." 9
Discourse about these and the like
subjects seems to me to be the discourse
But to depart from evil,
itself of wisdom.
which Job says is knowledge, is without doubt
Since it is in reference
of temporal things.
to time [and this world] that we are in
evil, from which we ought to abstain that we
may come to those good eternal things. And
therefore, whatsoever we do prudently, boWly,
temperately, and justly, belongs
that
knowledge or discipline wherewith our action
is conversant in avoiding evil and desiring
good; and so also, whatsoever we gather by
the knowledge that comes from inquiry, in
the way of examples either to be guarded
against or to be imitated, and in the way of
respecting any subject,
necessary
accommodated to our use.

proofs

to

"

23. When a discourse then relates to these
things, I hold it to be a discourse belonging
to knowledge, and to be distinguished from
a discourse belonging to wisdom, to which
those things belong, which neither have been,

1 Heb. v. 14.
3 Rom. xii. 2

2 1 Cor. xi. 7.
4 1 Cor. viii. 1.

5 i Cor. xiii. 12.
8 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

6 1 Cor. xii. 8,
9 1 John iii. 2,

7 Job xxviii. 8.

Book XII.

transitory.

And yet

nor shall be, but are; and on account of that
eternity in which they are, are said to have
been, and to be, and to be about to be, without any changeableness of times. For neither
have they been in such way as that they
should cease to be, nor are they about to be
in such way as if they were not now; but
they have always had and always will have
that very absolute being. And they abide,
but not as if fixed in some place as are
bodies; but as intelligible things in incorporeal nature, they are so at hand to the
glance of the mind, as things visible or tangible in place are to the sense of the body.
And not only in the case of sensible things
posited in place, there abide also intelligible
and incorporeal reasons of them apart from
local space; but also of motions that pass by
in successive times, apart from any transit
in time, there stand also like reasons, themselves certainly intelligible, and not sensible.
And to attain to these with the eye of the
mind is the lot of few; and when they are
attained, as much as they can be, he himself
who attains to them does not abide in them,
but is as it were repelled by the rebounding
of the eye itself of the mind, and so there
comes to be a transitory thought of a thing
not
transient
thought is committed to the memory through
the instructions by which the mind is taught;
that the mind which is compelled to
pass
from thence, may be able to return thither
again; although, if the thought should not
return to the memory and find there what it
had committed to it, it would be led thereto
like an uninstructed person, as it had been
led before, and would find it where it had
first found it, that is to say, in that incorporeal
truth, whence yet once more it may be as it
were written down and fixed in the mind.
For the thought of man, for example, does
not so abide in that incorporeal and unchangeable reason of a square body, as that
reason itself abides: if, to be sure, it could
attain to it at all without the phantasy of
local space. Or if one were to apprehend
the rhythm of any artificial or musical sound,
passing through certain intervals of time, as
it rested without time in some secret and
deep silence, it could at least be thought as
long as that song could be heard; yet what
the glance of the mind, transient though it
was, caught from thence, and, absorbing as
it were into a belly, so laid up in the memory, over this it will be able to ruminate in
some measure by recollection, and to transfer
what it has thus learned
systematic
But if this has been blotted out
knowledge.
by absolute forgetfulness, yet once again,

into

this

under the guidance of teaching, one will
come to that which had altogether dropped
away, and it will be found such as it was.

are

learnt

noble

CHAP. 15.

IN OPPOSITION TO THE REMINISCENCE OF PLATO AND PYTHAGORAS.
PYTHAGORAS THE SAMIAN.
OF THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN WISDOM AND KNOWLEDGE, AND OF
SEEKING THE TRINITY IN THE KNOWLEDGE OF
TEMPORAL THINGS.
24. And hence that

philosopher
Plato endeavored to persuade us that the
souls of men lived even before they bare
these bodies; and that hence those things
which are
rather remembered,
as having been known already, than taken
For he has
into knowledge as things new.
told us that a boy, when questioned I know
not what respecting geometry, replied as if
he were perfectly skilled in that branch of
For being questioned step by step
learning.
and skillfully, he saw what was to be seen,
and said that which he saw. '
But if this
had been a recollecting of things previously
known, then certainly every one, or almost
every one, would not have been able so to answer when questioned.
For not every one was
a geometrician in the former life, since geometricians are so few among men that scarcely
But we ought
one can be found anywhere.
rather to believe, that the intellectual mind
is so formed in its nature as to see those
things, which by the
of the
Creator are subjoined to things intelligible in
a natural order, by a sort of incorporeal light
of an unique kind; as the eye of the flesh
sees things adjacent to itself in this bodily
light, of which light it is made to be recepFor none the more
tive, and adapted to it.
does this fleshly eye, too, distinguish black
things from white without a teacher, because
it had already known them before it was
created in
it
possible only in intelligible things that any
one properly questioned should answer according to any branch of learning, although
ignorant of it ? Why can no one do this with
things sensible, except those which he has
seen in this his present body, or has believed
the information of others who knew them,
For
whether somebody's writings or words ?
we must not acquiesce in their story, who
assert that the Samian Pythagoras recollected
some things of this kind, which he had experienced when he was previously here in
another body; and others tell yet of others,
that they experienced something of the same

Why, lastly,

disposition

flesh.

this

is

1 [This fine specimen of the "

obstetric method "

given in Plato's dialogue, Meno. W. G. T. S.]

of Socrates is

Chap. XV.]

ON THE TRINITY.

sort in their minds: but it may be conjectured that these were untrue recollections,
such as we commonly experience in sleep,
when we fancy we remember, as though we
had done or seen it, what we never did or
saw at all; and that the minds of these persons, even though awake, were affected in
this way at the suggestion of malignant and
deceitful spirits, whose care it
is to confirm
or to sow some false belief concerning the
changes of souls, in order to deceive men.
This, I say, may be conjectured from this,
that if they really remembered those things
which they had seen here before, while occupying other bodies, the same thing would
happen to many, nay to almost all; since
they suppose that as the dead from the living, so, without cessation and continually, the
living are coming into existence from the
dead; as sleepers from those that are awake,
and those that are awake from them that

sleep.

25. If therefore this is the right distinction
between wisdom and knowledge, that the intellectual cognizance of eternal things belongs to wisdom, but the rational cognizance
of temporal things to knowledge, it
is not
difficult to judge which is to be preferred or
But if we must employ
postponed to which.
some other distinction by which to know
these two apart, which without doubt the
apostle teaches us are different, saying, "To
one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom;

to another the word of knowledge, by the
same Spirit;" still the difference between
those two which we have laid down is a most
evident one, in that the intellectual cognizance of eternal things is one thing, the rational
cognizance of temporal things another; and no
one doubts but that the former is to be preferred to the latter. As then we leave behind
those things which belong to the outer man,
and desire to ascend within from those things
which we have in common with beasts, before
we come to the cognizance of things intelligible and supreme, which are eternal, the
rational cognizance of temporal things preLet us then find a trinity in this
sents itself.
also, if we can, as we found one in the senses
the body, and in those things which
of
through them entered in the way of images
into our soul or spirit; so that instead of
corporeal things which we touch by corporeal
they are without us, we
sense, placed
might have resemblances of bodies impressed
within on the memory from which thought
might be formed, while the will as a third
united them; just as the sight of the eyes was
formed from without, which the will applied
to the visible thing in order to produce vision,
and united both, while itself also added itself
But this subject must
thereto as a third.
not be compressed into this book; so that in
that which follows, if God help, it may be
suitably examined, and the
to
which we come may be unfolded.

conclusions

as

BOOK XIII.

THE INQUIRY IS PROSECUTED RESPECTING KNOWLEDGE, IN WHICH, AS DISTINGUISHED FROM WISAND
DOM, AUGUSTIN HAD BEGUN IN THE FORMER BOOK TO LOOK FOR A KIND OF TRINITY.
OCCASION IS TAKEN OF COMMENDING CHRISTIAN FAITH, AND OF EXPLAINING HOW THE FAITH
NEXT, THAT ALL DESIRE BLESSEDNESS, YET THAT ALL
OF BELIEVERS IS ONE AND COMMON.
HAVE NOT THE FAITH WHEREBY WE ARRIVE AT BLESSEDNESS ; AND THAT THIS FAITH IS DEFINED IN CHRIST, WHO IN THE FLESH ROSE FROM THE DEAD ; AND THAT NO ONE IS SET FREE
FROM THE DOMINION OF THE DEVIL THROUGH FORGIVENESS OF SINS, SAVE THROUGH HIM.
IT IS SHOWN ALSO AT LENGTH THAT IT WAS NEEDFUL THAT THE DEVIL SHOULD BE CONFINALLY, THAT WHEN THE
QUERED BY CHRIST, NOT BY POWER, BUT BY RIGHTEOUSNESS.
WORDS OF THIS FAITH ARE COMMITTED TO MEMORY, THERE IS IN THE MIND A KIND OF
TRINITY, SINCE THERE ARE, FIRST, IN THE MEMORY THE SOUNDS OF THE WORDS, AND THIS
EVEN WHEN THE MAN IS NOT THINKING OF THEM ; AND NEXT, THE MIND'S EYE OF HIS
RECOLLECTION IS FORMED THEREUPON WHEN HE THINKS OF THEM J AND, LASTLY, THE WILL,
WHEN HE SO THINKS AND REMEMBERS, COMBINES BOTH.

CHAP. I.

THE ATTEMPT IS MADE TO DISTINGUISH OUT OF THE SCRIPTURES THE OFFICES
THAT IN
OF WISDOM AND OF KNOWLEDGE.
THE BEGINNING OF JOHN SOME THINGS THAT
ARE SAID BELONG TO WISDOM, SOME TO
KNOWLEDGE. SOME THINGS THERE ARE ONLY
HOW WE
KNOWN BY THE HELP OF FAITH.
IN THE
SEE THE FAITH THAT IS IN US.
SAME NARRATIVE OF JOHN, SOME THINGS ARE
KNOWN BY THE SENSE OF THE BODY, OTHERS
ONLY BY THE REASON OF THE MIND.
i. In the book before this, viz. the twelfth
of this work, we have done enough to distinguish the office of the rational mind in temporal things, wherein not only our knowing
but our action is concerned, from the more
excellent office of the same mind, which is
employed in contemplating eternal things,
But I think
and is limited to knowing alone.
it more convenient that I should insert somewhat out of the Holy Scriptures, by which the
two may more easily be distinguished.

"

2. John the Evangelist has thus begun his
In the beginning was the Word,
Gospel:
and the Word was with God, and the Word
The same was in the beginning
was God.

All things were made by Him;
with God.
and without Him was not anything made that
In Him was life; and the life was
was made.
And the light shineth in
the light of men.
darkness; and the darkness comprehended it
There was a man sent from God, whose
not.
The same came for a witname was John.
ness, to bear witness of the Light, that all
men through Him might believe. He was
not that Light, but was sent to bear witness
That was the true Light,
of that Light.
which lighteth every man that cometh into
the world. He was in the world, and the
world was made by Him, and the world knew
Him not. He came unto His own, and His
own received Him not.
But as many as received Him, to them gave He power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on His name: which were born, not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God. And the Word was
made flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld His glory, the glory as of the only-bethe Father), full of grace and
gotten of
This entire passage, which I have
truth." 1

1 John i. 1-14.

Chap. I.]

ON THE TRINITY

"

For by

here taken from the Gospel, contains in its
earlier portions what is immutable and eternal, the contemplation of which makes us
blessed; but in those which follow, eternal
things are mentioned in conjunction with
temporal things. And hence some things
there belong to knowledge, some to wisdom,
according to our previous distinction in the
"In the beFor the words,
twelfth book.
ginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God, and the Word was God.
The same
was in the beginning with God.
All things
were made by Him; and without Him was
In Him
not anything made that was made.
was life; and the life was the light of men.
And the light shineth in darkness, and the
darkness comprehended it not:"
require a
contemplative life, and must be discerned by
the intellectual mind; and the more any one
has profited in this, the wiser without doubt
But on account of the verse,
will he become.
" The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not," faith certainly
was necessary, whereby that which was not
darkness "
seen might be believed.
he intended to signify the hearts of mortals
turned away from light of this kind, and
hardly able to behold it; for which reason he
"
There was a man sent from God,
subjoins,
The same came for
whose name was John.
a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that
all men through Him might believe."
But
here we come to a thing that was done in time,
and belongs to knowledge, which is comprised
in the cognizance of facts. And we think of
the man John under that phantasy which is
impressed on our memory from the notion
of human nature. And whether men believe
or not, they think this in the same manner.
For both alike know what man is, the outer
part of whom, that is, his body, they have
learned through the eyes of the body; but
of the inner, that
is, the soul, they possess
the knowledge in themselves, because they
also themselves are men, and through intercourse with men; so that they are able to
There was a man, whose
think what is said,
name was John,'' because they know the
names also by interchange of speech.
But
that which is there also, viz.
sent from
God," they who hold at all, hold by faith;
and they who do not hold it by faith, either
hesitate through doubt, or deride it through
Yet both, if they are not in the
unbelief.
number of those over-foolish ones, who say
1 when they
in their heart
hear these words, think both things, viz. both
what God is, and what it is to be sent from

There is no God,''

"

"

"

God; and if they do not do this as the things
themselves really are, they do it at any rate
as they can.

3. Further, we know from other sources
the faith itself which a man sees to be in his
own heart, if he believes, or not to be there,
if he does not believe: but not as we know
bodies, which we see with the bodily eyes,
and think of even when absent through the
images of themselves which we retain in
memory; nor yet as those things which we
have not seen, and which we frame howsoever we can in thought from those which we
have seen, and commit them to memory, that
we may recur to them when we will, in order
that therein we may similarly by recollection
discern them, or rather discern the images of
them, of what sort soever these are which we
have fixed there; nor again as a living man,
whose soul we do not indeed see, but conjecture from our own, and from corporeal motions gaze also in thought upon the living
man, as we have learnt him by sight.
Faith
is not so seen in the heart in which it is, by
him whose it is; but most certain knowledge
fast, and conscience proclaims it.
holds it
Although therefore we are bidden to believe
on this account, because we cannot see what
we are bidden to believe; nevertheless we see
faith itself in ourselves, when that faith is in
us; because faith even in absent things is
present, and faith in things which are without
us is within, and faith in things which are not
seen is itself seen, and itself none the less
comes into the hearts of men in time; and if
any cease to be faithful and become unbelievers, then it perishes from them. And
is accommodated even to
sometimes faith
falsehoods; for we sometimes so speak as to
say, I put faith in him, and he deceived me.
And this kind of faith, if indeed it too is to
be called faith, perishes from the heart without blame, when truth is found and expels it.
But faith in things that are true, passes, as
one should wish it to pass, into the things
For we must not say that faith
themselves.
perishes, when those things which were beFor is it indeed still to be
lieved are seen.
called faith, when faith, according to the
definition in the Epistle to the Hebrews, is
the evidence of things not seen ?
" The
same came for a witness, to bear witness of
the Light, that all men through him might
believe;" the action, as we have said, is one
For to bear witness even to
done in time.
that which is eternal, as is that light that is
intelligible, is a thing done in time. And

4. In the words which follow next,

=

1 Ps.

2 Heb. xi. 1.

1 68

[Book XIII.

of this it was that John came to bear witness,
who "was not that Light, but was sent to
For he adds,
bear witness of that Light."
" That was the true Light that lighteth every
man that cometh into the world. He was in
the world, and the world was made by Him,
and the world knew Him not. He came unto
His own, and His own received Him not."
Now they who know the Latin language, understand all these words, from those things
which they know: and of these, some have
become known to us through the senses of
the world itself, of
the body, as man, as
which the greatness is so evident to our sight;
as again the sounds of the words themselves,
for hearing also is a sense of the body; and
some through the reason of the mind, as that
which is said, "And His own received Him
not;" for this means, that they did not believe in Him; and what belief is, we do not
know by any sense of the body, but by the
reason of the mind. We have learned, too,
not the sounds, but the meanings of the words
themselves, partly through the sense of the
body, partly through the reason of the mind.
Nor have we now heard those words for the
first time, but they are words we had heard
before. And we were retaining in our memory as things known, and we here recognized,
not only the words themselves, but also what
For when the bisyllabic word
they meant.
mundiis is uttered, then something that is certainly corporeal, for it is a sound, has become
known through the body, that is, through the
But that which it means also, has beear.
come known through
is,
For so far as
through the eyes of the flesh.
is known
the world is known to us at all, it
But the quadri-syllabic word
through sight.
crediderunt reaches us, so far as its sound,
since that is a corporeal thing, through the
ear of the flesh; but its meaning is discoverable by no sense of the body, but by the
For unless we knew
reason of the mind.
through the mind what the word credidenmt
meant, we should not understand what they
" And His own
did not do, of whom it is said,
received Him not."
The sound then of the
word rings upon the ears of the body from
without, and reaches the sense which is called
The species also of man is both
hearing.
known to us in ourselves, and is presented to
the senses of the body from without, in other
men; to the eyes, when it is seen; to the ears,
when it is heard; to the touch, when it is held
and touched; and it has, too, its image in our
memory, incorporeal indeed, but like the
Lastly, the wonderful beauty of the
body.
world itself is at hand from without, both to
our gaze, and to that sense which is called

the body, that

touch, if we come in contact with any of it:
and this also has its image within in our
memory, to which we revert, when we think
of it either in the enclosure of a room, or
But we have already
again in darkness.
sufficiently spoken in the eleventh book of
these images of corporeal things; incorporeal
indeed, yet having the likeness of bodies, and
But
belonging to the life of the outer man.
we are treating now of the inner man, and of
his knowledge, namely, that knowledge which
is of things temporal and changeable; into
the purpose and scope of which, when anything is assumed, even of things belonging
to the outer man, it must be assumed for this
end, that something may thence be taught
And
which may help rational knowledge.
hence the rational use of those things which
we have in common with irrational animals
belongs to the inner man; neither can
rightly be said that this is common to us with
the irrational animals.

it

CHAP. 2.

FAITH A THING OF THE HEART, NOT
OF THE BODY ; HOW IT IS COMMON AND ONE
AND THE SAME IN ALL BELIEVERS. THE FAITH
OF BELIEVERS IS ONE, NO OTHERWISE THAN
THE WILL OF THOSE WHO WILL IS ONE.

5. But faith, of which we are compelled,
by reason of the arrangement of our subject,
to dispute somewhat more at length in this
book: faith I say, which they who have are
called the faithful, and they who have not,
unbelievers, as were those who did not receive
the Son of God coming to His own; although
it is wrought in us by hearing, yet does not
belong to that sense of the body which is
called hearing, since it is not a sound; nor to
the eyes of this our flesh, since it
is neither
color nor bodily form; nor to that which is
called touch, since it has nothing of bulk; nor
to any sense of the body at all, since it is a
thing of the heart, not of the body; nor is it
without apart from us, but deeply seated within
us; nor does any man see it in another, but
each one in himself.
Lastly, it is a thing
that can both be feigned by pretence, and be
thought to be in him in whom it
is not.
Therefore every one sees his own faith in
himself; but does not see, but believes, that
it is in another; and believes this the more
firmly, the more he knows the fruits of it,
which faith is wont to work by love. ' And
therefore this faith is common to all of whom
" But as many as rethe evangelist subjoins,
ceived Him, to them gave He power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on His name: which were born, not of

Gal. v. 6.

Chap. III.]

ON THE TRINITY.

blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God;" common I say, not
as any form of a bodily object is common, as
regards sight, to the eyes of all to whom it is
present, for in some way the gaze of all that
behold it is informed by the same one form;
but as the human countenance can be said to
be common to all men; for this is so said,
that yet each certainly has his own. We say
certainly with perfect truth, that the faith of
believers is impressed from one doctrine upon
the heart of each several person who believes
the same thing.
But that which is believed
is a different thing from the faith by which
For the former is in things
it is believed.
which are said either to be, or to have been,
or to be about to be; bit the latter is in the
mind of the believer, and is visible to him
only whose it is; although not indeed itself,
For it is
but a faith like it, is also in others.
not one in number, but in kind; yet on account of the likeness, and the absence of all
difference, we rather call it one than many.
For when, too, we see two men exceedingly
alike, 'we wonder, and say that both have one
therefore more easily
countenance.
It
said that the souls were many,
a several
soul, of course, for each several person
of
whom we read in the Acts of the Apostles,
than it is, where
that they were of one soul,
the apostle speaks of "one faith,"
2 for any
one to venture to say that there are as many
And yet He who
faiths as there are faithful.
says, "O woman, great is thy faith;" 3 and
to another, "O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt ?" 4 intimates that each
has his own faith.
But the like faith of believers is said to be one, in the same way as
a like will of those who will is said to be one;
since in the case also of those who have the
same will, the will of each is visible to himself, but that of the other is not visible, although he wills the same thing; and if
it intimate itself by any signs, it is believed rather
But each being conscious of his
than seen.
own mind certainly does not believe, but
manifestly sees outright, that this is his own
will.

is

CHAP. 3.

SOME DESIRES BEING THE SAME
THE POET

IN ALL, ARE KNOWN TO EACH.
ENNIUS.
6. There is, indeed, so closely conspiring a
harmony in the same nature living and using
reason, that although one knows not what
the other wills, yet there are some wills of all
which are also known to each; and although

1 Acts. iv. 32.
3 Matt. xv. 2S.

2 Eph. iv. 5.
4 Matt. xiv. 31.

will.

each man does not know what any other one
man wills, yet in some things he may know
And hence comes that story
what all
of the comic actor's witty joke, who promised
that he would say in the theatre, in some
other play, what all had in their minds, and
what all willed; and when a still greater crowd
had come together on the day appointed,
with great expectation, all being in suspense
is affirmed to have said: You
and silent,
And mean
will to buy cheap, and sell dear.
actor though he was, yet all in his words recognized what themselves were conscious of,
and applauded him with wonderful goodwill,
for saying before the eyes of all what was
confessedly true, yet what no one looked for.
And why was so great expectation raised by
his promising that he would say what was the
will of all, unless because no man knows the
wills of other men ?
But did not he know
Is there any one who does not
that will ?
know it ?
Yet why, unless because there are
some things which not unfitly each conjectures from himself to be in others, through
sympathy or agreement either in vice or virBut it is one thing to see one's own
tue ?
will; another to conjecture, however certainly,
For, in human affairs, I
what is another's.
am as certain that Rome was built as that
Constantinople was, although I have seen
Rome with my eyes, but know nothing of the
other city, except what I have believed on the
testimony of others. And truly that comic
actor believed it to be common to all to will
to buy cheap and sell dear, either by observing himself or by making experiment also
But since such a will is in truth a
of others.
fault, every one can attain the counter virtue,
or run into the mischief of some other fault
which is contrary to it, whereby to resist and
For I myself know a case where
conquer it.
a manuscript was offered to a man for purchase, who perceived that the vendor was ignorant of its value, and was therefore asking
something very small,* and who thereupon
gave him, though not expecting it, the just
price, which was much more.
Suppose even
the case of a man possessed with wickedness
so great as to sell cheap what his parents left
to him, and to buy dear, in order to waste it
on his own lusts ? Such wanton extravagance,
I fancy, is not incredible; and if such men
are sought, they may be found, or even fall
in one's way although not sought; who. by a
wickedness more than that of the theatre,
make a mock of the theatrical proposition or
declaration, by buying dishonor at a great
price, while selling lands at a small one. We
have heard, too, of persons that, for the sake
of distribution, have bought corn at a higher

I/O

[Book XIII.

is that all men will.

price, and sold it to their fellow-citizens at a
And note also what the old poet
lower one.
Ennius has
mortals wish
said: that '"'all
themselves to be praised;" wherein, doubtless, he conjectured what was in others, both
by himself, and by those whom he knew by
experience; and so seems to have declared
what it
Lastly, if that
comic actor himself, too, had said, You all
will to be praised, no one of you wills to be
abused; he would have seemed in like manner to have expressed what all
Yet
there are some who hate their own faults, and
do not desire to be praised by others for that
for which they are displeased with themselves;
and who thank the kindness of those who rebuke them, when the purpose of that rebuke
is their own amendment. But if he had said,
You all will to be blessed, you do not will to
be wretched; he would have said something
which there is no one that would not recognize
For whatever else a man
in his own will.
may will secretly, he does not withdraw from
that will, which is well known to all men, and
well known to be in all men.

will.

CHAP. 4.

THE WILL TO POSSESS BLESSEDNESS
IS ONE IN ALL, BUT THE VARIETY OF WILLS IS
VERY GREAT CONCERNING THAT BLESSEDNESS
ITSELF.

7.

It is wonderful, however, since the will
to obtain and retain blessedness is one in all,
whence comes, on the other hand, such a
variety and diversity of wills concerning that
blessedness itself; not that any one is unwilling to have it, but that all do not know it.
For if all knew it, it would not be thought by
some to be in goodness of mind; by others,
in pleasure of body; by others, in both; and
by some in one thing, by others in another.
For as men find special delight in this thing
or that, so have they placed in it their idea
How, then, do all love so
of a blessed life.
warmly what not all know? Who can love
what he does not know?
a subject which I
have already discussed
in
preceding
books. z
blessedness
Why, therefore,
loved by all, when it is not known by all ?
Is
it perhaps that all know what it is itself, but
all do not know where it is to be found, and
that the dispute arises from this ?
as if, forsooth, the business was about some place in
this world, where every one ought to will to
live who wills to live blessedly; and as if the
question where blessedness is were not imFor cerplied in the question what it
tainly, if it is in the pleasure of the body, he
is blessed who enjoys the pleasure of the

the

is.

is

P.ks. fin. c. 4, etc., x. c. 1.

body; if in goodness of mind, he has it who
enjoys this; if in both, he who enjoys both.
When, therefore, one says, to live blessedly
is to enjoy the pleasure of the body; but another, to live blessedly is to enjoy goodness
of mind; is it not, that either both know, or
both do not know, what a blessed life
is ?
How, then, do both love it, if no one can love
what he does not know?
Or is that perhaps
false which we have assumed to be most true
and most certain, viz. that all men will to live
For if to live blessedly is, for
blessedly?
argument's sake, to live according to goodness of mind, how does he will to live blessedly who does not will this ?
Should we not
say more truly, That man does not will to
live blessedly, because he does not wish to
live according to goodness, which alone is to
Therefore all men do not
live blessedly ?
will to live blessedly; on the contrary, few
wish it;
if to live blessedly is nothing else
but to live according to goodness of mind,
which many do not will to do.
Shall we,
then, hold that to be false of which the Academic Cicero himself did not doubt (although
Academics doubt every thing), who, when he
wanted in the dialogue Hortcnsius to find
some certain thing, of which no one doubted,
from which to start his argument, says, We
Far be it
certainly all will to be blessed ?
from me to say this is false.
But what then ?
Are we to say that, although there is no other
way of living blessedly than living according
to goodness of mind, yet even he who does
not will this, wills to live blessedly?
This,
For it is much
indeed, seems too absurd.
as if we should say, Even he who does not will
to live blessedly, wills
blessedly.
Who could listen to, who could endure, such
a contradiction? And yet necessity thrusts
us into this strait, if it is both true that all
will to live blessedly, and yet all do not will
to live in that way in which alone one can
live blessedly.

live

to

CHAP. 5.

OF THE SAME THING.

8. Or is, perhaps, the deliverance from our
difficulties to be found in this, that, since we
have said that every one places his idea of a
blessed life in that which has most pleased
him, as pleasure pleased Epicurus, and goodness Zeno, and something else pleased other
people, we say that to live blessedly is nothing else but to live according to one's own
pleasure: so that it is not false that all will
to live blessedly, "because all will that which
For if this, too, had been
pleases each?
proclaimed to the people in the theatre, all
would have found it in their own wills.
But

Chap. VII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

"

and

" But this is indeed false.

when Cicero, too, had propounded this
in
opposition to himself, he so refuted it as to
make them blush who thought so.
For he
"But, behold! people who are not
says:
indeed philosophers, but who yet are prompt
to dispute, say that all are blessed, whoever
which is what we mean
live as they will;
But by and by he has
by, as pleases each.
For
subjoined:
to will what is not fitting, is itself most miserable; neither is it so miserable not to obtain
what one wills, as to will to obtain what one
Most excellently and altogether
ought not."
For who can be
most truly does he speak.
so blind in his mind, so alienated from all
light of decency, and wrapped up in the
darkness of indecency, as to call him blessed,
because he lives as he will, who lives wickedly
and disgracefully; and with no one restraining
him, no one punishing, and no one daring
even to blame him, nay more, too, with most
people praising him, since, as divine Scripture
says, "The wicked is praised in his heart's
he who works
desire;
gratifies all his most criminal and
blessed,"
flagitious desires; when, doubtless, although
even so he would be wretched, yet he would
be less wretched, if he could have had nothing
of those things which he had wrongly willed ?
For every one is made wretched by a wicked
will also, even though it stop short with will;
but more wretched by the power by which the
longing of a wicked will is fulfilled.
And,
therefore, since it is true that all men will to be
blessed, and that they seek for this one thing
with the most ardent love, and on account of
this seek everything which they do seek; nor
can any one love that of which he does not
know at all what or of what sort it is, nor can
be ignorant what that is which he knows that
he wills; it follows that all know a blessed
But all that are blessed have what they
life.
will, although not all who have what they will
But they are forewith
are forewith blessed.
wretched, who either have not what they will,
or have that which they do not rightly will.
Therefore he only is a blessed man, who
both has all things which he wills, and wills
nothing ill.

iniquity

is

CHAP. 6.

WHY, WHEN ALL WILL TO BE BLESSED,
THAT IS RATHER CHOSEN BY WHICH ONE
WITHDRAWS FROM BEING SO.
9. Since, then, a blessed life consists of
these two things, and is known to all, and dear
to all; what can we think to be the cause
both, men
why, when they cannot
choose, out of these two, to have all things
that they will, rather than to will all things

have

1 Ps.

well, even although they do not have them ?
Is it the depravity itself of the human race,
in such wise that, while they are not unaware
that neither is he blessed who has not what
he wills, nor he who has what he wills
wrongly, but he who both has whatsoever
good things he wills, and wills no evil ones,
yet, when both are not granted of those two
things in which the blessed life consists, that
is rather chosen by which one is withdrawn
the more from a blessed life (since he certainly is further from it who obtains things
which he wickedly desired, than he who only
does not obtain the things which he desired);
whereas the good will ought rather to be
chosen, and to be preferred, even if it do not
For he
obtain the things which it seeks ?
comes near to being a blessed man, who wills
well whatsoever he wills, and wills things,
which when he obtains, he will be blessed.
And certainly not bad things, but good,
make men blessed, when they do so make
them. And of good things he already has
something, and that, too, a something not
to be lightly esteemed,
namely, the very
good will itself; who longs to rejoice in those
good things of which human nature is capable, and not in the performance or the attainment of any evil; and who follows diligently,
and attains as much as he can, with a prudent, temperate, courageous, and right mind,
such good things as are possible in the present miserable life; so as to be good even in
evils, and when all evils have been put an end
to, and all good things fulfilled, then to be
blessed.

CHAP. 7.

FAITH IS NECESSARY, THAT MAN MAY
AT SOME TIME BE BLESSED, WHICH HE WILL
THE
ONLY ATTAIN IN THE FUTURE LIFE.
BLESSEDNESS OF PROUD PHILOSOPHERS RIDICULOUS AND PITIABLE.
10. And on this account, faith, by which
men believe in God, is above all things necessary in this mortal life, most full as it is of
errors and hardships.
For there are no good
things whatever, and above all, not those by
which any one is made good, or those by
which he will become blessed, of which any
other source can be found whence they come
to man, and are added to man, unless it be
But when he who is good and
from God.
in these miseries shall have come
faithful
from this life to the blessed life, then will
truly come to pass what now is absolutely
namely, that a man may live
impossible,
For he will not will to live badly
as he will.

2 [The prophet Nathan enunciates the same truth, in his words
for the Lord is with

" Go do all that is in thine heart ;

to David,
thee." 2 Sam. vii. 3. W. G. T. S.]

[Book XIII.

in the midst of that felicity, nor will he will
anything that will be wanting, nor will there
be wanting anything which he shall have
Whatever shall be loved, will be
willed.
present; nor will that be longed for, which
Everything which will
shall not be present.
be there will be good, and the supreme God
will be the supreme good and will be present
for those to enjoy who love Him; and what
altogether is most blessed, it will be certain
But now, indeed,
that it will be so forever.
philosophers have made for themselves, according to the pleasure of each, their own
ideals of a blessed life; that they might be
able, as it were by their own power, to do
that, which by the common conditions of
mortals they were not able to do,
namely,
For they felt that no
to live as they would.
one could be blessed otherwise than by having what he would, and by suffering nothing
And who would not
which he would not.
will, that the life whatsoever it be, with which
he is delighted, and which he therefore calls
blessed, were so in his own power, that he
could have it continually ? And yet who is
in tiiis condition ? Who wills to suffer troubles in order that he may endure them manfully, although he both wills and is able to
endure them if he does suffer them? Who
would will to live in torments, even although
he is able to live laudably by holding fast to
righteousness in the midst of them through
They who have endured these
patience ?
evils, either in wishing to have or in fearing to
lose what they loved, whether wickedly or
laudably, have thought of them as transitory.
For many have
stretched
boldly through
transitory evils to good things which will last.
And these, doubtless, are blessed through
hope, even while
such
transitory evils, through which they arrive at
good things which will not be transitory.
But he who is blessed through hope is not yet
blessed: for he expects, through patience,
a blessedness which he does not yet grasp.
Whereas he, on the other hand, who is tormented without any such hope, without any
such reward, let him use as much endurance
as he pleases, is not truly blessed, but bravely
For he is not on that account
miserable.
not miserable, because he would be more so
if he also bore misery impatiently.
Further,
even if he does not suffer those things which
he would not will to suffer in his own body,
not even then is he to be esteemed blessed,
inasmuch as he does not live as he wills.
For to omit other things, which, while the
body remains unhurt, belong to those annoyances of the mind, without which we should
will to live, and which are innumerable; he

suffering

actually

an

would will, at any rate, if he were able, so
to have his body safe and sound, and so to
suffer no inconveniences from it, as to have
it within his own control, or even to have it
with an imperishableness of the body itself;
and because he does not possess this, and
hangs in doubt about it, he certainly does
For although he may
not live as he wills.
be ready from fortitude to accept, and bear
with
equal mind, whatever adversities
may happen to him, yet he had rather they
should not happen, and prevents them if he
is able; and he is in such way ready for both
alternatives, that, as much as is in him, he
wishes for the one and shuns the other; and
if he have fallen into that which he shuns,
he therefore bears it willingly, because that
could not happen which he willed. He bears it,
therefore, in order that he may not be crushed ;
but he would not willingly be even burdened.
How, then, does he live as he wills ?
Is it
because he is willingly strong to bear what he
Then
would not will to be put upon him ?
he only wills what he can, because he canAnd here is the
not have what he wills.
sum-total of the blessedness of proud mortals, I know not whether to be laughed at, or
not rather to be pitied, who boast that they
live as they will, because they willingly bear
patiently what they are unwilling should hapFor this, they say, is like
pen to them.
Terence's wise saying,

"Since that cannot be which you will, will that which

thou canst." "

That this is aptly said, who denies ?
But it
is advice given to the miserable man, that
he may not be more miserable. And it
is
not rightly or truly said to the blessed man,
such as all wish themselves to be, That cannot
For if he is blessed,
be which you will.
whatever he wills can be; since he does not
But such a life is
will that which cannot be.
not for this mortal state, neither will it come
to pass unless when immortality also shall
And if this could not be
come to pass.
given at all to man, blessedness too would be
sought in vain, since it cannot be without
immortality.

CHAP. 8.

BLESSEDNESS CANNOT EXIST WITH-

OUT IMMORTALITY.

11. As,

therefore,

all men will to be
blessed, certainly, if they will truly, they will
also to be immortal; for otherwise they could
And further, if questioned
not be blessed.
also concerning immortality, as before concerning blessedness, all reply that they will

1 Andreia, Act ii. Scene 1, v. 5, 6.

Chap. IX.]

ON THE TRINITY.

l 73

it.

But blessedness of what quality soever,
such as is not so, but rather is so called, is
sought, nay indeed is feigned in this life,
whilst immortality is despaired of, without
which true blessedness cannot be.
Since
he lives blessedly, as we have already said
before, and have sufficiently proved and concluded, who lives as he wills, and wills nothBut no one wrongly wills iming wrongly.
mortality, if human nature is by God's gift
capable of it; and if it is not capable of it, it
For, that a
is not capable of blessedness.
man may live blessedly, he must needs live.
And if life quits him by his dying, how can
a blessed life remain with him ? And when
it quits him, without doubt it either quits
him unwilling, or willing, or neither.
If
unwilling, how is the life blessed which is so
within his will as not to be within his power ?
And whereas no one is blessed who wills
something that he does not have, how much
less is he blessed who is quitted against his
will, not by honor, nor by possessions, nor
by any other thing, but by the blessed life
itself, since he will have no life at all ? And
hence, although no feeling is left for his life
to be thereby miserable (for the blessed life
quits him, because life altogether quits him),
yet he is wretched as long as he feels, because he knows that against -his will that is
being destroyed for the sake of which he
loves all else, and which he loves beyond all
else. A life therefore cannot both be blessed,
and yet quit a man against his will, since no
one becomes blessed against his will; and
hence how much more does it make a man
miserable by quitting him against his will,
when it would make him miserable if he had
But if it quit him with
it against his will !
his will, even so how was that a blessed life,
which he who had it willed should perish ?
It remains then for them to say, that neither
of these is in the mind of the blessed man;
that is, that he is neither unwilling nor willing
to be quitted by a blessed life, when through
death life quits him altogether; for that he
stands firm with an even heart, prepared alike
But neither is that a
for either alternative.
blessed life which is such as to be unworthy
of his love whom it makes blessed.
For how
is that a blessed life which the blessed man
.does not love? Or how is that loved, of
which it is received indifferently, whether it
Unless perhaps
is to flourish or to perish ?
the virtues, which we love in
this way on
account of blessedness
to
persuade us that we do not love blessedness
Yet if they did this, we should ceritself.
tainly leave off loving the virtues themselves,
when we do not love that on account oi

alone, venture

and

good

supremely

And further,
which alone we loved them.
how will that opinion be true, which has been
so tried, and sifted, and thoroughly strained,
and is so certain, viz. that all men will to be
blessed, if they themselves who are already
blessed neither will nor do not will to be
Or if they will it, as truth problessed ?
claims, as nature constrains, in which indeed
the
unchangeably
blessed Creator has implanted that will: if, I
say, they will to be blessed who are blessed,
certainly they do no will to be not blessed.
But if they do not will not to be blessed,
without doubt they do not will to be annihilated and perish in regard to their blessedBut they cannot be blessed except
ness.
they are alive; therefore they do not will so
to perish in regard to their life.
Therefore,
whoever are either truly blessed or desire to
But he does not
be so, will to be immortal.
live blessedly who has not that which he wills.
Therefore it follows that in no way can life
be truly blessed unless it be eternal.

CHAP 9. WE SAY THAT FUTURE BLESSEDNESS
IS TRULY ETERNAL, NOT THROUGH HUMAN
REASONINGS, BUT BY THE HELP OF FAITH.
THE IMMORTALITY OF BLESSEDNESS BECOMES
CREDIBLE FROM THE INCARNATION OF THE
SON OF GOD.
12. Whether human nature can receive
this, which yet it confesses to be desirable,
But if faith be present,
is no small question.
which is in those to whom Jesus has given
power to become the sons of God, then there
Assuredly, of those who
is no question.
endeavor to discover it from human reasonings, scarcely a few, and they endued with
great abilities, and abounding in leisure, and
learned with the most subtle learning, have
been able to attain to the investigation of
And even
the immortality of the soul alone.
for the soul they have not found a blessed
life that is stable, that is, true; since they
have said that it returns to the miseries of
And they
this life even after blessedness.
among them who are ashamed of this opinion,
and have thought that the purified soul is to
a
be placed in eternal happiness without
body, hold such opinions concerning the past
eternity of the world, as to confute
this
opinion of theirs concerning the soul: a thing
which here it is too long to demonstrate; but
it has been, as I think, sufficiently explained
by us in the twelfth book of the City of God*
But that faith promises, not by human reaauthority, that the
soning, but by divine
whole man, who certainly consists of soul

1 C. 20.

[Book XIII.

"

" To them that believe on His name;

and body, shall be immortal, and on this acAnd so, when it had
count truly blessed.
been said in the Gospel, that Jesus has given
"
power to become the sons of God to them
who received Him; '' and what it
is to have
received Him had been shortly explained by
"
saying,
and it was further added in what way they
are to become sons of God, viz., "Which
were born not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God;
lest that infirmity of men which we all see
and bear should despair of attaining so great
is added in the same place,
excellence, it
"And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt
that, on the contrary, men
among us;" 1
might be convinced of that which seemed
For if He who is by nature the
incredible.
Son of God was made the Son of man through
mercy for the sake of the sons of men,
for
" The Word was
this is what is meant by
made flesh, and dwelt among us "
how much more credible is it that the sons of
men by nature should be made the sons of
God by the grace of God, and should dwell
in God, in whom alone and from whom alone
the blessed can be made partakers of that
immortality; of which that we might be convinced, the Son of God was made partaker
of our mortality ?

men,

CHAP. IO.

THERE WAS NO OTHER MORE SUITABLE WAY OF FREEING MAN FROM THE MISERY
OF MORTALITY THAN THE INCARNATION OF
THE MERITS WHICH ARE CALLED
THE WORD.
OURS ARE THE GIFTS OF GOD.
13. Those then who say, What, had God
no other way by which He might free men from
the misery of this mortality, that He should
will the only-begotten Son, God co-eternal
with Himself, to become man, by putting on
a human soul and flesh, and being made
mortal to endure death?
these, I say, it is
not enough so to refute, as to assert that
that mode by which God deigns to free us
through the Mediator of God and men, the
man Christ Jesus, is good and suitable to the
-dignity of God; but we must show also, not
indeed that no other mode was possible to
God, to whose power all things are equally
subject, but that there neither was nor need
have been any other mode more appropriate for
For what was so necescuring our misery.
sary for the building up of our hope, and for
the freeing the minds of mortals cast down
by the condition of mortality itself, from
despair of immortality, than that it should be
demonstrated to us at how great a price God

1 John 1. 12-14.

rated us, and how greatly He loved us ?
But
what is more manifest and evident in this so
great proof hereof, than that the Son of God,
unchangeably good, remaining what He was
in Himself, and receiving from us and for us
what He was not, apart from any loss of His
own nature, and deigning to enter into the
fellowship of ours, should first, without any
evil desert of His own, bear our evils; and so
with unobligated munificence should bestow
His own gifts upon us, who now believe how
much God loves us, and who now hope that
of which we used to despair, without any
good deserts of our own, nay, with our evil
deserts too going before?

14. Since those also which are called our
deserts, are His gifts.
For, that faith may
2 "the love of God is shed
work by love,
abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which
is given unto us/' 3 And He was then given,
when Jesus was glorified by the resurrection.
For then He promised that He Himself
would send Him, and He sent Him; 4 because then, as it was written and foretold of
Him, "He ascended up on high, He led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men." 5
These gifts constitute our deserts, by which
we arrive at the chief good of an immortal
" But God," says the apostle,
blessedness.
" commendeth His love towards us, in that,
while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.
Much more, then, being now justified by His
blood, we shall be saved from wrath through
" For if,
Him." To this he goes on to add,
when we were enemies, we were reconciled to
God by the death of His Son; much more,
being reconciled, we shall be saved by His
Those whom he first calls sinners he
life."
afterwards calls the enemies of God; and
those whom he first speaks of as justified by
His blood, he afterwards speaks of as reconciled by the death of the Son of God; and
those whom he speaks of first as saved from
wrath through Him, he afterwards speaks of
as saved by His life. We were not, therefore, before that grace merely anyhow sinners,
but in such sins that we were enemies of
But the same apostle calls us above
God.
several times by two appellations, viz. sinners
one as if the most
and enemies of God,
mild, the other plainly the most harsh,
saying, "For if when we were yet weak, in*
due time Christ died for
ungodly."
Those whom he called weak, the same he
Weakness seems something
called ungodly.
slight; but sometimes it is such as to be called
Yet except it were weakness, it
impiety.

the

2 Gal. v. 5.
4 John xx, 22, vii. 39, and xv. 26.
5 Eph. iv. 8 and Ps. lxviii. 18.

3 Rom. v. 4, 5.

6 Rom. v. 6-10.

Chap. XII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

would not need a physician, who is
in the
Hebrew Jesus, in the Greek Iioryjp, but in
our speech Saviour. And this word the Latin
language had not previously, but could have,
seeing that it could have it when it wanted it.
And this foregoing sentence of the apostle,
" For when we were yet weak,
where he says,
in due time He died for the ungodly," coheres
with those two following sentences; in the one
of which he spoke of sinners, in the other of
enemies of God, as though he referred each
severally to each, viz. sinners to the weak, the
enemies of God to the ungodly.

CHAP. II.

A DIFFICULTY, HOW WE ARE JUSTI-

"

TIFIED IN THE BLOOD OF THE SON OF GOD.
15. But what is meant by

justified in His
blood ?" What power is there in this blood, I
beseech you, that they who believe should be
justified in it ? And what is meant by "being
reconciled by the death of His Son ?" Was it
indeed so, that when God the Father was wroth
with us, He saw the death of His Son for us, and
was appeased towards us ? Was then His Son
already so far appeased towards us, that He
even deigned to die for us; while the Father
was still so far wroth, that except His Son
died for us, He would not be appeased ? And
what, then, is that which the same teacher of
the Gentiles himself says in another place:
"What shall we then say to these things ?
If
God be for us, who can be against us ? He
that spared not His own Son, but delivered
Him up for us all; how has He not with Him
also freely given us all things?"
Pray, unless
the Father had been already appeased, would
He have delivered up His own Son, not
sparing Him for us ?
Does not this opinion
seem to be as it were contrary to that ?
In
the one, the Son dies for us, and the Father
is reconciled to us by His death; in the other,
as though the Father first loved us, He Himself on our account does not spare the Son,
He Himself for us delivers Him up to death.
But I see that the Father loved us also before,
not only before the Son died for us, but before
He created the world; the apostle himself being witness, who says, "According as He
hath chosen us in Him before the foundation
of the world." 2 Nor was the Son delivered
up for us as it were unwillingly, the Father
Himself not sparing Him; for it is said also
concerning Him, "Who loved me, and delivered up Himself for me." 3
Therefore together both the Father and the Son, and the
Spirit of both, work all things equally and
harmoniously; yet we are
justified in the
blood of Christ, and we are reconciled to God

by the death of His Son. And I will explain,
as I shall be able, here also, how this was
done, as much as may seem sufficient.

CHAP. 12.

ALL, ON ACCOUNT OF THE SIN OF
ADAM, WERE DELIVERED INTO THE POWER OF
THE DEVIL.
16. By the justice of God in some sense,
the human race was delivered into the power
of the devil; the sin of the first man passing
over originally into all of both sexes in their
birth through conjugal union, and the debt of
our first parents binding their whole posteriThis delivering up is
first signified in
ty.
Genesis, where, when it had been said to the ser-
" Dust shalt thou eat," it was said to the
pent,
" Dust thou art, and unto dust thou
man,
In the words, "Unto dust
shalt return." 4
shalt thou return/' the death of the body is
fore-announced, because he would not have
experienced that either, if he had continued
to the end upright as he was made; but in
" Dust
that it is said to him whilst still living,
thou art," it is shown that the whole man was
changed for the worse. For " Dust thou art"
" My spirit shall not alis much the same as,
ways remain in these men, for that they also are
flesh." 5 Therefore it was at that time shown,
that he was delivered to him, in that it had
" Dust shalt thou eat." But
been said to him,
the apostle declares this more clearly, where
he says: "And you who were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein in time past ye
walked according to the course of this world,
according to the prince of the power of the
air, the spirit that now worketh in the children
of unfaithfulness; among whom we also had
our conversation in times past, in the lusts of
our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh
and of the mind; and were by nature the
children of wrath, even as others." 6 The
"
children of unfaithfulness" are the unbelievers; and who is not this before he becomes
a believer ? And therefore all men are originally under the prince of the power of the air,
"who worketh in the children of unfaithfulness." And that which I have expressed by
"
is the same that the apostle expresses when he speaks of themselves who "by
" were as others; viz. by nature as it
nature
has been depraved by sin, not as it was
created upright from the beginning. But the
way in which man was thus delivered into the
power of the devil, ought not to be so understood as if God did this, or commanded it to
be done; but that He only permitted it, yet
that justly. For when He abandoned the sin-

originally

"

1 Rom. vili. 31. 32.

Eph. i. 4.

3 Gal. ii. 20.

4 Gen. iii. 14-19.
6 Eph. ii. 1-3.

5 Gen. vi. 3. "Strive with man," A. V.

[Book Xlil.

ner, the author of the sin immediately entered.
Yet God did not certainly so abandon His
own creature as not to show Himself to him
as God creating and quickening, and among
penal evils bestowing also many good things
upon the evil. For He hath not in anger shut
up His tender mercies. 1 Nor did He dismiss
man from the law of His own power, when
He permitted him to be in the power of the
devil; since even the devil himself is not separated from the power of the Omnipotent, as
For whence do
neither from His goodness.
even the evil angels subsist in whatever manner of life they have, except through Him
who quickens all things ?
If, therefore, the
commission of sins through the just anger
of God subjected man to the devil, doubtless
the remission of sins through the merciful
reconciliation of God rescues man from the
devil.

CHAP. 13.

MAN WAS TO BE RESCUED FROM
THE POWER OF THE DEVIL, NOT BY POWER,
BUT BY RIGHTEOUSNESS.

17. But the devil was to be overcome, not
by the power of God, but by His righteousFor what is more powerful than the
ness.
Or what creature is there of
Omnipotent?
which the power can be compared to
the
But since the devil,
power of the Creator?
by the fault of his own perversity, was made
a lover of power, and a forsaker and assailant
for thus also men imitate
of righteousness,
him so much the more in proportion as they
set their hearts on power, to the neglect or even
hatred of righteousness, and as they either rejoice in the attainment of power, or are inflamed by the lust of it,
it pleased God, that
in order to the rescuing of man from the grasp
of the devil, the. devil should be conquered,
not by power, but by righteousness; and that
so also men, imitating Christ, should seek to
conquer the devil by righteousness, not by
Not that power is to be shunned as
power.
though it were something evil; but the order
must be preserved, whereby righteousness is
before it. For how great can be the power of
mortals ?
Therefore let mortals cleave to
righteousness; power will be given to immorAnd compared to this, the power, how
tals.
great soever, of those men who are called
powerful on earth, is found to be ridiculous
weakness, and a pitfall is dug there for the
sinner, where the wicked seem to be most
And the righteous man says in
powerful.
Blessed is the man whom Thou
his song,
chasteneth, O Lord, and teachest him out of
Thy law: that Thou mayest give him rest

"

from the days of adversity, until the pit be
digged for the wicked. For the Lord will not
cast off His people, neither will He forsake
His inheritance, until righteousness return
unto judgment, and all who follow it are upright in heart." 2 At this present time, then,
in which the might of the people of God is
delayed, "the Lord will not cast off His
people, neither will He forsake His inheritance," how bitter and unworthy things soever it may suffer in its humility and weakness; "until the righteousness," which the
weakness of the pious now possesses, "shall
return to judgment," that is, shall receive the
power of judging; which is preserved in the
end for the righteous when power in its due
order shall have followed after righteousness
going before. For power joined to righteousness, or righteousness added to power, constitutes a judicial authority. But righteousness
belongs to a good will; whence it was said by
the angels when Christ was born: "Glory to
God in the
highest, and on earth peace to'
men of good will." 3
But power ought to follow righteousness, not to go before it; and acis placed in "second," that is,
cordingly it
prosperous fortune; and this is called "second," 4 from "following."
For whereas two
things make a man blessed,
as we have
argued above, to will well, and to be able to
do what one wills, people ought not to be so
perverse, as has been noted in the same discussion, as that a man should choose from the
two things which make him.blessed, the being
able to do what he wills, and should neglect
to will what he ought; whereas he ought first
to have a good will, but great power afterwards.
Further, a good will must be purged from
vices, by which if a man is overcome, he is
in such wise overcome as that he wills evil;
and then how will his will be still good ?
It
is to be wished, then,. that power may now
be given, but power against vices, to conquer
which men do not wish to be powerful, while
they wish to be so in order to conquer men;
and why is this, unless that, being in truth
conquered, they feignedly conquer, and are
conquerors not in truth, but in opinion ? Let
a man will to be prudent, will to be strong,
will to be temperate, will to be just; and that
he may be able to have these things truly, let
him certainly desire power, and seek to be
powerful in himself, and (strange though it
But all the
be) against himself for himself.
other things which he wills rightl)% and yet is
not able to have, as, for instance, immortality
and true and full felicity, let him not cease to
long for, and let him patiently expect.

1 Ps. lxxvn 9.

2 Ps. xciv. 12-15.

3 Luke ii. 14.

4 Res secundce.

Chap. XV.]

ON THE TRINITY.

CHAP. 14.

"THE UNOBLIGATED DEATH OF CHRIST
HAS FREED THOSE WHO WERE LIABLE TO
DEATH.

"

"

18. What, then,

is the righteousness by
which the devil was conquered ?
What, except the righteousness of Jesus Christ ? And
Because, when he
how was he conquered ?
found in Him nothing worthy of death, yet he
slew Him. And certainly it is just, that we
whom he held as debtors, should be dismissed
free by believing in Him whom he slew withIn this way it is that we are
out any debt.
said to be justified in the blood of Christ.'
For so that innocent blood was shed for the
remission of our sins. Whence He calls HimFree among the dead." 2
self in the Psalms,
For he only that is dead is free from the debt
Hence also in another psalm He
of death.
says, "Then I restored that which I seized
not;" 3 meaning sin by the thing seized, because sin is laid hold of against what is lawful.
Whence also He says, by the mouth of His own
" For the
Flesh, as is read in the Gospel:
prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing
that the world
in me," that is, no sin; but
may know," He says, "that I do the commandment of the Father; arise, let us go hence." 4
And hence He proceeds to His passion, that
He might pay for us debtors that which He
Would then the devil
Himself did not owe.
be conquered by this most just right, if Christ
had willed to deal with him by power, not by
But He held back what was
righteousness ?
possible to Him, in order that He might first
do what was fitting. And hence it was necessary that He should be both man and God.
For unless He had been man, He could not
have been slain; unless He had been God,
men would not have believed that He would
not do what He could, but that He could not
do what He would; nor should we have
thought that righteousness was preferred by
Him to power, but that He lacked power. But
now He suffered for us things belonging to
man, because He was man ; but if He had been
unwilling, it would have been in His power to
not so to suffer, because He was also God.
And righteousness was therefore made more
acceptable in humility, because so great power as was in His Divinity, if He had been unwilling, would have been able not to suffer
humility; and thus by Him who died, being
thus powerful, both righteousness was commended, and power promised, to us, weak
mortals. For He did one of these two things
For
by dying, the other by rising again.
what is more righteous, than to come even to

the death of the cross for righteousness ? And
what more powerful, than to rise from the
dead, and to ascend into heaven with that
very flesh in which He was slain ? And therefore He conquered the devil first by righteousness, and afterwards by power: namely, by
righteousness, because He had no sin, and
was slain by him most unjustly; but by power,
because having been dead He lived again,
never afterwards to die. 5 But He would have
conquered the devil by power, even though
He could not have been slain by him: although it belongs to a greater power to conquer
death itself also by rising again, than to avoid
But the reason is really a differit by living.
ent one, why we are justified in the blood of
Christ, when we are rescued from the power
of the devil through the remission of sins: it
pertains to this, that the devil is conquered
by Christ by righteousness, not by power. For
Christ was crucified, not through immortal
power, but through the weakness which He
took upon Him in mortal flesh; of which
weakness nevertheless the apostle says,
that
the weakness of God is stronger than men." 6

"

CHAP. 15

OF THE SAME SUBJECT.

19. It is not then difficult to see that the
devil was conquered, when he who was slain by
Him rose again.
It is something more, and
more profound of comprehension, to see that
the devil was conquered when he thought
himself to have conquered, that is, when
Christ was slain.
For then that blood, since
it was His who had no sin at all, was poured
out for the remission of our sins; that, because the devil deservedly held those whom,
as guilty of sin, he bound by the condition of
death, he might deservedly loose them through
Him, whom, as guilty of no sin, the punishment of death undeservedly affected.
The
strong man was conquered by this righteousness, and bound with this chain, that his vessels might be spoiled, 7 which with himself and
his angels had been vessels of wrath while
with him, and might be turned into vessels of
For the Apostle Paul tells us, that
mercy.
these words of our Lord Jesus Christ Himself
were spoken from heaven to him when he was
first called. For among the other things which
he heard, he speaks also of this as said to him
For I have appeared unto thee for this
thus:
purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness both of these things which thou hast seen
from me, and of those things in the which I
will appear unto thee; delivering thee from
the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom
now I send thee, to open the eyes of the blind,

"

1 Rom. v. q.
3 Ps. Ixix. 4.

2 Ps. Ixxxviii. 5.
4 John xiv. 30-31.

5 Rom. vi. 9.

6 1 Cor. i. 2S.

7 Mark iii. 27.

a Rom. ix. 22, 23.

i 7 8

[Book XIII.

"

and to turn them from darkness [to light],
and from the power of Satan unto God, that
they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified,
and faith that is in me." * And hence the same
apostle also, exhorting believers to the giving
" Who
of thanks to God the Father, says:
hath delivered us from the power of darkness,
and hath translated us into the kingdom of
His dear Son: in whom we have redemption,
In this reeven the forgiveness of sins."
demption, the blood of Christ was given, as
it were, as a price 'for us, by accepting which
the devil was not enriched, but bound: 3 that
we might be loosened from his bonds, and
that he might not with himself involve in the
meshes of sins, and so deliver to the destruction of the second and eternal death/ any
one of those whom Christ, free from all debt,
had redeemed by pouring out His own blood
unindebtedly; but that they who belong to
the grace of Christ, foreknown, and predestinated, and elected before the foundation of
the world, 5 should only so far die as Christ
Himself died for them, i.e. only by the death
of the flesh, not of the spirit.

CHAP. 1 6.

THE REMAINS OF DEATH AND THE
EVIL THINGS OF THE WORLD TURN TO GOOD
FOR THE ELECT. HOW FITLY THE DEATH OF
CHRIST WAS CHOSEN, THAT WE MIGHT BE
JUSTIFIED IN HIS BLOOD. WHAT THE ANGER
OF GOD IS.

20. For although the death, too, of the
flesh itself came originally from the sin of the
first man, yet the good use of it has made
most glorious martyrs. And so not only that
death itself, but all the evils of this world,
and the griefs and labors of men, although
they come from the deserts of sins, and especially of original sin, whence life itself too
became bound by the bond of death, yet
have fitly remained, even when sin is forgiven; that man might have wherewith to
contend for truth, and whereby the goodness
of the faithful might be exercised; in order
that the new man through the new covenant
might be made ready among the evils of this
world for a new world, by bearing wisely the
misery which this condemned life deserved,
and by rejoicing soberly because it will be

- Col. i. 13, 14.

1 Acts xxvi. 16-18.
3 [In this representation of A ugustin, the relics of that misconception which appears in the earlier soteriology, particularly
that of Irenaeus, are seen : namely, that the death of Christ ranCertain texts which teach that resoms the sinner from Satan.
demption delivers from the captivity to sin and Satan, were interpreted to teach deliverance from the claims of Satan. Augustin's
soteriology is more free from this error than that of Irenaeus, yet
not entirely free from it. The doctrine of justification did not obtain its most consistent and complete statement in the Patristic
church. W. G. T. S.]
4 Apoc. xxi. 8.

5 1 Pet. i. 20.

"

sacred

writings

but expecting

faithfully and pafinished,
tiently the blessedness which the future life,
For the
being set free, will have for ever.
devil being cast forth from his dominion, and
from the hearts of the faithful, in the condemnation and faithlessness of whom he, although himself also condemned, yet reigned,
is only so far permitted to be an adversary
according to the condition of this mortality,
as God knows to be expedient for them: concerning which the
speak
through the mouth of the apostle: ''God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted
above that ye are able; but will with the
temptation also make a way to escape, that
ye may be able to bear it." 6 And those evils
which the faithful endure piously, are of profit either for the correction of sins, or for the
exercising and proving of righteousness, or to
manifest the misery of this life, that the life
where will be that true and perpetual blessedness may be desired more ardently, and
sought out more earnestly.
But it is on their
account that these evils are still kept in being, of whom the apostle says:
For we know
all things work together for good to
that
them that love God, to them who are called
For
to be holy according to His purpose.
whom He did foreknow, He also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of His
Son, that He might be the first-born among
Moreover, whom He did
many brethren.
predestinate, them He also called; and whom
He called, them He also justified; and whom
He justified, them He also glorified."
It is
of these who are predestinated, that not one
shall perish with the devil; not one shall remain even to death under the power of the
And then follows what I have already
devil.
cited above: 7 "What shall we then say to
If God be for us, who can be
these things?
against us ? He that spared not His own Son,
but delivered Him up for us all; how has He
not with Him also freely given us all things ?" 8
21. Why then should the death of Christ,
not have come to pass ?
Nay, rather, why
should not that death itself have been chosen
above all else to be brought to pass, to the
passing by of the other innumerable ways
which He who is omnipotent could have employed to free us; that death, I say, wherein
neither was anything diminished or changed
from His divinity, and so great benefit was
conferred upon men, from the humanity which
He took upon Him, that a temporal death,
which was not due, was rendered by the eternal Son of God, who was also the Son of man,
whereby He might free them from an eternal

6 1 Cor. x. 13.

7 C. 2.

8 Rom. viii. 28-32.

Chap. XVII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

j

Therefore

death which was due ? The devil was holding fast our sins, and through them was fixing us deservedly in death. He discharged
them, who had none of His own, and who was
That
led by him to death undeservedly.
blood was of such price, that he who even
slew Christ for a time by a death which was !
not due, can as his due detain no one, who
has put on Christ, in the eternal death which
" God commendeth His
was due.
love towards us, in that, while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us. Much more then,
being now justified in His blood, we shall be
saved from wrath through Him."
Justified,
he says, in His blood,
justified plainly, in
that we are freed from all sin; and freed from
all sin, because the Son of God, who knew no
Therefore "we shall
sin, was slain for us.
be saved from wrath through Him;" from the
wrath certainly of God, which is nothing else
For the wrath of God
but just retribution.
is not, as is that of man, a perturbation of the
is the wrath of Him to whom
mind; but it
" But
Holy Scripture says in another place,
Thou, O Lord, mastering Thy power, judgIf, therefore, the just
est with calmness." '
retribution of God has received such a name,
what can be the right understanding also of
the reconciliation of God, unless that then
Neither were
such wrath comes to an end ?
we enemies to God, except as sins are enemies
to righteousness; which being forgiven, such
enmities come to an end, and they whom He
Himself justifies are reconciled to the Just
One. And yet certainly He loved them even
" He spared not His
while still enemies, since
own Son, but delivered Him up for us all,"
when we were still enemies. And therefore
" For if, when
the apostle has rightly added:
we were enemies, we were reconciled to God
by the death of His Son," by which that re-
" much more, bemission of sins was made,
ing reconciled, we shall be saved in His life."
Saved in life, who were reconciled by death.
For who can doubt that He will give His life
for His friends, for whom, when enemies,
He gave His death? "And not only so,"
he says, "but we also joy in God, through
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now
received the atonement." "Not only," he
says, "shall we be saved," but "we also
joy;" and not in ourselves, but "in God;"
nor through ourselves, "but through our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement," as we have argued
above. Then the apostle adds, "Wherefore,
as by one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin; and so death passed upon all

men, in whom all have sinned;" 2 etc.:
in
which he disputes at some length concerning
the two men; the one the first Adam, through
whose sin and death we, his descendants, are
bound by, as it were, hereditary evils; and
the other the second Adam, who is not only
man, but also God, by whose payment for us
of what He owed not, we are freed from the
debts both of our first father and of ourselves.
Further, since on account of that one the
devil held all who were begotten through his
corrupted carnal concupiscence, it is just that
on account of this one he should loose all who
are regenerated through His immaculate
spiritual grace.

CHAP. 17.

OTHER ADVANTAGES OF THE IN-

CARNATION.

22. There are many other things also in
the incarnation of Christ, displeasing as it is
to the proud, that are to be observed and
advantageously. And one of
thought of
them is, that it has been demonstrated to man
what place he has in the things which God
has created; since human nature could so be
joined to God, that one person could be made
of two substances, and thereby indeed of
God, soul, and flesh: so that those
three
proud malignant spirits, who interpose themselves as mediators to deceive, although as
if to help, do not therefore dare to place
themselves above man because they have not
flesh; and chiefly because the Son of God
deigned to die also in the same flesh, lest
they, because they seem to be immortal,
should therefore succeed in getting themFurther, that the
selves worshipped as gods.
grace of God might be commended to us in
the man Christ without any precedent merits;
because not even He Himself obtained by any
precedent merits that He should be joined in
the true God, and
such great unity with
should become the Son of God, one Person
with Him; but from the time when He began
to be man, from that time He is also God;
whence it is said, "The Word was made
Then, again, there is this, that the c
flesh." 3
pride of man, which is the chief hindrance \
against his cleaving to God, can be confuted
and healed through such great humility of
God. Man learns also how far he has gone
away from God; and what it is worth to him
to cure him, when he returns
as a pain
through such a Mediator, who both as God
assists men by His divinity, and as man
agrees with men by His weakness.
For what
greater example of obedience could be given
to us, who had perished through disobedience,

1 Wisd. xii. 18.

Rom. v. 8, 12.

3 John i. 14.

i8o

[Book XIII.

*

the

cross ?

than God the Son obedient to God the Father,
even to the death
of
Nay,
wherein could the reward of obedience itself
be better shown, than in the flesh of so great
a Mediator, which rose again to eternal life ?
It belonged also to the justice and goodness
of the Creator, that the devil should be conquered by the same rational creature which
he rejoiced to have conquered, and by one
that came from that same race which, by the
corruption of its origin through one, he held
altogether.

CHAP. 1 8. WHY THE SON OF GOD TOOK MAN
UPON HIMSELF FROM THE RACE OF ADAM,
AND FROM A VIRGIN.
23. For assuredly God could have taken
upon Himself to be man, that in that manhood He might be the Mediator between
God and men, from some other source, and
not from the race of that Adam who bound
the human race by his sin; as He did not
create him whom He first created, of the
Therefore He was
race of some one else.
able, either so, or in any other mode that He
would, to create yet one other, by whom the
conqueror of the first might be conquered.
But God judged it better both to take upon
Him man through whom to conquer the
enemy of the human race, from the race itself that had been conquered; and yet to do
this of a virgin, whose conception, not flesh
Nor
but spirit, not? lust but faith, preceded.
did that concupiscence of the flesh intervene,
by which the rest of men, who derive original
sin, are propagated and conceived; but holy
virginity became pregnant, not by conjugal
intercourse, but by faith,
lust being utterly
so that that which was born from the
absent,
root of the first man might derive only the
For there
origin of race, not also of guilt.
was born, not a nature corrupted by the contagion of transgression, but the one only
There was
remedy of all such corruptions.
born, I say, a Man having nothing at all, and
to have nothing at all, of sin; through whom
they were to be born again so as to be freed
from sin, who could not be born without sin.
For although conjugal chastity makes a right
use of the carnal concupiscence which is in
our members; yet it is liable to motions not
voluntary, by which it shows either that it
could not have existed at all in paradise before sin, or if it did, that it was not then such
as that sometimes it should resist the will.
But now we feel it to be such, that in opposition to the law of the mind, and even if
there is no question of begetting, it works in

us the incitement of sexual intercourse; and
if in this men yield to it, then it is satisfied
by an act of sin; if they do not, then it is
bridled by an act of refusal: which two things
who could doubt to have been alien from
For neither did the
paradise before sin ?
chastity that then was do anything indecorous, nor did the pleasure that then was suffer
It was necessary, thereanything unquiet.
fore, that this carnal concupiscence should
be entirely absent, when the offspring of the
Virgin was conceived; in whom the author of
death was to find nothing worthy of death,
and yet was to slay Him in order that he
might be conquered by the death of the
Author of
the first
life: the conqueror of
Adam, who held fast the human race, conquered by the second Adam, and losing the
Christian race, freed out of the human race
from human guilt, through Him who was not
in the guilt, although He was of the race;
that that deceiver might be conquered by
that race which he had conquered by guilt.
And this was so done, in order that man may
not be lifted up, but "that he that glorieth
For he who was
should glory in the Lord." 3
conquered was only man; and he was therefore conquered, because he lusted proudiy to
But He who conquered was both
be a god.
man and God; and therefore He so conquered, being born of a virgin, because God
in humility did not, as He governs other
saints, so govern that Man, but bare Him [as
These so great gifts of God, and
a Son].
whatever else there are, which it
is too long
for us now upon this subject both to inquire
and to discuss, could not exist unless the
Word had been made flesh.

CHAP. 19. WHAT IN THE INCARNATE WORD
BELONGS TO KNOWLEDGE, .WHAT TO WISDOM.
24. And all these things which the Word
made flesh did and bare for us in time and
place, belong, according to the distinction
which we have undertaken to demonstrate,
And as the
to knowledge, not to wisdom.
Word is without time and without place, it
is co-eternal with the Father, and in its
wholeness everywhere; and if any one can,
and as much as he can, speak truly concerning this Word, then his discourse will pertain
to wisdom. And hence the Word made flesh,
which is Christ Jesus, has the treasures both
For the aposof wisdom and of knowledge.
tle, writing to the Colossians, says: "For I
would that ye knew what great conflict I have
for you, and for them at Laodicea, and for
as many as have not seen my face in the

1 Phil. ii. 3.

2 Luke i. 26-32.

3 2 Cor. x. 17.

Chap. XX.]

ON THE TRINITY.

flesh; that their hearts might be comforted,
being knit together in love, and unto all riches
of the full assurance of understanding, to the
the mystery of God,
acknowledgment of
which is Christ Jesus: in whom are hid all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge." x
To what extent the apostle knew all those
treasures, how much of them he had penetrated, and in them to how great things he
had reached, who can know ?
Yet, for my
part, according to that which is written, "But
the manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every man to profit withal; for to one is given
by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another
" 2
the word of knowledge by the same Spirit;
if these two are in such way to be distinguished from each other, that wisdom is to be
assigned to divine things, knowledge to human,
I acknowledge both in Christ, and so with me
do all His faithful ones. And when I read,
"The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among
us," I understand by the Word the true Son
of God, I acknowledge in the flesh the true
Son of man, and both together joined into
one Person of God and man, by an ineffable
copiousness of grace. And on account of
this, the apostle goes on to say, "And we
beheld His glory, the glory as of the Onlybegotten of the Father, full of grace and
If we refer grace to knowledge, and
truth.
truth to wisdom, I think we shall not swerve
from that distinction between these two things
which we have commended.
For in those
things that have their origin in time, this is
the highest grace, that man is joined with
God in unity of person; but in things eternal
the highest truth is rightly attributed to the
Word of God.
But that the same is Himself
the Only-begotten of the Father, full
of
grace and truth,
this took place, in order
that He Himself in things done for us in time
should be the same for whom we are cleansed
by the same faith, that we may contemplate
Him steadfastly
eternal. And
those
the
of
heathen who have been able to understand and
discern the invisible things of God by those
things which are made, have yet, as is said
" 4
of them,
because they philosophized without a Mediator, that is, without the man Christ, whom
they neither believed to be about to come at
the word of the prophets, nor to have come
at that of the apostles.
For, placed as they
were in these lowest things, they could not
but seek some media through which they
might attain to those lofty things which they
had understood; and so they fell upon deceit-

held down the truth in iniquity;

things
philosophers

distinguished

in

"

things.

ful spirits, through whom it came to pass,
that "they changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed
For in such
beasts, and creeping things." 5
forms also they set up or worshipped idols.
Therefore Christ is our knowledge, and the
same Christ is also our wisdom. He Himself
implants in us
faith concerning temporal
things, He Himself shows forth the truth conThrough Him we
cerning eternal
reach on to Himself: we stretch through
knowledge to wisdom; yet we do not withdraw
in whom are
from one and the same Christ,
hidden all the treasures of wisdom and of
But now we speak of knowlknowledge/'
edge, and will hereafter speak of wisdom as
much as He Himself shall grant. And let
us not so take these two things, as if it were
not allowable to speak either of the wisdom
which is in human things, or of the knowlFor after a laxer
edge which is in divine.
custom of speech, both can be called wisdom,
and both knowledge.
Yet the apostle could
" To one is given
not in any way have written,
the word of wisdom, to another the word of
knowledge," except also these several things
had been properly called by the several names,
of the distinction between which we are now

"

treating.

CHAP. 20. WHAT HAS BEEN TREATED OF IN
THIS BOOK. HOW WE HAVE REACHED BY STEPS
TO A CERTAIN TRINITY, WHICH IS FOUND IN
PRACTICAL KNOWLEDGE AND TRUE FAITH.

25. Now, therefore, let us see what this
prolix discourse has effected, what it has
gathered, whereto it has reached.
It belongs
to all men to will to be blessed; yet all men
have not faith, whereby the heart is cleansed,
And thus it
and so blessedness is reached.
comes to pass, that by means of the faith
which not all men will, we have to reach on
to the blessedness which every one wills.
All
see in their own heart that they will to be
blessed; and so great is the agreement of
human nature on this subject, that the man
is not deceived who conjectures this concerning another's mind, out of his own: in short,
we know ourselves that all will
But
many despair of being immortal, although no
otherwise can any one be that which all will,
Yet they will also to be imthat is, blessed.
mortal if they could; but through not believing that they can, they do not so live that
Therefore faith is necessary, that
they can.
we' may attain blessedness in all the good
things of human nature, that is, of both soul

this.

Col. ii. 1-3.
John i. 14.

2 1 Cor. xii. 7, 8.
4 Rom. i. 23 ; detinueru ,

S Rom. i. 18, 20.

[Book XIIL

But that same faith requires that
and body.
this faith be limited in Christ, who rose in the
flesh from the dead, not to die any more;
and that no one is freed from the dominion
of the devil, through the forgiveness of sins,
save by Him; and that in the abiding place
of the devil, life must needs be at once miserable and never-ending, which ought rather to
All which I have
be called death than life.
also argued, so far as space permitted, in this
book, while I have already said much on the
subject in the fourth book of this work as
1 but in that place for one purpose, here
well;
namely, there, that
I might
for another,
show why and how Christ was sent in the full2 on account of
ness of time by the Father,
those who say that He who sent and He who
was sent cannot be equal in nature; but here,
in order to distinguish practical knowlege
from contemplative wisdom.

If,

26. For we wished to ascend, as it were,
by steps, and to seek in the inner man, both
in knowledge and in wisdom, a sort of trinity
of its own special kind, such as we sought before in the outer man; in order that we may
come, with a mind more practised in these
lower things, to the contemplation of that
Trinity which is God, according to our little
measure, if indeed, we can even do this, at
least in a riddle and as through a glass.
then, any one have committed to memory the
words of this faith in their sounds alone, not
knowing what they mean, as they commonly
who do not know Greek hold in memory
Greek words, or similarly Latin ones, or those
of any other language of which they are ignorant, has not he a sort of trinity in his
mind ? because, first, those sounds of words
are in his memory, even when he does not
think thereupon; and next, the mental vision
(aa'es) of his act of recollection is formed
thence when he conceives of them; and next,
the will of him who remembers and thinks
Yet we should by no means say
unites both.
that the man in so doing busies himself with
a trinity of the interior man, but rather of the
exterior; because he remembers, and when
he wills, contemplates as much as he wills,
that alone which belongs to the sense of the
Nor in such
body, which is called hearing.
an act of thought does he do anything else
than deal with images of corporeal things,
But if he holds and recolthat is, of sounds.
lects what those words signify, now indeed
something of the inner man is brought into

1 Cc. 19-21.

2 Gal. iv. 4.

3 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

action; not yet, however, ought he to be said
or thought to live according to a trinity of the
inner man, if he does not love those things
which are there declared, enjoined, promised.
For it is possible for him also to hold and
conceive these things, supposing them to be
false, in order that he may endeavor to disTherefore that will, which in
prove them.
this case unites those things which are held
in the memory with those things which are
thence impressed on the mind's eye in conception, completes, indeed, some kind of trinity, since itself is a third added to two others;
but the man does not live according to this,
when those things which are conceived are
taken to be false, and are not accepted.
But
when those things are believed to be true, and
those things which therein ought to be loved,
are loved, then at last the man does live according to a trinity of the inner man; for every one
lives according to that which he loves. But how
can things be loved which are not known, but
This question has been alonly believed?
ready treated of in former books; 4 and we
found, that no one loves what he is wholly
ignorant of, but that when things not known
are said to be loved, they are loved from
And now we
those things which are known.
so conclude this book, that we admonish the
5 which faith worketh by
just to live by faith,
6 so that the virtues also themselves, by
love,
which one lives prudently, boldly, temperately, and justly, be all referred to the same
faith; for not otherwise can they be true virAnd yet these in this life are not of so
tues.
great worth, as that the remission of sins, of
some kind or other, is not' sometimes necessary here; and this remission comes not to
pass, except through Him, who by His own
blood conquered the prince of sinners. Whatsoever ideas are in the mind of the faithful
man from this faith, and from such a life,
when they are contained in the memory, and
are looked at by recollection, and please the
set forth a kind of trinity of its own
will,
But the image of God, of which by
sort. 7
His help we shall afterwards speak, is not yet
in that trinity; a thing which will then be
more apparent, when it shall have been shown
where it is, which the reader may expect in a
succeeding book.

4 Ek. viii. cc. 8 seqq., and Bk. x. c. 1, etc.
5 Rom. i. 1-.
7 [The ternary is this :

6 Gal. v. 6.

the memory. 2. The contemplation of it as thus recollected.
This last is the " will" that
The love of it.
two.-W. G. T. S.]

1. The idea of a truth or fact held in
3.
unites" the first

"

BOOK XIV.
THE TRUE WISDOM OF MAN IS TREATED OF ; AND IT IS SHOWN THAT THE IMAGE OF COD, WHICH
MAN IS IN RESPECT TO HIS MIND, IS NOT PLACED PROPERLY IN TRANSITORY THINGS, AS IN
MEMORY, UNDERSTANDING, AND LOVE, WHETHER OF FAITH ITSELF AS EXISTING IN TIME, OR
EVEN OF THE MIND AS BUSIED WITH ITSELF, BUT IN THINGS THAT ARE PERMANENT ; AND
THAT THIS WISDOM IS THEN PERFECTED, WHEN THE MIND IS RENEWED IN THE KNOWLEDGE
OF GOD, ACCORDING TO THE IMAGE OF HIM WHO CREATED MAN AFTER HIS OWN IMAGE, AND
THUS ATTAINS TO WISDOM, WHEREIN THAT WHICH IS CONTEMPLATED IS ETERNAL.

CHAP. I.

WHAT THE WISDOM IS OF WHICH WE
WHENCE THE NAME
ARE HERE TO TREAT.
OF PHILOSOPHER AROSE. WHAT HAS BEEN
ALREADY SAID CONCERNING THE DISTINCTION
OF KNOWLEDGE AND WISDOM.
i. We must now discourse concerning wisdom; not the wisdom of God, which without
doubt is God, for His only-begotten Son is
called the wisdom of God; 1 but we will speak
of the wisdom of man, yet of true wisdom,
which is according to God, and is His true
and chief worship, which is called in Greek
by one term, dsovifieia. And this term, as we
have already observed, when our own countrymen themselves also wished to interpret
it by a single term, was by them rendered
piety, whereas pietv means more commonly
what the Greeks call ebaipeta.
But because
Oeoffifieia cannot be translated perfectly by
any one word, it is better translated by two,
so as to render it rather by
the worship of
That this is the wisdom of man, as
God."
we have already laid down in the twelfth
book 2 of this work, is shown by the authority
of Holy Scripture, in the book of God's servant Job, where we read that the Wisdom of
" Behold piety, that is wisGod said to man,
dom; and to depart from evil is knowledge;" 3
or, as some have translated the Greek word
imffTTJfuqv, "learning/' 4 which certainly takes
its name from learning,
4 whence also it may
be called
For everything
knowledge.
learned in order that it may be known.

is
Al-

"

though the same word, indeed, 3
is employed
in a different sense, where any one suffers
evils for his sins, that he may be corrected.
Whence is that in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
"
For what son is he to whom the father giveth not discipline?" And this is
still more
" Now no chastapparent in the same epistle:
6 for the present seemeth to be joyous,
ening
but grievous: nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto
Therethem which are exercised thereby." 7
fore God Himself is the chiefest wisdom; but
the worship of God is the wisdom of man, of
For "the wisdom of
which we now speak.
this world is foolishness with God." 8
It is
in respect to this wisdom, therefore, which is
the worship of God, that Holy Scripture says,
" The multitude of the wise is the welfare of
the world. "^

to

2. But if to dispute of wisdom belongs to
Shall we dare
wise men, what shall we do?
indeed to profess wisdom, lest it should be
mere impudence for ourselves
dispute
Shall we not be alarmed by the exabout it ?
ample of Pythagoras ? who dared not profess
to be a wise man, but answered that he was a
philosopher, i.e., a lover of wisdom; whence
arose the name, that became thenceforth so
much the popular name, that no matter how
great the learning wherein any one excelled,
either in his own opinion or that of others, in
things pertaining to wisdom, he was still
Or
called nothing more than philosopher.
was it for this reason that no one, even of

1 Ecclus. xxiv. 5 and i Cor. i. 24.
3 Job. xxviii. 28.

2 C. 14.

Discijiiina, disco.

5 Disriplina.
8 1 Cor. iii. 19.

6 Piscifilina.
9 Wisd. vi. 26.

7 Heb. xii.

11.

7,

1 84

[Book XIV.

such as these, dared to profess himself a wise
because they imagined that a wise man
man,
But our Scriptures
was one without sin ?
" Rebuke a wise
do not say this, which say,
For doubtless
man, and he will love thee." *
he who thinks a man ought to be rebuked,
judges him to have sin.
However, for my
part, I dare not profess myself a wise man
even in this sense; it is enough for me to assume, what they themselves cannot deny,
that to dispute of wisdom belongs also to the
For
philosopher, i.e., the lover of wisdom.
they have not given over so disputing who
have professed to be lovers of wisdom rather
than wise men.

3. In disputing, then, about wisdom, they
have defined it thus: Wisdom is the knowlAnd
edge of things human and divine.
hence, in the last book, I have not withheld
the admission, that the cognizance of both
subjects, whether divine or human, may be
But
called both knowledge and wisdom. 2
according to the distinction made in the apos-
" To one is given the word of wistle's words,
dom, to another the word of knowledge," 3
this definition is to be divided, so that the
knowledge of things divine shall be called
wisdom, and that of things human appropriate to itself the name of knowledge; and of
the latter I have treated in the thirteenth
book, not indeed so as to attribute to this
knowledge everything whatever that can be
known by man about things human, wherein
there is exceeding much of empty vanity and
mischievous curiosity, but only those things
by which that most wholesome faith, which
leads to true blessedness, is begotten, nourished, defended, strengthened; and in this
knowledge most of the faithful are not strong,
however exceeding strong in the faith itself.
is one thing to know only what man
For it
ought to believe in order to attain to a blessed
life, which must needs be an eternal one; but
another to know in what way this belief itself
may both help the pious, and be defended
against the impious, which last the apostle
seems to call by the special name of knowlAnd when I was speaking of this
edge.
knowledge before, my especial business was
to commend faith, first briefly distinguishing
temporal, and
from things
things eternal
things temporal; but
there discoursing of
while deferring things eternal to the present
book, I showed also that faith respecting
things eternal is itself a thing temporal, and
dwells in time in the hearts of believers, and
yet is necessary in order to attain the things
I argued also, that faith
eternal themselves. 4

respecting the things temporal which He that
is eternal did and suffered for us as man,
which manhood He bare in time and carried
on to things eternal, is profitable also for the
obtaining of things eternal; and that the virtues themselves, whereby in this temporal
and mortal life men live prudently, bravely,
temperately, and justly, are not true virtues,
unless they are referred to that same faith,
is, which leads on nevertemporal though it
theless to things eternal.

CHAP. 2.

THERE IS A KIND OF TRINITY IN THE
HOLDING, CONTEMPLATING, AND LOVING OF
FAITH TEMPORAL, BUT ONE THAT DOES NOT
YET ATTAIN TO BEING PROPERLY AN IMAGE
OF GOD.

4. Wherefore since, as it is written,

" While
we are in the body, we are absent from the
Lord; for we walk by faith, not by sight;" 5
undoubtedly, so long as the just man lives
6 howsoever he lives according to the
by faith,
inner man, although he aims at truth and
reaches on to things eternal by this same
temporal faith, nevertheless in the holding,
contemplating, and loving this temporal faith,
we have not yet reached such a trinity as is to
be called an image of God; lest that should
seem to be constituted in things temporal
For
which ought to be so in things eternal.
when the human mind sees its own faith,
whereby it believes what it does not see, it
For that will
does not see a thing eternal.
not always exist, which certainly will not then
exist, when this pilgrimage, whereby we are
absent from God, in such way that we must
needs walk by faith, shall be ended, and that
sight shall have succeeded it whereby we
just as now, because
shall see face to face; 7
we believe although we do not see, we shall
deserve to see, and shall rejoice at having
For
been brought through faith to sight.
then it will be no longer faith, by which that
is believed which is not seen; but sight, by
which that is seen which is believed. And
then, therefore, although we remember this
past mortal life, and call to mind by recollection that we once believed what we did not
see, yet that faith will be reckoned among
things past and done with, not among things
And hence
present and always continuing.
also that trinity which now consists in the remembering, contemplating, and loving this
same faith while present and continuing, will
then be found to be done with and past, and
is to be
not still enduring.
gathered, that if that trinity is indeed an im-

And hence it

1 Prov. ix. S.
3 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

- Bk. xiii. cc. 1, 19.
4 Bk. xiii. c. 7.

5 2 Cor. v. 6, 7.

6 Rom. i. 17.

7 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

Chap. IV.]

ON THE TRINITY.

"

acre of God, then this image itself would have
to be reckoned, not among things that exist
always, but among things transient.
CHAP> 3 _ A DIFFICULTY REMOVED, WHICH LIES
IN THE WAY OF WHAT HAS JUST BEEN SAID.
But far be it from us to think, that while
the nature of the soul is immortal, and from
the first beginning of its creation thenceforth
never ceases to be, yet that that which is the
best thing it has should not endure for ever
Yet what is there
with its own immortality.
in its nature as created, better than that it is
We
made after the image of its Creator ?
must find then what may be fittingly called
the image of God, not in the holding, contemplating, and loving that faith which will
not exist always, but in that which will exist
always.
c

.

Shall we then scrutinize somewhat more
carefully and deeply whether the case is really
For it may be said that this trinity
thus?
does not perish even when faith itself shall
have passed away; because, as now we both
hold it by memory, and discern it by thought,
and love it by will; so then also, when we
shall both hold in memory, and shall recollect,
that we once had it, and shall unite these two
by the third, namely will, the same trinity will
Since, if it have left in its passtill continue.
sage as it were no trace in us, doubtless we
shall not have ought of it even in our memory whereto to recur when recollecting it as
past, and by the third, viz. purpose, coupling
both these, to wit, what was in our memory
though we were not thinking about, it, and
But
What is formed thence by conception.
he who speaks thus, does not perceive, that
when we hold, see, and love in ourselves our
present faith, we are concerned with a different trinity as now existing, from that trinity
which will exist, when we shall contemplate
by recollection, not the faith itself, but as it
were the imagined trace of it laid up in the
memory, and shall unite by the will, as by a
third, these two things, viz. that which was
in the memory of him who retains, and that
which is impressed thence upon the vision of
the mind of him who recollects. And that
we may understand this, let us take an example from things corporeal, of which we
have sufficientlv spoken in the eleventh book. 2
For as we ascend from lower to higher things,
or pass inward from outer to inner things, we
first find a trinity in the bodily object which
is seen, and in the vision of the seer, which
is informed thereby, and
when he sees it,
in the purpose of the will which combines

1 Gen. i. 27.

:c. 2 r,q.

Let us assume a trinity like this, when
both.
the faith which is now in ourselves is so established in our memory as the bodily object
we spoke of was in place, from which faith is
formed the conception in recollection, as from
that bodily object was formed the vision of
the beholder; and to these two, to complete
the trinity, will is to be reckoned as a third,
which connects and combines the faith established in the memory, and a sort of effigy of
that faith impressed upon the vision of recollection; just as in that trinity of corporeal
vision, the form of the bodily object that is
seen, and the corresponding form wrought
in the vision of the beholder, are combined
Suppose, then,
by the purpose of the will.
that this bodily object which was beheld was
dissolved and had perished, and that nothing
at all of it remained anywhere, to the vision
of which the gaze might have recourse; are
we then to say, that because the image of the
bodily object thus now past and done with remains in the memory, whence to form the
the
conception in recollecting, and to have^
two united by will as a third, therefore it is
the same trinity as that former one, when
the appearance of the bodily object posited
Certainly not, but altoin place was seen ?
aether a different one: for, not to say that
that was from without, while this is from
within; the former certainly was produced by
the appearance of a present bodily object, the
latter by the im?ge of that object now past.
too, in the case of which we are now
So
treating' to illustrate which we have thought
aood to'adduce this example, the faith which
is even now in our mind, as that bodily obheld, looked at,
ject was in place, while
loved, produces a sort of trinity; but that
trinity will exist no more, when this faith in
the mind, like that bodily object in place
But that which will
shall no longer exist.
then exist, when we shall remember it to have
been, but not now to be, in us, will doubtless
For that which now is, is
be a different one.
wrought by the thing itself, actually present
and attached to the mind of one who believes;
but that which shall then be, will be wrought
by the imagination of a past thing left in the
memory of one who recollects.

CHAP. 4.

THE IMAGE OF GOD IS TO BE SOUGHT
IN THE IMMORTALITY OF THE RATIONAL SOUL.
HOW A TRINITY IS DEMONSTRATED IN THE
MIND.

Therefore neither is that trinity arf imacre of God, which is not now, nor is that
other an image of God, which then will not
be- but we must find in the soul of man, i.e.,

1 86

[Book XIV.

"

the rational or intellectual soul, that image of
the Creator which is immortally implanted in
For as the immortality itits immortality.
self of the soul is spoken with a qualification;
since the soul too has its proper death, when
it lacks a blessed life, which is to be called
the true life of the soul; but it
is therefore
called immortal, because it never ceases to
live with some life or other, even when it is
so, although reason or inmost miserable;
tellect is at one time torpid in it, at another
appears small, and at another great, yet the
human soul is never anything save rational or
intellectual; and hence, if it is made after the
image of God in respect to this, that it is able
to use reason and intellect in order to understand and behold God, then from the moment
when that nature so marvellous and so great
began to be, whether this image be so worn
out as to be almost none at all, or whether it
be obscure and defaced, or bright and beauFurther, too,
tiful, certainly it always is.
pitying the defaced condition of its dignity,
although man
divine Scripture tells us, that
walks in an image, yet he disquieteth himself
in vain; he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell
" '
It would not therewho shall gather them.
fore attribute vanity to the image of God, unless it perceived it to have been defaced. Yet
it sufficiently shows that such defacing does
not extend to the taking away its being an
image, by saying, "Although man walks in
Wherefore in both ways that
an image."
sentence can be truly enunciated; in that, as
it is said, "Although man walketh in an image,
yet he disquieteth himself in vain," so it may
Although man disquieteth himself
be said,
For
in vain, yet he walketh in an image."
although the nature of the soul is great, yet
is not the
it can be corrupted, because it
highest; and although it can be corrupted,
because it is not the highest, yet because it
is capable and can be partaker of the highest
Let us seek,
nature, it
then, in this image of God a certain trinity of
a special kind, with the aid of Him who Himself made us after His own image.
For no
otherwise can we healthfully investigate this
subject, or arrive at any result according to
the wisdom which is from Him.
But if the
reader will either hold in remembrance and
recollect what we have said of the human soul
or mind in former books, and especially in
the tenth, or will carefully re-peruse it in the
passages wherein it is contained, he will not
require here any more lengthy discourse respecting the inquiry into so great a thing.

is a great nature.

7. We said, then, among other things in

"

1 Ps. xxxix.

the tenth book, that the mind of man knows
For the mind knows nothing so much
itself.
as that which is close to itself; and nothing is
more close to the mind than itself. We adevidences, as much as
duced also
seemed sufficient, whereby this might be
most certainly proved.

other

CHAP. 5.

WHETHER THE MIND OF INFANTS

KNOWS ITSELF.
What, then, is to be said of the mind of an
infant, which is still so small, and buried in
such profound ignorance of things, that the
mind of a man which knows anything shrinks
Is that too to be
from the darkness of it ?
believed to know itself; but that, as being too
intent upon those things which it has begun
to perceive through the bodily senses, with
the greater delight in proportion to their novelty, it is not able indeed to be ignorant of
itself, but is also not able to think of itself ?
Moreover, how intently it is bent upon sensible things that are without it, may be conjectured from this one fact, that it
is so
greedy of sensible light, that if any one
ignorance of the
through carelessness, or
possible consequences, place a light at nighttime where an infant is lying down, on that
side to which the eyes of the child so lying
down can be bent, but its neck cannot be
turned, the gaze of that child will be so fixed
in that direction, that we have known some
to have come to squint by this means, in that
the eyes retained that form which habit in
some way impressed upon them while tender
case, too, of the other
and soft.
bodily senses, the souls of infants, as far as
their age permits, so narrow themselves as it
were, and are bent upon them, that they
either vehemently detest or vehemently desire
that only which offends or allures through the
flesh, but do not think of their own inward
self, nor can be made to do so by admonition;
because they do not yet know the signs that
express admonition, whereof words are the
chief, of which as of other things they are
is one thing
wholly ignorant.
not to know oneself, another not to think of
oneself, we have shown already in the same
book. 3

And that it

In the

8. But let us pass by the infantine age,
since we cannot question it as to what goes
on within itself, while we have ourselves pretty
Let it suffice only for us
well forgotten it.
hence to be certain, that when man has come
to be able to think of the nature of his own
mind, and to find out what is the truth, he

2 [This occurred in the case of Edward Irving. Oliphant's Life

of Irving.--W'. G. T. S.]

3 Bk. x. c. 5.

Chap. VI.]

ON THE TRINITY.

I8 7

And
will find it nowhere else but in himself.
he will find, not what he did not know, but
For what do
that of which he did not think.
we know, if we do not know what is in our
own mind; when we can know nothing at all
of what we do know, unless by the mind ?

CHAP. 6. HOW A KIND OF TRINITY EXISTS IN
WHAT IS

THE MIND THINKING OF ITSELF.
THE PART OF THOUGHT IN THIS TRINITY.

itself,

external to

The function of thought, however, is so
great, that not even the mind itself can, so
to say, place itself in its own sight, except
when it thinks of itself; and hence it is so far
the case, that nothing is in the sight of the
mind, except that which is being thought of,
that not even the mind itself, whereby we
think whatever we do think, can be in its own
sight otherwise than by thinking of itself.
is not in its own sight
But in 7uhat way it
when it is not thinking of itself, while it can
never be without itself, as though itself were
one thing, and the sight of itself another, it
For this is
is not in my power to discover.
not unreasonably said of the eye of the body;
for the eye itself of the body is fixed in its
own proper place in the body, but its sight
and
extends to things
reaches even to the stars. And the eye is not
in its own sight, since it does not look at itself, unless by means of a mirror, as is said
above; 1 a thing that certainly does not happen when the mind places itself in its own
Does it then see
sight by thinking of itself.
one part of itself by means of another part
of itself, when it looks at itself
in thought,
as we look at some of our members, which
can be in our sight, with other also of our
members, viz. with our eyes ? What can be
said or thought more absurd ?
For by what
is the mind removed, except by itself? or
where is it placed so as to be in its own sight,
Therefore it will not
except before itself?
be there, where it was, when it was not in its
own sight; because it has been put down in
one place, after being taken away from anBut if it migrated in order to be beother.
held, where will it remain in order to behold ?
Is it as it were doubled, so as to be in this and
in that place at the same time, viz. both where
it can behold, and where it can be beheld;
that in itself it may be beholding, and before
If we ask the truth, it will tell
itself beheld ?
us nothing of the sort since it is but feigned
images of bodily objects of which we conceive
when we conceive thus; and that the mind is
not such, is very certain to the few minds by

o

%

/

1 Bk.

which the truth on such a subject can be inIt appears, therefore, that the bequired.
holding of the mind is something pertaining
to its nature, and is recalled to that nature
when it conceives of itself, not as if by moving through space, but by an incorporeal conversion; but when it is not conceiving of itself, it appears that it is not indeed in its own
sight, nor is its own perception formed from
it, but yet that it knows itself as though it
were to itself a remembrance of itself.
Like
one who is skilled in many branches of learning: the things which he knows are contained
in his memory, but nothing thereof is in the
sight of his mind except that of which he is
conceiving; while all the rest are stored up
in a kind of secret knowledge, which is called
The trinity, then, which we were
memory.
setting forth, was constituted in
this way;
first, we placed in the memory the object by
which the perception of the percipient was
formed; next, the conformation, or as it were
the image which is impressed thereby; lastly,
love or will as that which combines the two.
When the mind, then, beholds itself in conception, it understands and cognizes itself; it
begets, therefore, this its own understanding
and cognition.
For an incorporeal thing
is understood when it
beheld, and is
cognized when understood.
Yet certainly
the mind does not
knowledge of
as
understood by conception, as though it had
before been unknown to itself; but it was
known to itself, in the way in which things
are known which are contained in the memory,
but of which one is not thinking; since we
say that a man knows letters even when he is
thinking of something else, and not of letters.
And these two, the begetter and the begotten,
are coupled together by love, as by a third,
which is nothing else than will, seeking or
holding fast the enjoyment of something. We
held, therefore, that a trinity of the mind is
to be intimated also by these three terms,
memory, intelligence, will.

itself, when it beholds itself

so beget this

is

9. But since the mind, as we said near the
end of the same tenth book, always remembers itself, and always understands and loves
itself, although it does not always think of itself as distinguished from those things which
are not itself; we must inquire in what way
understanding {intellectus) belongs to conception, while the notion (notitia) of each thing
that is in the mind, even when one is not
thinking of it, is said to belong only to the
For if this is so, then the mind had
memory.
not these three things: viz. the remembrance,
the understanding, and the love of itself; but
it only remembered itself, and afterwards,

i88

[Book XIV.

when it began to think of itself, then it understood and loved itself.

CHAP. 7.

THE THING IS MADE PLAIN BY AN
IN WHAT WAY THE MATTER IS

EXAMPLE.
HANDLED IN ORDER TO HELP THE READER.

is not this similarly absurd ?

Wherefore let us consider more carefully
that example which we have adduced, wherein
it was shown that not knowing a thing is different from not thinking [conceiving] of it;
and that it may so happen that a man knows
something of which he is not thinking, when
he is thinking of something else, not of that.
When any one, then, who is skilled in two or
more branches of knowledge is thinking of
one of them, though he is not thinking of the
other or others, yet he knows them.
But can
we rightly say. This musician certainly knows
music, but he does not now understand it, because he is not thinking of it; but he does
now understand geometry, for of that he is
now thinking?
Such an assertion, as far as
What, again, if we were
appears, is absurd.
to say, This musician certainly knows music,
but he does not now love it, while he is not
now thinking of it; but he does now love
geometry, because of that he is now thinking;
But we say
quite correctly, This person whom you perceive disputing about geometry is also a perfect musician, for he both remembers music,
and understands, and loves it; but although
he both knows and loves it, he is not now
thinking of it, since he is thinking of geometry, of which he is disputing. And hence we
are warned that we have a kind of knowledge
of certain things stored up in the recesses of
the mind, and that this, when it is thought of,
as it were, steps forth in public, and is placed
as if openly in the sight of the mind; for then
the mind itself finds that it both remembers,
and understands, and loves itself, even although it was not thinking of itself, when it
But in the
was thinking of something else.
case of that of which we have not thought
for a long time, and cannot think of it unless
reminded; that, if the phrase is allowable, in
some wonderful way I know not how, we do
not know that we know.
In short, it is rightly
said by him who reminds, to him whom he reminds, You know this, but you do not know
that you know it; I will remind you, and you
will find that you know what you had thought
you did not know.
Books, too, lead to the
same results, viz. those that are written upon
subjects which the reader under the guidance
of reason finds to be true; not those subjects
which he believes to be true on the faith of
the narrator, as in the case of history; but

those which he himself also finds to be true,
either of himself, or in that truth itself which
But he who cannot
is the light of the mind.
things, even when recontemplate these
minded, is too deeply buried in the darkness
of ignorance, through great blindness of heart
and too wonderfully needs divine help, to be
able to attain to true wisdom.

10. For this reason I have wished to adduce some kind of proof, be it what it might,
conceiving, such as
respecting the act of
might serve to show in what way, out of the
things contained in the memory, the mind's
eye is informed in recollecting, and some
such thing is begotten, when a man conceives,
as was already in him when, before he conceived, he remembered; because it is easier
to distinguish things that take place at successive times, and where the parent precedes
For if
the offspring by an interval of time.
we refer ourselves to the inner memory of the
mind by which it remembers itself, and to the
inner understanding by which it understands
itself, and to the inner will by which it loves
itself, where these three always are together,
and always have been together since they beall, whether they were being
gan to be at
thought of or not; the image of this trinity
will indeed appear to pertain even to the
memory alone; but because in this case a
word cannot be without a thought (for we
think all that we say, even if it be said by that
inner word which belongs to no separate language), this image is rather to be discerned in
these three things, viz. memory, intelligence,
will. And I mean now by intelligence that
by which we understand in thought, that is,
when our thought is formed by the finding of
those things, which had been at hand to the
memory but were not being thought of; and
I mean that will, or love, or preference, which
combines this offspring and parent, and is in
some way common to both.
Hence it was
that I tried also, viz. in the eleventh book, to
lead on the slowness of readers by means of
outward sensible things which are seen by the
eyes of the flesh; and that I then proceeded
to enter with them upon that power of the
inner man whereby he reasons of things temporal, deferring the consideration of that
which dominates as the higher power, by
And
which he contemplates things eternal.
I discussed this in two books, distinguishing
the two in the twelfth, the one of them being
higher and the other lower, and that the lower
ought to be subject to the higher; and in the
thirteenth I discussed, with what truth and
brevity I could, the office of the lower, in
which the wholesome knowledge of things
human is contained, in order that we may so

Chap. VIII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

act in this temporal life as to attain that which
is eternal; since, indeed, I have cursorily included in a single book a subject so manifold
and copious, and one so well known by the
many and great arguments of many and great
men, while manifesting that a trinity exists
also in it, but not yet one that can be called
an image of God.
CHAP g _T HE TRINITY WHICH IS THE IMAGE
OF GOD IS NOW TO BE SOUGHT IN THE NOBLEST PART OF THE MIND.

'

t 1

But we have come now to that argument in which we have undertaken to consider the noblest part of the human mind by
which it knows or can know God, in order
that we may find in it the image of God.
t or
although the human mind is not of the same
nature with God, yet the image of that nature
than which none is better, is to be sought and
found in us, in that than which our nature
But the mind must
also has nothing better.
first be considered as it is in itself, before it
becomes partaker of God; and His image
For, as we have said,
must be found in it.
although worn out and defaced by losing the
participation of God, yet the image of God
For it is His image in this
still remains. 1
very point, that it is capable of Him, and can
be partaker of Him; which so great good is
only made possible by its being His image.
then, the mind remembers, underWell
if we discern this, we
stands, loves itself;
discern a trinity, not yet indeed God, but now
The memory does
at last an image of God.
not receive from without that which it is to
hold; nor does the understanding find without that which it is to regard, as the eye of
the body does; nor has will joined these two
from without, as it joins the form of the bodyily object and that which is thence wrought
in the vision of the beholder; nor has conception, in being turned to it, found an image of
a thing seen without, which has been somehow seized and laid up in the memory, whence
the intuition of him that recollects has been
formed, will as a third joining the two: as we
showed to take place in those trinities which
were discovered in things corporeal, or which
were somehow drawn within from bodily objects by the bodily sense; of all which we
have discoursed in the eleventh book. 2 Nor,
again, as it took place, or appeared to do so,
when we went on further to discuss that knowledge, which had its place now in the workings of the inner man, and which was to be
distinguished from wisdom; of which knowledge the subject-matter was, as it were, ad-

1 Supra, c. iv.

2 Cc. 2 sq.

ventitious to the mind, and either was brought
as deeds
thither by historical information,
and words, which are performed in time and
pass away, or which again are established in
the nature of things in their own times and
or arises in the man himself not beplaces,
in<r there before, whether on the information
as faith,
of others, or by his own thinking,
which we commended at length in the thirteenth book, or as the virtues, by which, if
they are true, one so lives well in this mortality as to live blessedly in that immortality
which God promises. These and other things
of the kind have their proper order in time,
and in that order we discerned more easily a
trinity of memory, sight, and love. For some
of such things anticipate the knowledge of
For they are knowable also before
learners.
they are known, and beget in the learner a
knowledge of themselves. And they either
exist in their own proper places, or have happened in time past; although things that are
past do not themselves exist, but only certain
sio-ns of them as past, the sight or hearing of
which makes it known that they have been
and have passed away. And these signs are
either situate in the places themselves, as e.g.
monuments of the dead or the like; or exist
in written books worthy of credit, as is all history that is of weight and approved authority;
or are in the minds of those who already know
them; since what is already known to them
is knowable certainly to others also, whose
knowledge it has anticipated, and who are
able to know it on the information of those
who do know it. And all these things, when
they are learned, produce a certain kind of
trinity, viz. by their own proper species, which
was knowable also before it was known, and
by the application to this of the knowledge of
the learner, which then begins to exist when
he learns them, and by will as a third which
combines both; and when they are known, yet
another trinity is produced in the recollecting
of them, and this now inwardly in the mind
itself from those images which, when they
were 'learned, were impressed upon the memory and from the informing of the thought
when the look has been turned upon these by
recollection, and from the will which as a
But those tnings
third combines these two.
which arise in the mind, not having been
there before, as faith and other things of that
kind, although they appear to be adventitious,
since they are implanted by teaching, yet are
not situate without or transacted without as
are those things which are believed; but began to be altogether within in the mind itself.
For faith is not that which is believed, but
that by which it is believed; and the former

[Book XIV.

is believed, the latter seen.
Nevertheless, because it began to be in the mind, which was
a mind also before these things began to be
in it, it seems to be somewhat adventitious,
and will be reckoned among things past, when
sight shall have succeeded, and itself shall
And it makes now by its
have ceased to be.
is, and beheld, and
presence, retained as it
loved, a different trinity from that which it will
then make by means of some trace of itself,
which in passing it will have left in the memory: as has been already said above.

CHAP. 9.

WHETHER JUSTICE AND THE OTHER
VIRTUES CEASE TO EXIST IN THE FUTURE
LIFE.

12. There is,

some question
however,
raised, whether the virtues likewise by which
one lives well in this present mortality, seeing
that they themselves begin also to be in the
mind, which was a mind none the less when
it existed before without them, cease also to
exist at that time when they have brought us
to things eternal. For some have thought that
they will cease, and in the case of three
prusuch an asserdence, fortitude, temperance
tion seems to have something in it; but justice is immortal, and will rather then be made
Yet Tullius,
perfect in us than cease to be.
the great author of eloquence, when arguing
in the dialogue Hortensius, says of all four:
"
If we were allowed, when we migrated from
this life, to live forever in the islands of the
blessed, as fables tell, what need were there
of eloquence when there would be no trials, or
what need, indeed, of the very virtues themFor we should not need fortitude
selves ?
when nothing of either toil or danger was proposed to us; nor justice, when there was nothing of anybody else's to be coveted; nor temperance, to govern lusts that would not exist;
nor, indeed, should we need prudence, when
there was no choice offered between good and
evil. We should be blessed, therefore, solely
by learning and knowing nature, by which
alone also the life of the gods is praiseworthy.
And hence we may perceive that everything
else is a matter of necessity, but this is one of
This great orator, then, when
free choice."
proclaiming the
philosophy,
going over again all that he had learned from
philosophers, and excellently and pleasantly
explaining it, has affirmed all four virtues to
be necessary in this life only, which we see
to be full of troubles and mistakes; but not
one of them when we shall have migrated from
this life, if we are permitted to live there
where is a blessed life; but that blessed souls
are blessed only in learning and knowing, i.e.

excellence of

in the contemplation of nature, than which
nothing is better and more lovable. It is that
nature which created and appointed all other
natures. And if
it belongs to justice to be
subject to the government of this nature, then
justice is certainly immortal; nor will it cease
to be in that blessedness, but will be such and
so great that it cannot be more perfect or
Perhaps, too, the other three virtues
greater.
prudence although no longer with any risk
of error, and fortitude without the vexation of
bearing evils, and temperance without the
thwarting of lust
will exist in that blessedness: so that it may be the part of prudence to
prefer or equal no good thing to. God; and of
fortitude, to cleave to Him most steadfastly;
and of temperance, to be pleased by no harmful defect. But that which justice is now concerned with in helping the wretched, and prudence in guarding against treachery, and fortitude in bearing troubles patiently, and temperance in controlling evil pleasures, will not
exist there, where there will be no evil at all.
And hence those acts of the virtues which are
necessary to this mortal life, like the faith to
which they are to be referred, will be reckoned among things past; and they make now
a different trinity, whilst we hold, look at,
and love them as present, from that which
they will then make, when we shall discover
them not to be, but to have been, by certain
traces of them which they will have left in
passing in the memory; since then, too, there
will be a trinity, when that trace, be it of what
sort it may, shall be retained in the memory,
and truly recognized, and then these two be
joined by will as a third.

CHAP. IO. HOW A TRINITY IS PRODUCED BY
THE MIND REMEMBERING, UNDERSTANDING,
AND LOVING ITSELF.

13. In the knowledge of all these temporal
things which we have mentioned, there are
some knowable things which precede the acquisition of the knowledge of them by an interval of time, as in the case of those sensible objects which were already real before they were
known, or of all those things that are learned
through history; but some things begin to be
at the same time with the knowing of them,
just as, if any visible object, which did not exist before at all, were to rise up before our
eyes, certainly it does not precede our knowing it; or if there be any sound made where
there is some one to hear, no doubt the sound
and the hearing that sound begin and end
Yet none the less, whether
simultaneously.
preceding in time or beginning to exist simultaneously, knowable things generate knowl-

Chap. XII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

I 9 I

the

edge, and are not generated by knowledge.
But when knowledge has come to pass, whenthings known and laid up in
ever
memory are reviewed by recollection, who
does not see that the retaining them in the
memory is prior in time to the sight of them
in recollection, and to the uniting of the two
In the mind, howthings by will as a third ?
ver, it is not so. For the mind is not adventitious to itself, as though there came to itself
already existing, that same self not already
existing, from somewhere else, or did not indeed come from somewhere else, but that in
the mind itself already existing, there was
born that same mind not already existing;
just as faith, which before was not, arises in
the mind which already was. Nor does the
mind see itself, as it were, set up in its own
memory by recollection subsequently to the
knowing of itself, as though it was not there
before it knew itself; whereas, doubtless, from
the time when it began to be, it has never
ceased to remember, to understand, and to
love itself, as we have already shown. And
hence, when it is turned to itself by thought,
there arises a trinity, in which now at length
we can discern also a word; since it is formed
from thought itself, will uniting both.
Here,
then, we may recognize, more than we have
hitherto done, the image of which we are in
search.

CHAP. II.

WHETHER MEMORY IS ALSO OF
THINGS PRESENT.

14. But some one will

say, That is not
memory by which the mind, which is ever
present to itself, is affirmed to remember itself; for memory is of things past, not of
For there are some, and
things present.
among them Cicero, who, in treating of the
virtues, have divided prudence into
these
three
memory, understanding, forethought:
to wit, assigning memory to things past, understanding to things present, forethought to
things future; which last is certain only in the
case of those who are prescient of the future;
and this is no gift of men, unless it be granted
from above, as to the prophets. And hence
" The
the book of Wisdom, speaking of men,
thoughts of mortals," it says, "are fearful,
But memand our forethought uncertain." 1
ory of things past, and understanding of
things present, are certain: certain, I mean,
respecting things incorporeal, which are present; for things corporeal are present to the
But let any one
sight of the corporeal eyes.
who denies that there is any memory of things
present, attend to the language used even in

' ' 2

profane literature, where exactness of words
was more looked for than truth of things.
" Nor did Ulysses suffer such things, nor did
the Ithacan forget himself in so great a peril.
For when Virgil said that Ulysses did not forget himself, what else did he mean, except
that he remembered himself? And since he
was present to himself, he could not possibly
remember himself, unless memory pertained
to things present.
And, therefore, as that
is called memory in things past which makes
it possible to recall and remember them; so
in a thing present, as the mind is to itself, that
is not unreasonably to be called memory,
which makes the mind at hand to itself, so
that it can be understood by its own thought,
and then both be joined together by love of itself.

CHAP. 12.

THE TRINITY IN THE MIND IS THE
IMAGE OF GOD, IN THAT IT REMEMBERS, UNDERSTANDS, AND LOVES GOD, WHICH TO DO
IS WISDOM.

"

is made wise itself.

15. This trinity, then, of the mind is not
therefore the image of God, because the mind
remembers itself, and understands and loves
itself; but because it can also remember, understand, and love Him by whom it was made.
And in so doing it
But
if it does not do so, even when it remembers,
understands, and loves itself, then it
is foolLet it then remember its God, after
ish.
whose image it is made, and let it understand
and love Him. Or to say the same thing more
briefly, let it worship God, who is not made,
by whom because itself was made, it is capable and can be partaker of Him; wherefore it
Behold, the worship of God, that
is written,
is wisdom." 3 And then it will be wise, not
by its own light, but by participation of that
supreme Light; and wherein it is eternal,
therein shall reign in blessedness. For this
wisdom of man is so called, in that it
is also
of God.
is true wisdom; for if
it is human, it is vain. Yet not so of God, as
is that wherewith God is wise. For He is not
wise by partaking of Himself, as the mind is
But as we call it the
by partaking of God.
only when we
righteousness
speak of that by which He Himself is righteous, but also of that which He gives to man
when He justifies the ungodly, which latter
righteousness the apostle commending, says
not knowing the righteousness
of some, that
of God and going about to establish their own
righteousness, they are not subject to the righteousness of God;" 4 so also it may be said of
some, that not knowing the wisdom of God

For then it

of God,

not

"

1 Wisd. ix. 14.

2 sEueid, iii. 628, 629.

3 Job. xxviii. 28.

4 Rom. x. 3.

I 9 :

[Book XIV.

and going about to establish their own wisdom, they are not subject to the wisdom of
God.

16. There is, then, a nature not made,
which made all other natures, great and small,
and is without doubt more excellent than
those which it has made, and therefore also
than that of which we are speaking; viz. than
the rational and intellectual nature, which is
the mind of man, made after the image of
Him who made it. And that nature, more
excellent than the rest, is God. And indeed
" He is not far from every one of us," as the
"
For in Him we live,
apostle says, who adds,
and are moved, and have our being." x And
if this were said in respect to the body, it
might be understood even of this corporeal
world; for in it too in respect to the body, we
live, and are moved, and have our being.
And therefore it ought to be taken in a more
excellent way, and one that is spiritual, not
visible, in respect to the mind, which is made
after His image For what is there that is not
in Him, of whom it is divinely written,
For
of Him, and through Him, and in Him,
are all things "? 2
If, then, all things are in
Him, in whom can any possibly live that do
live, or be moved that are moved, except in
Him in whom they are?
Yet all are not
with Him in that way in which it
is said to
I am continually with Thee." 3 Nor
Him,
is He with all in that way in which we say,
And so it is the esThe Lord be with you.
pecial wretchedness of man not to be with
Him, without whom he cannot be.
For, beyond a doubt, he is not without Him in whom
he is; and yet if he does not remember, and
understand, and love Him, he is not with
Him. And when any one absolutely forgets
a thing, certainly it is impossible even to remind him of it.

"

"

CHAP. 13.

HOW ANY ONE CAN FORGET AND

REMEMBER GOD.

17. Let us take an instance for the purpose
from visible things. Somebody whom you do
not recognize says to you, You know me; and
in order to remind you, tells you where, when,
and how he became known to you; and if,
after the mention of every sign by which you
might be recalled to remembrance, you still
do not recognize him, then you have so come
to forget, as that the whole of that knowledge
is altogether blotted out of your mind; and
nothing else remains, but that you take his
word for it who tells you that you once knew
him; or do not even do that, if you do not
think the person who speaks to you to be

1 Acts xvii. 27, 28

2 Rom. xi. 36.

3 Ps. lxxiii. 23.

But if you do remember
worthy of credit.
him, then no doubt you return to your own
memory, and find in it that which had not been
Let
altogether blotted out by forgetfulness.
us return to that which led us to adduce this
instance from the intercourse of men. Among
" The wicked
other things, the 9th Psalm says,
shall be turned into hell, and all the nations
that forget God;" 4 and again the 2 2d Psalm,
"All the ends of the world shall be reminded,
and turned unto the Lord." 5
These nations,
then, will not so have forgotten God as to be
unable to remember Him when reminded of
Him; yet, by forgetting God, as though forgetting their own life, they had been turned
But when remindinto death, i.e. into hell. 6
ed they are turned to the Lord, as though
coming to life again by remembering their
proper life which they had forgotten.
It is
read also in the 94th Psalm, "Perceive now,
ye who are unwise among the people; and ye
fools, when will ye be wise ? He that planted
the ear, shall He not hearj?
For this
is spoken to those, who said vain things concerning God through not understanding Him.

etc. 7

"

CHAP. 14.

UNDERSTANDING,

THE MIND LOVES GOD IN RIGHTLY
LOVING ITSELF ; AND IF IT LOVE NOT GOD,
IT MUST BE SAID TO HATE ITSELF.
EVEN A
WEAK AND ERRING MIND IS ALWAYS STRONG
AND
IN REMEMBERING,
LET IT BE TURNED TO GOD,
LOVING ITSELF.
THAT IT MAY BE BLESSED BY REMEMBERING,
UNDERSTANDING, AND LOVING HIM.
18. But there are yet more testimonies in
the divine Scriptures concerning the love of
God. For in it, those other two [namely, memory and understanding] are understood by
consequence, inasmuch as no one loves that
which he does not remember, or of which he
And hence is that well
is wholly ignorant.
" Thou
known and primary commandment,
shalt love the Lord thy God." 8 The human
mind, then, is so constituted, that at no time
does it not remember, and understand, and
But since he who hates any one
love itself.
is anxious to injure him, not undeservedly is
the mind of man also said to hate itself when
ill to itself
it injures itself.
through ignorance, in that it does not think
that what it wills is prejudicial to it; but it
none the less does will ill to itself, when it
And
wills what would be prejudicial to it.
" He that loveth iniquity,
hence it is written,
He, therefore, who
hateth his own soul." 9
knows how to love himself, loves God; but

For it wills

4 Ps. ix. 17.
6 [AiiKustin here understands "

5 Ps. xxii. 27.

retribution for the wicked. W. G. T. S.]
e Deut. vi. 5.

7 Ps. xciv. 8, 9.

Sheol," to denote the place of

9 Ps, xi. 5.

Chap. XTV.]

ON THE TRINITY.

T 93

"

to

he who does not love God, even if he does
a thing implanted in him by
love himself,
yet is not unsuitably said to hate himnature,
self, inasmuch as he does that which is adverse to himself, and assails himself as though
And this is no
he were his own enemy.
doubt a terrible delusion, that whereas all will
to profit themselves, many do nothing but that
which is most pernicious
themselves.
When the poet was describing a like disease
of dumb animals,
May the gods," says he,
"
grant better things to the pious, and assign
that delusion to enemies. They were rending
with bare teeth their own torn limbs." * Since
it was a disease of the body he was speaking
of, why has he called it a delusion, unless because, while nature inclines every animal to
take all the care it can of itself, that disease
was such that those animals rent those very
limbs of theirs which they desired should be
But when the mind loves
safe and sound ?
God, and by consequence, as has been said,
remembers and understands Him, then it
is
rightly enjoined also to love if s neighbor as itself; for it has now come to love itself rightly
and not perversely when it loves God, by
partaking of whom that image not only exists, but is also renewed so as to be. no longer
old, and restored so as to be no longer defaced, and beatified so as to be no longer
unhappy. For although it so love itself, that,
supposing the alternative to be proposed to it,
it would lose all things which it loves less
than itself rather than perish; still, by abandoning Him who is above it, in dependence
upon whom alone it could guard its own
strength, and enjoy Him as
light, to
whom it is sung in the Psalm,
I will guard
my strength in dependence upon Thee," 2 and
again, "Draw near to Him, and be enlightit has been made so weak and so
ened," 3
dark, that it has fallen away unhappily from
itself too, to those things that are not what itself is, and which are beneath itself, by affections that it cannot conquer, and delusions
from which it sees no way to return. And
hence, when by God's mercy now penitent, it
" My strength faileth
cries out in the Psalms,
me; as for the light of mine eyes, it also is
gone from me." 4

its

"

19. Yet, in the midst of these evils of weakness and delusion, great as they are, it could
not lose its natural memory, understanding
And therefore what I
and love of itself.
quoted above 5 can be rightly said, "Although man walketh in an image, surely he is
disquieted in vain: he heapeth up treasures,

Virg. Georg. iii. 513
Ps. xxxiv. 5C 4.

514.

2 Ps. lix. 9. _
4 Ps. xxxviii. 10.

" 7

and knoweth not who shall gather them." 6
For why does he heap up treasures,unless because his strength has deserted him, through
which he would have God, and so lack nothing ? And why cannot he tell for whom he
shall gather them, unless because the light of
his eyes is taken from him ? And so he does
not see what the Truth saith, "Thou fool,
this night thy soul shall be required of thee.
Then whose shall those things be which thou
Yet because even such a
hast provided ?
man walketh in an image, and the man's
mind has remembrance, understanding, and
love of itself; if it were made plain to it that
it could not have both, while it was permitted
to choose one and lose the other, viz. either
the treasures it has heaped up, or the mind;
who is so utterly without mind, as to prefer
to have the treasures rather than the mind ?
For treasures commonly are able to subvert
the mind, but the mind that is not subverted
by treasures can live more easily and unenBut who
cumberedly without any treasures.
will be able to possess treasures unless it be
by means of the mind ?
For if an infant,
born as rich as you please, although lord of
everything that is rightfully his, yet possesses nothing if his mind be unconscious, how
can any one possibly possess anything whose
mind is wholly lost ? But why say of treasures,
that anybody, if the choice be given him, prefers going without them to going without a
mind; when there is no one that prefers, nay,
no one that compares them, to those lights
of the body, by which not one man only here
and there, as in the case of gold, but every
For every
man, possesses the very heaven ?
one possesses by the eyes of the body whatever he gladly sees. Who then is there, who,
if he could not keep both, but must lose one,
would not rather lose his treasures than his
eyes ? And yet if it were put to him on the
same condition, whether he would rather lose
eyes than mind, who is there with a mind that
does not see that he would rather lose the
For a mind without
former than the latter ?
the eyes of the flesh is
still human, but the
eyes o; the flesh without a mind are bestial.
And who would not rather be a man, even
though blind in fleshly sight, than a beast that
can see ?

20. I have said thus much, that even those
who are slower of understanding, to whose
eyes or ears this book may come, might be
how greatly
admonished, however briefly,
even a weak and erring mind loves itself, in
wrongly loving and pursuing things beneath
itself. Now it could not love

itself

if

it

6 Ps. xxxix. 6.

7 Luke xii. 20.

i 9 4

[Book XIV.

were altogether ignorant of itself, /. e. if it did
not remember itself, nor understand itself;
by which image of God within itself it has
such power as to be able to cleave to Him
For it is so reckoned in
whose image it is.
the order, not of place, but of natures, as
that there is none above it save Him. When,
finally, it shall altogether cleave to Him, then
it will be one spirit, as the apostle testifies,
" But he who cleaves to the Lord is
saying,
1 And this by its drawing near
one spirit.''
to partake of His nature, truth, and blessedness, yet not by His increasing in His own
nature, truth and blessedness. In that nature,
then, when it happily has cleaved to it,
will live unchangeably, and will see as unchangeable all that it does see.
Then, as
His desire will
divine Scripture promises,
be satisfied with good things,"
2 good things
unchangeable,
own God, whose image it is. And that it may
not ever thenceforward suffer wrong, it will
be in the hidden place of His presence, 3 filled
with so great fullness of Him, that sin thenceBut now, when
forth will never delight it.
it sees itself, it sees something not unchangeable.

the very Trinity itself,

its

"

it

CHAP. 15.

ALTHOUGH THE SOUL HOPES FOR
BLESSEDNESS, YET IT DOES NOT REMEMBER
LOST BLESSEDNESS, BUT REMEMBERS GOD AND
THE RULES OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.
THE UNCHANGEABLE RULES OF RIGHT LIVING ARE
KNOWN EVEN TO THE UNGODLY.
21. And of this certainly it feels no doubt,
that it is wretched, and longs to be blessed;
nor can it hope for the possibility of this on
any other ground than its own changeableness;
for if it were not changeable, then, as it could
not become wretched after being blessed, so
neither could it become blessed after being
And what could have made it
wretched.
wretched under an omnipotent and good God,
except its own sin and the righteousness of
its Lord ? And what will make it blessed, unless its own merit, and its Lord's reward ?
But its merit, too, is His grace, whose reward
will be its blessedness; for it cannot give itself the righteousness it has lost, and so has
For this it received when man was
not.
created, and assuredly lost it by sinning.
Therefore it receives righteousness, that on
account of this it may deserve to receive
blessedness; and hence the apostle truly says
to it, when beginning to be proud as it were
" For what hast thou that
of its own good,
thou didst not receive ? Now if thou didst
receive it, why dost thou glory as if thou

1 1 Cor. vi. 17.

- Ps. ciii. 5.

3 Ps. xxxi. 20.

But when it rightly
hadst not received it ?" 4
remembers its own Lord, having received His
Spirit, then, because it is so taught by an inward teaching, it feels wholly that it cannot
rise save by His affection freely given, nor
has been able to fall save by its own defection
freely chosen. Certainly it does not remember its own blessedness; since that has been,
but is not, and it has utterly forgotten it, and
therefore cannot even be reminded of it. 5 But
it believes what the trustworthy Scriptures
of its God tell of that blessedness, which were
written by His prophet, and tell of the blessedness of Paradise, and hand down to us historical information of that first both good and
And it remembers the Lord its
ill of man.
God; for He always is, nor has been and is
not, nor is but has not been; but as He
never will not be, so He never was not.
And He is whole everywhere. And hence it
both lives, and is moved, and is in Him; 6 and
so it can remember Him. Not because it recollects the having known Him in Adam or
anywhere else before the life of this present
body, or when it was first made in order to
be implanted in this body; for it remembers
nothing at all of all this. Whatever there is of
this, it has been blotted out by forgetfulness.
But it is reminded, that it may be turned to
God, as though to that light by which it was in
some way touched, even when turned away
from Him.
is that even the
ungodly think of eternity, and rightly blame
and rightly praise many things in the morals
of men. And by what rules do they thus
judge, except by those wherein they see how
men ought to live, even though they themselves do not so live ? And where do they
For they do not see them
see these rules ?
in their own [moral] nature; since no doubt
these things are to be seen by the mind, and
their minds are confessedly changeable, but
these rules are seen as unchangeable by him
who can see them at all; nor yet in the character of their own mind, since these rules are
rules of righteousness, and their minds are
Where indeed are
confessedly unrighteous.
these rules written, wherein even the unrighteous recognizes what is righteous, wherein he
discerns that he ought to have what he himself has not ? Where, then, are they written,
in the book of that Light which is
unless
called Truth ? whence every righteous law is

For hence it

4 1 Cor. iv. 7.
5 [In the case of knowledge that is remembered, there is someas when past acquisitions are recalled
thing latent and potential
by a voluntary act of recollection. The same is true of innate
these also are latent, and brought into consciousness by
ideas
But no man can either remember, or elicit, his original
reflection.
holiness and blessedness, because this is not latent and potential,
but wholly lost by the fall. W. G. T. S.]

6 Acts xvii. 28.

Chap. XVI.]

ON THE TRINITY.

J 95

copied and transferred (not by migrating to it,
but by being as it were impressed upon it) to
the heart of the man that worketh righteousness; as the impression from a ring passes
into the wax, yet does not leave the ring. But
he who worketh not, and yet sees how he
ought to work, he is the man that is turned
away from that light, which yet touches him.
But he who does not even see how he ought
to live, sins indeed with more excuse,because
of a law that he
he is not a transgressor
knows; but even he too is just touched sometimes by the splendor of the everywhere present truth, when upon admonition he confesses.

CHAP. 1 6. HOW THE IMAGE OF GOD IS FORMED
ANEW IN MAN.

"

image

22. But those who, by being reminded, are
turned to the Lord from that deformity whereby they were through worldly lusts conformed
to this world, are formed anew from the world,
when they hearken to the apostle, saying," Be
not conformed to this world, but be ye formed
again in the renewing of your mind;" 1 that
that image may begin to be formed again by
Him by whom it had been formed at first.
For that image cannot form itself again, as it
He says again elsecould deform itself.
where: "Be ye renewed in the spirit of your
mind; and put ye on the new man, which
after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness." 2 That which is meant by
created
after God," is expressed in another place by
"after the image of God."3 But it lost righteousness and true holiness by sinning, through
defaced and
which that
tarnished; and this it recovers when it
formed again and renewed. But when he says,
"In the spirit of your mind," he does not intend to be understood of two things, as though
mind were one, and the spirit of the mind
another; but he speaks thus, because all mind
is spirit, but all spirit is not mind. For there
is a Spirit also that is God, 4 which cannot be
renewed, because it cannot grow old. And
we speak also of a spirit in man distinct from
the mind, to which spirit belong the images
that are formed after the likeness of bodies;
and of this the apostle speaks to the Corinthi-
" But if I shall have prayed
ans, where he says,
with a tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my unFor he speaks
derstanding is unfruitful." 5
thus, when that which is said is not understood ;
since it cannot even be said, unless the images of the corporeal articulate sounds anticipate the oral sound by the thought of the
The soul of man is also called spirit,
spirit.

became

is

"

"

is signified.

whence are the words in the Gospel, "And
He bowed His head, and gave up His spirit;"
by which the death of the body, through the
We speak
spirit's leaving it,
also of the spirit of a beast, as it is expressly
written in the book of Solomon called Ecclesiastes; "Who knoweth the spirit of man that
goeth upward, and the spirit of the beast that
goeth downward to the earth ?" 7
It is written
too in Genesis, where it
is said that by the
" had in it the
deluge all flesh died which
spirit of life." 8 We speak also of the spirit,
meaning the wind, a thing most manifestly
corporeal; whence is that in the Psalms,
Fire
and hail, snow and ice, the spirit of the
Since spirit, then, is a word of so
storm." 9
many meanings, the apostle intended to exthe spirit of the mind "
that spirit
press by
As the same
which is called the
mind.
apostle also, when he says,
' ' In putting off
certainly did not inthe body of the flesh,"
tend two things, as though flesh were one,
and the body of the flesh another; but because
body is the name of many things that have no
flesh (for besides the flesh, there are many
bodies celestial and bodies terrestrial), he
expressed by the body of the flesh that body
which is flesh. In like manner, therefore, by
the spirit of the mind, that spirit which is
mind. Elsewhere, too, he has even more plainly
called it an image, while enforcing the same
thing in other words. "Do you," he says,
"
putting off the old man with his deeds, put
on the new man, which is renewed in the
knowledge of God after the mage of Him
that created him." 11 Where the one passage
reads, "Put ye on the new man, which is
Put ye
created after God," the other has,
on the new man, which is renewed after the
image of Him that created him."
In the
one place he says,
the
After the image of Him that created
other,
him." But instead of saying, as in the former passage," In righteousness and true holiness," he has put in the latter,
In the
knowledge of God."
This renewal, then,
and forming again of the mind, is wrought
either after God, or after the image of God.
But it is said to be after God, in order that it
may not be supposed to be after another
creature; and to be after the image of God,
in order that this renewing may be understood to take place in that wherein is the
Just as we
image of God, i.e. in the mind.
say, that he who has departed from the body
a faithful and righteous man, is dead after
For what do
the body, not after the spirit.
we mean by dead after the body, unless as to

After God;" in

"

"

"

"

1 Rom. xii. 2.
4 John iv. 2+.

2 Eph. iv. 23, 24.
5 1 Cor. xiv. 14.

3 Gen. i. 27.

6 John xix. 30.
9 Ps. cxlviii. 8.

7 Eccles. iii. 21.
Col, ii. 11.

'

8 Gen. vii. 22.
Col. iii. 9, 10.

iq6

[Book XIV.

the body or in the body, and not dead as to
Or if we want to say
the soul or in the soul ?
he is handsome after the body, or strong
after the body, not after the mind; what else
is this, than that he is handsome or strong in
And the same is the
body, not in mind ?
Let
case with numberless other instances.
us not therefore so understand the words,
" After the image of Him that created him,"
as though it were a different image after
which he is renewed, and not the very same
which is itself renewed.

CHAP. 17. HOW THE IMAGE OF GOD IN THE
MIND IS RENEWED UNTIL THE LIKENESS OF
GOD IS PERFECTED IN IT IN BLESSEDNESS.

23. Certainly this renewal does not take
place in the single moment of conversion itself, as that renewal in baptism takes place
in a single moment by the remission of all
sins; for not one, be it ever so small, remains
But as it is one thing to be free
unremitted.
from fever, and another to grow strong again
from the infirmity which the fever produced;
and one thing again to pluck out of the body
a weapon thrust into it, and another to heal
the wound thereby made by a prosperous
cure; so the first cure is to remove the cause
of infirmity, and this is wrought by the forgiving of all sins; but the second cure is to
heal the infirmity itself, and this takes place
gradually by making progress in the renewal
of that image: which two things are plainly
shown in the Psalm, where we read, "Who
forgiveth all thine iniquities," which takes
place in baptism; and then follows, "and
1 and this takes
healeth all thine infirmities;"
place by daily additions, while this image is
And the apostle has spoken
being renewed. 2
of this most expressly, saying, "And though
our outward man perish, yet the inner man
is renewed day by day." 3 And "it is renewed in the knowledge of God, i.e. in righteousness and true holiness," according to the
testimonies of the apostle cited a little before.
He, then, who is day by day renewed by
making progress in the knowledge of God,
and in righteousness and true holiness, transfers his love from things temporal to things
eternal, from things visible to things intelligible, from things carnal to things spiritual;

1 Ps. ciii. 3.
2 [Justification is instantaneous :

sanctification

is gradual.
Baptism is the sign, not the cause, of the former. "As many of
us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized with reference to (eis) his death:" and "are intombed with him by the
baptism that has reference to (ei?) his death."
4.
According to St. Paul, baptism supposes a trust in the atonement
In saying that "the forgiveness of
of Christ, and is a seal of it.
all thine iniquity takes place in baptism," Augustin is liable to be
understood as teaching the efficiency of baptism in producing
This is the weak side of the Post Nicene soteriology.
forgiveness.

Rom. vi.

3,

W. G. T. S.]

3 2 Cor. iv. 16.

and diligently
perseveres in bridling and
lessening his desire for the former, and in
binding himself by love to the latter. And
he does this in proportion as he is helped by
For it is the sentence of God Himself,
God.
"Without me ye can do nothing." 4 And
when the last day of life shall have found any
one holding fast faith in the Mediator in such
progress and growth as this, he will be welcomed by the holy angels, to be led to God,
whom he has worshipped, and to be made
perfect by Him; and so will receive in the
end of the world an incorruptible body, in
For
order not to punishment, but to glory.
the likeness of God will then be perfected in
this image, when the sight of God shall be
And of this the Apostle Paul
perfected.
" Now we see through a glass, in an
speaks:
enigma, but then face to face." 5 And again:
"
But we with open face, beholding as in a
glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into
the same image, from glory to glory, even as
by the spirit of the Lord." 6 And this is what
happens from day to day in those that make
good progress.

CHAP. 18.

WHETHER THE SENTENCE OF JOHN
IS TO BE UNDERSTOOD OF OUR FUTURE LIKENESS WITH THE SON OF GOD IN THE IMMORTALITY ITSELF ALSO OF THE BODY.

"

24. But the Apostle John says,

Beloved,
now are we the sons of God; and it doth not
yet appear what we shall be: but we know
that, when He shall appear, we shall be like
Him, for we shall see Him as He is." 7 Hence
it appears, that the full likeness of God is to
take place in that image of God at that time
when it shall receive the full sight of God.
And yet this may also possibly seem to be
said by the Apostle John of the immortality
For we shall be like to God in
of the body.
this too, but only to the Son, because He only
in the Trinity took a body, in which He died
and rose again, and which He carried with
Him to heaven above.
For this, too, is called
an image of the Son of God, in which we shall
have, as He has, an immortal body, being
conformed in this respect not to the image of
the Father or of the Holy Spirit, but only of
the Son, because of Him alone is it read and
the Word
received by a sound faith, that
was made flesh." 8 And for this reason the
" Whom He did foreknow, He
apostle says,
also did predestinate to be conformed to the
image of His Son, that He might be the firstborn among many brethren." 9 "The first-
" from the dead," 10 accordborn

certainly

"

"

4 John xv. 5.
7 1 John iii. 2.
Col. 1. 18.

5 1 Cor. xiii. :
8 John i. 14.

6 2 Cor. iii. 18.
9 Rom. viii. 29.

Chap. XIX.]

ON THE TRINITY.

ing to the same apostle; by which death His
flesh was sown in dishonor, and rose again in
According to this image of the Son,
glory.
to which we are conformed in the body by immortality, we also do that of which the same
" As we have borne the image
apostle speaks,
of the earthy, so shall we also bear the image
of the heavenly;" J to wit, that we who are
mortal after Adam, may hold by a true faith,
and a sure and certain hope, that we shall be
For so can we now
immortal after Christ.
bear the same image, not yet in sight, but in
For the
faith; not yet in fact, but in hope.
apostle, when he said this, was speaking of
the resurrection of the body.

CHAP. 19.

JOHN IS RATHER TO BE UNDERSTOOD OF OUR PERFECT LIKENESS WITH THE
WISDOM IS PERTRINITY IN LIFE ETERNAL.
FECTED IN HAPPINESS.

"

"

2 we believe,

25. But in respect to that image indeed, of
Let us make man after our
which it is said,
image and likeness,"
and, after
the utmost search we have been able to make,
that man was made after the
understand,
is not said,
image of the Trinity, because it
After my, or After thy image. And therefore
that place too of the Apostle John must be
understood rather according to this image,
" We shall be like Him, for we
when he says,
shall see Him as He is;" because he spoke
" We are
too of Him of whom he had said,
the sons of God." 3 And the immortality of
the flesh will be perfected in that moment of
the resurrection, of which the Apostle Paul
In the twinkling of an eye, at the last
says,
trump; and the dead shall be raised incorruptFor in
ible, and we shall be changed." 4
an eye, before the
that very twinkling of
judgment, the spiritual body shall rise again
in power, in incorruption,in glory, which is now
sown a natural body in weakness, in corruption,
But the image which is renewed
in dishonor.
in the spirit of the mind in the knowledge of
God, not outwardly, but inwardly, from day
to day, shall be perfected by that sight itself;
which then after the judgment shall be face
to face, but now makes progress as through a
glass in an enigma. 5 And we must understand it to be said on account of this perfection, that "we shall be like Him, for we shall
see Him as He is."
gift will be
given to us at that time, when it shall have
Come, ye blessed of my Father,
been said,
" 6 For
inherit the kingdom prepared for you.
tnen will the ungodly be taken away, so that

For this

"

1 Cor. xv. 43, 49.

3 John in. 2.
5 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

2 Gen. i. 26.
4 1 Cor. xv. 52.
6 Matt. xxv. 34.

he shall not see the glory of the Lord, 7 when
those on the left hand shall go into eternal
punishment, while those on the right go into
But "this is eternal life," as
life eternal. 8
the Truth tells us; "to know Thee," He
says, "the one true God, and Jesus Christ
whom Thou hast sent." 9

26. This contemplative wisdom, which I
believe is properly called wisdom as distinct
from knowledge in the sacred writings; but
wisdom only of man, which yet man has not
except from Him, by partaking of whom a
rational and intellectual mind can be made
this contemplative wisdom, I say,
truly wise;
it is that Cicero commends, in the end of the
dialogue Hortensius, when he says: "While,
then, we consider these things night and day,
and sharpen our understanding, which is the
eye of the mind, taking care that it be not
ever dulled, that is, while we live in philosophy; we, I say, in so doing, have great hope
that, if, on the one hand, this sentiment and
wisdom of ours is mortal and perishable, we
still, when we have discharged
our
shall
human offices, have a pleasant setting, and a
not painful extinction, and as it were a rest
from life: or if, on the other, as ancient philand those, too, the greatosophers thought,
we have
est and far the most celebrated,
souls eternal and divine, then must we needs
think, that the more these shall have always
kept in their own proper course, i.e. in reason
and in the desire of inquiry, and the less they
shall have mixed and entangled themselves
in the vices and errors of men, the more easy
ascent and return they will have to heaven.''
And then he says, adding this short sentence,
and finishing his discourse by repeating it:
"Wherefore, to end my discourse at last, if
we wish either for a tranquil extinction, after
living in the pursuit of these subjects, or if
to migrate without delay from this present
home to another in no little measure better,
we must bestow all our labor and care upon
these pursuits." And here I marvel, that a
man of such great ability should promise to
men living in philosophy, which makes man
blessed by contemplation of truth, "a pleasant setting after the discharge of human
offices, if this our sentiment and wisdom is
mortal and perishable;" as if that which we
did not love, or rather which we fiercely hated,
were then to die and come to nothing, so that
But inits setting would be pleasant to us !
deed he had not learned this from the philosophers, whom he extols with great praise; but
this sentiment is redolent of that New Academy, wherein it pleased him to doubt of even

7 Isa. xxvi. 10.

8 Matt. xxv. 46.

9 John xvii. 3.

i g8

[Book XIV.

But from the philosothe plainest things.
phers that were greatest and far most celeconfesses, he had
brated, as he himself
learned that souls are eternal. For souls that
are eternal are not unsuitably stirred up by
their own
the exhortation to be found in
proper course," when the end of this life shall
have come, i.e. "in reason and in the desire
'' and to mix and entangle themof inquiry,
selves the less in the vices and errors of men,

"

in order that they may have an easier return
to God.
But that course which consists in
the love and investigation of truth does not
suffice for the wretched, i.e. for all mortals
who have only this kind of reason, and are
without faith in the Mediator; as I have
taken pains to prove, as much as I could, in
former books of this work, especially in the
fourth and thirteenth.

BOOK XV.

BEGINS BY SETTING FORTH BRIEFLY AND IN SUM THE CONTENTS OF THE PREVIOUS FOURTEEN
THE ARGUMENT IS THEN SHOWN TO HAVE REACHED SO FAR AS TO ALLOW OF OUR
BOOKS.
NOW INQUIRING CONCERNING THE TRINITY, WHICH IS GOD, IN THOSE ETERNAL, INCORPOREAL,
AND UNCHANGEABLE THINGS THEMSELVES, IN THE PERFECT CONTEMPLATION OF WHICH A
BUT THIS TRINITY, AS HE SHOWS, IS HERE SEEN BY US AS
BLESSED LIFE IS PROMISED TO US.
BY A MIRROR AND IN AN ENIGMA, IN THAT IT IS SEEN BY MEANS OF THE IMAGE OF GOD,
WHICH WE ARE, AS IN A LIKENESS THAT IS OBSCURE AND HARD OF DISCERNMENT.
IN LIKE
MANNER, IT IS SHOWN, THAT SOME KIND OF CONJECTURE AND EXPLANATION MAY BE GATHERED RESPECTING THE GENERATION OF THE DIVINE WORD, FROM THE WORD OF OUR OWN
MIND, BUT ONLY WITH DIFFICULTY, ON ACCOUNT OF THE EXCEEDING DISPARITY WHICH IS
DISCERNIBLE BETWEEN THE TWO WORDS; AND, AGAIN, RESPECTING THE PROCESSION OF THE
HOLY SPIRIT, FROM THE LOVE THAT IS JOINED THERETO BY THE WILL.

CHAP. I.

GOD IS ABOVE THE MIND.

i . Desiring to exercise the reader in the
things that are made, in order that he may
know Him by whom they are made, we have
now advanced so far as to His image, which
is man, in that wherein he excels the other
in reason or intelligence, and
animals, i.e.
whatever else can be said of the rational or
intellectual soul that pertains to what is called
For by this name some Latin
the mind. 1
after their own peculiar mode of
writers,
speech, distinguish that which excels in man,
and is not in the beast, from the soul,
2 which
If, then, we seek anyis in the beast as well.
thing that is above this nature, and seek truly,
namely, a nature not created, but
it is God,
And whether this is the Trinity, it
creating.
is now our business to demonstrate not only
to believers, by authority of divine Scripture,
but also to such as understand, by some kind
of reason, if we can. And why I say, if we
can, the thing itself will show better when we
have begun to argue about it in our inquiry.

CHAP. 2.

GOD, ALTHOUGH INCOMPREHENSIBLE,
THE TRACES OF THE
IS EVER TO BE SOUGHT.
TRINITY ARE NOT VAINLY SOUGHT IN THE
CREATURE.
2. For God Himself, whom we seek, will,

"

"

is said in the holy Psalm,

as I hope, help our labors, that they may not
be unfruitful, and that we may understand
how it
Let the
heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.
Seek the Lord, and be strengthened: seek His
For that which is always
face evermore." 3
being sought seems as though it were never
found; and how then will the heart of them
that seek rejoice, and not rather be made sad,
For it is
if they cannot find what they seek ?
not said, The heart shall rejoice of them that
And
find, but of them that seek, the Lord.
yet the prophet Isaiah testifies, that the Lord
God can be found when He is sought, when
Seek ye the Lord; and as soon as
he says:
ye have found Him, call upon Him: and when
He has drawn near to you, let the wicked man
forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man
If, then, when sought, He
his thoughts." 4
it said, "Seek ye His
can be found, why is
Is He perhaps to be sought
face evermore ?
even when found ?
For things incomprehensible must so be investigated, as that no one
may think he has found nothing, when he has
been able to find how incomprehensible that
is which he was seeking. Why then does he
so seek, if he comprehends that which he
seeks to be incomprehensible, unless because
he may not give over seeking so long as he
makes progress in the inquiry itself into things

"

Me.ns or animus.

A iiima.

3 Ps. cv. 3, 4-

4 Isa. lv. 6, j.

LBook XV.

*

is

"

"

after

seeks,

For it

God.'' 3

incomprehensible, and becomes ever better
and better while seeking so great a good,
which is both sought in order to be found,
and found in order to be sought?
both sought in order that it may be found
more sweetly, and found in order that it may
The words of Wisbe sought more eagerly.
dom in the book of Ecclesiasticus may be
taken in this meaning: "They who eat me
shall still be hungry, and they who drink me
For they eat and
shall still be thirsty."
drink because they find; and they still continue seeking because they are hungry and
Faith
thirst.
understanding finds;
whence the prophet says,
Unless ye believe,
ye shall not understand." 2 And yet, again,
understanding still seeks Him, whom it finds;
for "God looked down upon the sons of
men/' as it is sung in the holy Psalm,
to see
if there were any that would understand, and
And man, therefore,
seek
ought for this purpose to have understanding,
that he may seek after God.

3. We shall have tarried then long enough
among those things that God has made, in
order that by them He Himself may be known
" For the invisible things
that made them.
of Him from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made." 4 And hence they are rebuked in the book of Wisdom, "who could
not out of the good things that are seen know
Him that is: neither by considering the works,
did they acknowledge the workmaster; but
deemed either fire, or wind, or the swift air,
or the circle of the stars, or the violent water,
or the lights of heaven, to be the gods which
govern the world: with whose beauty if they,
being delighted, took them to be gods, let
them know how much better the Lord of them
is; for the first Author of beauty hath created
But if they were astonished at their
them.
power and virtue, let them understand by
them how much mightier He is that made
For by the greatness and beauty of
them.
the creatures proportionably the Maker of
them is seen" 5
I have quoted these words
from the book of Wisdom for this reason,
that no one of the faithful may think me
vainly and emptily to have sought first in the
creature, step by step through certain trinities, each of their own appropriate kind, until I came at last to the mind of man, traces
of that highest Trinity which we seek when
we seek God.

1 Ecclus. xxiv. 29.
3 Ps. xiv. 2.
5 Wisd. xiii. 1-5.

2 Isa. vii. 9.
4 Rom. i. 20.

CHAP. 3.

A BRIEF RECAPITULATION OF ALL
THE PREVIOUS BOOKS.

4. But since the necessities of our discussion and argument have compelled us to say
a great many things in the course of fourteen
books, which we cannot view at once in one
glance, so as to be able to refer them quickly
in thought to that which we desire to grasp,
I will attempt, by the help of God, to the best
of my power, to put briefly together, without
arguing, whatever I have established in the
several books by argument as known, and to
place, as it were, under one mental view, not
the way in which we have been convinced of
each point, but the points themselves of which
we have been convinced; in order that what
follows may not be so far separated from that
which precedes, as that the perusal of the
former shall produce forgetfulness of the latit have produced such
ter; or at any rate, if
forgetfulness, that what has
escaped the
memory may be speedily recalled by reperusal.

In the fifth,

5. In the first book, the unity and equality
of that highest Trinity is shown from Holy
In the second, and third, and
Scripture.
fourth, the same: but a careful handling of
the question respecting the sending of the Son
and of the Holy Spirit has resulted in three
books; and we have demonstrated, that He
who is sent is not therefore less than He who
sends because the one sent, the other was
sent; since the Trinity, which is in all things
equal, being also equally in its own nature
unchangeable, and invisible, and everywhere
present, works indivisibly.
with a view to those who think that the substance of the Father and of the Son is therefore not the same, because they suppose
everything that is predicated of God to be
predicated according to substance, and therefore contend that to beget and to be begotten,
or to be begotten and unbegotten, as being
it is demondiverse, are diverse substances,
strated that not everything that is predicated
of God is predicated according to substance,
as He is called good and great according to
substance, or anything else that is predicated
of Him in respect to Himself, but that some
things also are predicated relatively, i.e. not
in respect to Himself, but in respect to something which is not Himself; as He is called
the Father in respect to the Son, or the Lord
in respect to the creature that serves Him;
and that here, if anything thus relatively predicated, i.e. predicated in respect to something
that is not Himself, is predicated also as in
Lord, Thou hast become our
time, as, e.g.,

"

Chap. 1 1 1. J

ON THE TRINITY.

"

1 then nothing happens to Him so as
refuge,''
to work a change in Him, but He Himself
continues altogether unchangeable in His own
In the sixth, the question
nature or essence.
how Christ is called by the mouth of the apostle "the power of God and the wisdom of
is so far argued that the more careful
God," 2
handling of that question is deferred, viz.
whether He from whom Christ is begotten is
not wisdom Himself, but only the father of
His own wisdom, or whether wisdom begat
But be it which it may, the equality
wisdom.
of the Trinity became apparent in this book
also, and that God was not triple, but a
Trinity; and that the Father and the Son are
not, as it were, a double as opposed to the
single Holy Spirit: for therein three are not
anything more than one. We considered,
too, how to understand the words of Bishop
Eternity in the Father, form in the
Hilary.
In the seventh, the
Image, use in the Gift,"
question is explained which had been deferred: in what way that God who begat the
Son is not only Father of His own power and
wisdom, but is Himself also power and wisdom; so, too, the Holy Spirit; and yet that
they are not three powers or three wisdoms,
but one power and one wisdom, as one God
and one essence.
It was next inquired, in
what way they are called one essence, three
persons, or by some Greeks one essence,
three substances; and we found that the
words were so used through the needs of
speech, that there might be one term by
which to answer, when it is asked what the
three are, whom we truly confess to be three,
viz. Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit.
In
the eighth, it is made plain by reason also to
those who understand, that
only the
Father is not greater than the Son in the substance of truth, but that both together are not
anything greater than the Holy Spirit alone,
nor that any two at all in the same Trinity are
anything greater than one, nor all three together anything greater than each severally.
Next, I have pointed out, that by means of
the truth, which is beheld by the understanding, and by means of the highest good, from
which is all good, and by means of the righteousness for which a righteous mind is loved
even hy a mind not yet righteous, we might
understand, so far as it is possible to understand, that not only incorporeal but also unchangeable nature which is God; and by
means, too, of love, which in the Holy Scriptures is called God, 3 by which, first of all, those
who have understanding begin also, however
feebly, to discern the Trinity, to wit, one that

not

1 Ps. XC. I.

2 i Cor. i. 24.

3 i John iv. 16.

that.

loves, and that which is loved, and love.
In
the ninth, the argument advances as far as to
the image of God, viz. man in respect to his
mind; and in this we found a kind of trinity,
i.e. the mind, and the knowledge whereby
the mind knows itself, and the love whereby
it loves both itself and its knowledge of itself;
and these three are shown to be mutually
equal, and of one essence.
In the tenth, the
same subject is more carefully and subtly
handled, and is brought to this point, that we
found in the mind a still more manifest trinity
of the mind, viz. in memory, and understanding, and will.
But since it turned out also,
that the mind could never be in such a case
as not to remember, understand, and love itself, although it did not always think of itself; but that when it did think of itself, it
did not in the same act of thought distinguish
itself from things corporeal; the argument respecting the Trinity, of which this is an image, was deferred, in order to find a trinity
also in the things themselves that are seen
with the body, and to exercise the reader's
attention more distinctly in
Accordingly, in the eleventh, we chose the sense of
sight, wherein that which should have been
there found to hold good might be recognized
also in the other four bodily senses, although
not expressly mentioned; and so a trinity of
the outer man first showed itself in those
things which are discerned from without, to
wit, from the bodily object which is seen, and
from the form which is thence impressed upon
the eye of the beholder, and from the purpose
But these
of the will combining the two.
three things, as was patent, were not mutually
Next, we found
equal and of one substance.
yet another trinity in the mind itself, introduced into it, as it were, by the things perceived from without; wherein the same three
things, as it appeared, were of one substance:
the image of the bodily object which is in the
and the form thence impressed
memory,
when the mind's eye of the thinker is turned
to it, and the purpose of the will combining
But we found this trinity to pertain
the two.
to the outer man, on this account, that it was
introduced into the mind from bodily objects
which are perceived from without.
In the
twelfth, we thought good to distinguish wisdom from knowledge, and to seek first, as being the lower of the two, a kind of appropriate and special trinity in that which is specially called knowledge; but that although we
have got now in this to something pertaining
to the inner man, yet it is not yet to be either
called or thought an image of God. And
this is discussed in the thirteenth book by the
commendation of Christian faith.
In the

[Book XV.

fourteenth we discuss the true wisdom of man,
viz. that which is granted him by God's gift
in the partaking of that very God Himself,
which is distinct from knowledge; and the
discussion reached this point, that a trinity is
discovered in the image of God, which is man
in respect to his mind, which mind is "renewed in the knowledge
after the
image of Him that created" man; 1 "after
His own image;" 2 and so obtains wisdom,
wherein is the contemplation of things eternal.

of God,

"

"

CHAP. 4. WHAT UNIVERSAL NATURE TEACHES
US CONCERNING GOD.
6. Let us, then, now seek the Trinity which
is God, in the things themselves that are
eternal, incorporeal, and unchangeable; in
the perfect contemplation of which a blessed
life is promised us, which cannot be other
For not only does the authorthan eternal.
ity of the divine books declare that God is;
but the whole nature of the universe itself
which surrounds us, and to which we also
belong, proclaims that it has a most excellent Creator, who has given to us a mind and
natural reason, whereby to see that things living are to be preferred to things that are not
living; things that have sense to things that
have not; things that have understanding to
things that have not;
to
things mortal;
things
things
impotent; things righteous to things unrighteous; things beautiful to things deformed;
things incorthings good to
things unruptible
changeable to things changeable; things invisible to things visible; things incorporeal
to things corporeal; things blessed to things
And hence, since without doubt
miserable.
we place the Creator above things created,
we must needs confess that the Creator both
lives in the highest sense, and perceives and
understands all things, and that He cannot
die, or suffer decay, or be changed; and that
He is not a body, but a spirit, of all the most
powerful, most righteous, most beautiful,
most good, most blessed.

things immortal
powerful

to things corruptible;

things evil;

to

CHAP. 5.

HOW DIFFICULT IT IS TO DEMON-

STRATE THE TRINITY BY NATURAL REASON.
7. But all that I have said, and whatever
else seems to be worthily said of God after
the like fashion of human speech, applies to
the whole Trinity, which is one God, and to
For who
the several Persons in that Trinity.
would dare to say either of the one God,
which is the Trinity itself, or of the Father,

number.

or Son, or Holy Spirit, either that He is not
living, or is without sense or intelligence; or
that, in that nature in which they are affirmed to be mutually equal, any one of them
is mortal, or corruptible, or changeable, or
Or is there any one who would
corporeal ?
deny that any one in the Trinity is most
powerful, most righteous, most beautiful,
most good, most blessed ?
If, then, these
things, and all others of the kind, can be
predicated both of the Trinity itself, and of
each several one in that Trinity, where or
Let
how shall the Trinity manifest itself?
us therefore first reduce these numerous
For
predicates to some limited
that which is called life in God, is itself His
God, therefore, does
essence and nature.
not live, unless by the life which He is to
Himself. And this life is not such as that
which is in a tree, wherein is neither understanding nor sense; nor such as is in a beast,
for the life of a beast possesses the fivefold
But the
sense, but has no understanding.
life which is God perceives and understands
all things, and perceives by mind, not by
" God is a spirit."
3 And God
body, because
does not perceive through a body, as animals
do, which have bodies, for He does not conAnd hence that single
sist of soul and body.
nature perceives as it understands, and understands as it perceives, and its sense and
Nor
understanding are one and the same.
yet so, that at any time He should either
cease or begin to be; for He is immortal.
" He
And it is not said of Him in vain, that
For immortality
only hath immortality."
is true immortality in His case whose nature
That is also true eternity
admits no change.
by which God is
without
beginning, without end; consequently also
It is one and the same thing,
incorruptible.
therefore, to call God eternal, or immortal,
or incorruptible, or unchangeable; and it is
likewise one and the same thing to say that
He is living, and that He is intelligent, that
For He did not receive
is, in truth, wise.
wisdom whereby to be wise, but He is Himlife, and again is
self wisdom.
power or
beauty,
whereby He is called powerful and beautiful.
For what is more powerful and more beautiful
than wisdom, "which reaches from end to
end
all
again, and
Or do goodness,
things "? s
righteousness, differ from each other in the
nature of God, as they differ in His works,
as though they were two diverse qualities of
God goodness one, and righteousness an-

might, and

And this is

unchangeable,

yet again

mightily,

disposes

sweetly

and

1 Col. iii. 10.

2 Gen. i. 27.

3 John iv. 24.

4 1 Tim. vi. 16.

5 Wisd. viii. i.

Chap. VI.]

ON THE TRINITY.

Certainly not; but that which is
other?
righteousness is also itself goodness; and that
which is goodness is also itself blessedness.
And God is therefore called incorporeal, that
He may be believed and understood to be a
spirit, not a body.

i.e.

or

living,

eternal,

immortal,
since these

incorruptible,
four, as

8. Further, if we say, Eternal, immortal,
unchangeable,
incorruptible,
wise,
powerful, beautiful, righteous, good, blessed,
spirit; only the last of this list as it were
seems to signify substance, but the rest to
signify qualities of that substance; but it is
not so in that ineffable and simple nature.
For whatever seems to be predicated thereis to be underin according to
quality,
stood according to substance
essence.
For far be it from us to predicate spirit of
God according to substance, and good according to quality; but both according to
And so in like manner of all
substance. 1
those we have mentioned, of which we have
already spoken at length in the former books.
Let us choose, then, one of the first four of
those in our enumeration and arrangement,
unI have
changeable;
argued already, have one meaning; in order
that our aim may not be distracted by a multiplicity of objects. And let it be rather that
which was placed first, viz. eternal.
Let us
follow the same course with the four that
come next, viz. living, wise, powerful, beauAnd since life of some sort belongs
tiful.
also to the beast, which has not wisdom;
while the next two, viz. wisdom and might,
are so compared to one another in the case
of man, as that Scripture says,
Better is he
that is wise than he that is strong;"
2 and
beauty, again, is commonly attributed
to
bodily objects also: out of these four that
we have chosen, let Wise be the one we take.
Although these four are not to be called
unequal in speaking of God; for they are
four names, but one thing.
But of the third
and last four,
although it is the same thing
in God to be righteous that it is to be good
or to be blessed; and the same thing to be a
spirit that it is to be righteous, and good, and
blessed; yet, because in men there can be a
spirit that is not blessed, and there can be
one both righteous and good, but not yet
blessed; but that which is blessed is doubtless both just, and good, and a spirit,
let

"

1 [In the Infinite Being, qualities are inseparable from esIf man or angel
sence; in the finite being, they are separable.
ceases to be good, or wise, or righteous, he does not thereby cease
to be man or angel.
But if God should lose goodness, wisdom or
righteousness, he would no longer be God.
This is the meaning
"
of Augustin, when he says that "
as well as"spirit
goodness
must be predicated of God, "according to substance"
that is,
that qualites in Gcd are essential qualities. They are so one
with the essence, that they are inseparable. W. G. T. S.1

; '

- Wisd. vi. 1.

us rather choose that one which cannot exist
even in men without the three others, viz.
blessed.

CHAP. 6. HOW THERE IS A TRINITY IN THE
WHETHER AND
VERY SIMPLICITY OF GOD.
HOW THE TRINITY THAT IS GOD IS MANIFESTED FROM THE TRINITIES WHICH HAVE BEEN
SHOWN TO BE IN MEN.

9. When, then, we say, Eternal, wise,
blessed, are these three the Trinity that is
called God ? We reduce, indeed, those twelve
to this small number of three; but perhaps
we can go further, and reduce these three
For if wisdom and
also to one of them.
might, or life and wisdom, can be one and
the same thing in the nature of God, why
cannot eternity and wisdom, or blessedness
and wisdom, be one and the same thing in
the nature of God ? And hence, as it made
no difference whether we spoke of these
twTelve or of those three when we reduced the
many to the small number; so does it make
no difference whether we speak of those
three, or of that one, to the singularity of
which we have shown that the other two of
What fashion,
the three may be reduced.
then, of argument, what possible force and
might of understanding, what liveliness of
reason, what sharp-sightedness of thought,
set forth how (to pass over now the
will
others) this one thing, that God is called
For God does not rewisdom, is a trinity?
ceive wisdom from any one as we receive it
from Him, but He is Himself His own wisdom; because His wisdom is not one thing,
and His essence another, seeing that to Him
to be wise is to be.
Christ, indeed, is called
in the Holy Scriptures,
the power of God,
and the wisdom of God." 3
But we have discussed in the seventh book how this is to be
understood, so that the Son may not seem to
make the Father wise; and our explanation
came to this, that the Son is wisdom of wisdom, in the same way as He is light of light,
God of God.
Nor could we find the Holy
Spirit to be in any other way than that He
Himself also is wisdom, and altogether one
wisdom, as one God, one essence.
How,
then, do we understand this wisdom, which is
I do not say, How do
God, to be a trinity?
we believe this ?
For among the faithful this
ought to admit no question.
But supposing
there is any way by which we can see with
the understanding what we believe, what is
that way ?

"

10. For if we recall where it was in these
books that a trinity first began to show itself

3 1 Cor. i. 24.

[Book XV.

to our understanding, the eighth book is that
which occurs to us; since it was there that to
the best of our power we tried to raise the
aim of the mind to understand that most excellent and unchangeable nature, which our
mind is not. And we so contemplated this
nature as to think of it as not far from us,
and as above us, not in place, but by its own
awful and wonderful excellence, and in such
wise that it appeared to be with us by its own
Yet in this no trinity was yet
present light.
manifest to us, because in that blaze of light
we did not keep the eye of the mind steadfastly
bent upon seeking it; only we discerned it in
a sense, because there was no bulk wherein
we must needs think the magnitude of two or
three to be more than that of one.
But
when we came to treat of love, which in the
Holy Scriptures is called God, 1 then a trinity
began to dawn upon us a little, i.e. one that
loves, and that which is loved, and love.
But because that ineffable light beat back our
gaze, and it became in some degree plain
that the weakness of our mind could not as
yet be tempered to it, we turned back in the
course we had
begun, and
midst of the
planned according to the (as it were) more
familiar consideration of our own mind, according: to which man is made after
the
image of God, 2 in order to relieve our overstrained attention; and thereupon we dwelt
from the ninth to the fourteenth book upon
the consideration of the creature, which we
are, that we might be able to understand and
behold the invisible things of God by those
And now that we
things which are made.
have exercised the understanding, as far as
was needful, or perhaps more than was needful, in lower things, lo! we wish, but have
not strength, to raise ourselves to behold that
For in such
highest Trinity which is God.
manner as we see most undoubted trinities,
whether those which are wrought from without by corporeal things, or when these same
things are thought of which were perceived
from without; or when those things which
take their rise in the mind, and do not pertain to the senses of the body, as faith, or as
the virtues which comprise the art of living,
are discerned by manifest reason, and held
fast by knowledge; or when the mind itself,
by which we know whatever we truly say that
we know, is known to itself, or thinks of itself; or when that mind beholds anything
eternal and unchangeable, which itself is not;
in such way, then, I say, as we see in all
these instances most undoubted trinities,
because they are wrought in ourselves, or are

1 i John iv. 16.

2 Gen. i. 27.

in ourselves, when we remember, look at, or
do we, I say, in such
desire these things;
manner also see the Trinity that is God; because there also, by the understanding, we
behold both Him as it were speaking, and
His Word, i.e. the Father and the Son; and
then, proceeding thence, the love common
These
to both, namely, the Holy Spirit ?
trinities that pertain to our senses or to our
mind, do we rather see than believe them,
but rather believe than see that God is a
But if this is so, then doubtless we
trinity ?
either do not at all understand and behold
the invisible things of God by those things
that are made, or if we behold them at all,
we do not behold the Trinity in them; and
there is therein somewhat to behold, and
somewhat also which we ought to believe,
even though not beheld. And as the eighth
book showed that we behold the unchangeable good which we are not, so the fourteenth
reminded us thereof, when we spoke of the
wisdom that m3n has from God.
Why, then,
do we not recognize the Trinity
therein ?
Does that wisdom which God is said to be,
not perceive itself, and not love itself ? Who
would say this ? Or who is there that does
not see, that where there is no knowledge,
there in no way is there wisdom ? Or are we,
in truth, to think that the Wisdom which is
God knows other things, and does not know
itself; or loves other things, and does not
But if this is a foolish and imlove itself ?
pious thing to say or believe, then behold we
to wit, wisdom^ and the knowlhave a trinity,
edge wisdom has of itself, and its love of
For so, too, we find a trinity in man
itself.
also, i.e. mind, and the knowledge wherewith
mind knows itself, and the love wherewith it
loves itself.

CHAP. 7.

THAT IT IS NOT EASY TO DISCOVER
THE TRINITY THAT IS GOD FROM THE TRINITIES WE HAVE SPOKEN OF.

11. But these three are in such way in
not themselves man.
man, that they are
For man, as the ancients defined him, is a
These things, thererational mortal animal.
fore, are the chief things in man, but are not
man themselves.
And any one person, i.e.
each individual man, has these three things
But if, again, we were so to dein his mind.
fine man as to say, Man is a rational substance consisting of mind and body, then
without doubt man has a soul that is not
And
body, and a body that is not soul.
hence these three things are not man, but beIf, again, we
long to man, or are in man.
put aside the body, and think of the soul by

Chap. VII.]

ON THE TRINITY

itself, the mind is somewhat belonging to the
soul, as though its head, or eye, or countenance; but these things are not to be regarded
It is not then the soul, but that
as bodies.
which is chief in the soul, that is called the
But can we say that the Trinity is in
mind.
such way in God, as to be somewhat belonging to God, and not itself God? And hence
each individual man, who is called the image
of God, not according to all things that pertain to his nature, but according to his mind
alone, is one person, and is an image of the
But that Trinity of
Trinity in his mind.
which he is the image is nothing else in its
totality than God, is nothing else in its totalNor does anything perity than the Trinity.
tain to the nature of God so as not to pertain
to that Trinity; and the Three Persons are of
one essence, not as each individual man is
one person.

12. There is, again, a wide difference in
this point likewise, that whether we speak of
the mind in a man, and of its knowledge and
we
love; or of memory, understanding, will,
remember nothing of the mind except by
memory, nor understand anything except by
understanding, nor love anything except by
But in that Trinity, who would dare to
will.
say that the Father understands neither Himself, nor the Son, nor the Holy Spirit, except
by the Son, or loves them except by the Holy
Spirit; and that He remembers only by Himself either Himself, or the Son, or the Holy
Spirit; and in the same way that the Son remembers neither Himself nor the Father, except by the Father, nor loves them except by
the Holy Spirit; but that by Himself He only
understands both the Father and Son and
Holy Spirit: and in like manner, that the
Holy Spirit by the Father remembers both
the Father and the Son and Himself, and by
the Son understands both the Father and the
Son and Himself; but by Himself only loves
both Himself and the Father and the Son;
as though the Father were both His own
memory, and that of the Son and of the Holy
Spirit; and the Son were the understanding
of both Himself, and the Father and the
Holy Spirit; but the Holy Spirit were the love
both of Himself, and of the Father and of
the Son ? Who would presume to think or
affirm this of that Trinity ? For if therein the
Son alone understands both for Himself and
for the Father and for the Holy Spirit, we
have returned to the old absurdity, that the
Father is not wise from Himself, but from
the Son, and that wisdom has not begotten
wisdom, but that the Father is said to be wise
by that wisdom which He begat.
For where
there is no understanding there can be no

wisdom; and hence, if the Father does not
understand Himself for Himself, but the Son
understands for the Father, assuredly the Son
But if to God to be
makes the Father wise.
is to be wise, and essence is to Him the same
as wisdom, then it is not the Son that has His
essence from the Father, which is the truth,
but rather the Father from the Son, which is
And this absurda most absurd falsehood.
ity, beyond all doubt, we have discussed, disproved, and rejected, in the seventh book.
Therefore God the Father is wise by that wisdom by which He is His own wisdom, and
the Son is the wisdom of the Father from the
wisdom which is the Father, from whom the
Son is begotten; whence it follows that the
Father understands also by that understanding by which He is His own understanding
(for he could not be wise that did not understand); and that the Son is the understanding
of the Father, begotten of the understanding
which is the Father. And this same may not
For how is
be unfitly said of memory also.
he wise, that remembers nothing, or does not
remember himself?
Accordingly, since the
Father is wisdom, and the Son is wisdom,
therefore, as the Father remembers Himself,
so does the Son also remember Himself; and
as the Fafher remembers both Himself and
the Son, not by the memory of the Son, but
by His own, so does the Son remember both
Himself and the Father, not by the memory
Where,
of
again, there is no love, who would say there
was any wisdom ? And hence we must infer
that the Father is in such way His own love,
as He is His own understanding and memory.
And therefore these three, i.e. memory, understanding, love or will, in that highest and
unchangeable essence which is God, are, we
see, not the Father and the Son and the Holy
And because
Spirit, but the Father alone.
the Son too is wisdom begotten of wisdom, as
neither the Father nor the Holy Spirit understands for Him, but He understands for Himself; so neither does the Father remember
for Him, nor the Holy Spirit love for Him,
but He remembers and loves
for Himself:
for He is Himself also His own memory, His
own understanding, and His own love.
But
that He is so comes to Him from the Father,
of whom He is born. And because the Holy
Spirit also is wisdom proceeding from wisdom,
He too has not the Father for a memory, and
the Son for an understanding, and Himself
for love: for He would not be wisdom if another remembered for Him, and yet another
understood for Him, and He only loved for
Himself; but Himself has all three things,
and has them in such way that they are Him-

the Father, but by His own.

[Book XV,

self. But that He is so comes to Him thence,
whence He proceeds.

13. What man, then, is there who can comprehend that wisdom by which God knows all
things, in such wise that neither what we call
things past are past therein, nor what we call
things future are therein waited for as coming,
as though they were absent, but both past and
future with things present are all present; nor
yet are things thought severally, so
that
thought passes from one to another, but all
things simultaneously are at hand in one
what man, I say, is there that comglance;
prehends that wisdom, and the like prudence,
and the like knowledge, since in truth even
our own wisdom is beyond our comprehenFor somehow we are able to behold
sion ?
the things that are present to our senses or
to our understanding; but the things that are
absent, and yet have once been present, we
know by memory, if we have not forgotten
them. And we conjecture, too, not the past
from the future, but the future from the past,
For there are
yet by an unstable knowledge.
some of our thoughts to which, although future, we, as it were, look onward with greater
plainness and certainty as being very near;
and we do this by the means of memory when
we are able to do it, as much as we ever are
able, although memory seems to belong not
to the future, but to the past. And this may
be tried in the case of any words or songs,
the due order of which we are rendering by
memory; for we certainly should not utter
succession, unless we foresaw in
each in
thought what came next. And yet it
is not
foresight, but memory, that enables us to
foresee it; for up to the very end of the words
or the song, nothing is uttered except as foreAnd yet in doseen and looked forward to.
ing this, we are not said to speak or sing by
foresight, but by memory; and if any one is
more than commonly capable of
uttering
many pieces in this way, he is usually praised,
not for his foresight, but for his memory.
We know, and are absolutely certain, that all
this takes place in our mind or by our mind;
but how it takes place, the more attentively
we desire to scrutinize, the more do both our
very words break down, and our purpose itself fails, when by our understanding, if not
our tongue, we would reach to something of
And do such as we are, think,
clearness.
that in so great infirmity of mind we can comprehend whether the foresight of God is the
same as His memory and His understanding,
who does not regard in thought each several
thing, but embraces all that He knows in one
eternal and unchangeable and ineffable viIn this difficulty, then, and strait, we
sion ?

may well cry out to the living God, "Such
knowledge is too wonderful for me: it is high,
For I understand
I cannot attain unto it." 1
by myself how wonderful and incomprehensible is Thy knowledge, by which Thou madest me, when I cannot even comprehend myself whom Thou hast made !
And yet,
"while I was musing, the fire burned," 2 so
that

I seek Thy face evermore." 3

"

CHAP. 8. HOW THE APOSTLE SAYS THAT GOD
IS NOW SEEN BY US THROUGH A GLASS.

[as

Paul]

Beholding as in a glass,"

14. I know that wisdom is an incorporeal
substance, and that it
is the light by which
those things are seen that are not seen by
carnal eyes; and yet a man so great and so
says, "We see now
spiritual
through a glass, in an enigma, but then face
If we ask what and of what sort
to face." 4
is this "glass/' this assuredly occurs to our
minds, that in a glass nothing is discerned
but an image. We have endeavored, then,
so to do; in order that we might see in some
way or other by this image which we are, Him
by whom we are made, as by a glass.
And
this is intimated also in the words of the same
" But we with open face, beholding
apostle:
as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same image, from glory to
glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord." 3
"
6 he has said, i.e.
seeing by means of a glass, not looking from
a watch-tower: an ambiguity that does not exist in the Greek language, whence the apostolic epistles have been rendered into Latin.
7 in which the images
For in Greek, a glass,
of things are visible, is wholly distinct in the
sound of the word also from a watch-tower,
from the height of which we command a more
distant view. And it is quite plain that the
apostle, in using the word "
in
respect to the glory of the Lord, meant it to
come from "speculum," not from "specula."
" We are transformed into
But where he says,
the same image," he assuredly means to speak
of the image of God; and by calling it "the
same," he means that very image which we
see in the glass, because that same image is
also the glory of the Lord; as he says elsewhere, "For a man indeed ought not to
cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image
and glory of God," 9
a text already discussed in the twelfth book. He means, then,
by "We are
transformed," that we are
changed from one form to another, and that
we pass from a form that is obscure to a form

speculantes

"

1 Ps. cxxxix. 6.
4 1 Cor. xiii. 12.
7 Speculum.

2 Ps. xxxix. 3.
5 2 Cor. iii. 18
8 Specula.

3 Ps. cv. 4.
6 Speculantes.
9 1 Cor. xi. 7.

Chap. IX.]

ON THE TRINITY.

20'

"

that is bright: since the obscure form, too, is
the image of God; and if an image, then asglory," in which we are created
suredly also
as men, being better than the other animals.
" The
For it is said of human nature in itself,
man ought not to cover his head, because he
is the image and glory of God." And this
nature, being the most excellent among things
created, is transformed from a form that is
defaced into a form that is beautiful, when it
is justified by its own Creator from ungodliSince even in ungodliness itself, the
ness.
more the faultiness is to be condemned, the
more certainly is the nature to be praised.
" from glory to
And therefore he has added,
glory:" from the glory of creation to the
Although these words,
glory of justification.
"from glory to glory," may be understood
from the glory of faith
also in other ways;
to the glory of sight, from the glory whereby
we are sons of God to the glory whereby we
shall be like Him, because "we shall see
Him as He is." *
But in that he has added,
"
as from the Spirit of the Lord," he declares,
that the blessing of so desirable a transformation is conferred upon us by the grace of
God.

CHAP. 9.

OF THE TERM "ENIGMA,'
TROPICAL MODES OF SPEECH.

AND OF

to

relates

15. What has been said

the
words of the apostle, that "we see now
through a glass;" but whereas he has added,
"
in an enigma," the meaning of this addition is unknown to any who are unacquainted
with the books that contain the doctrine of
those modes of speech, which the Greeks call
Tropes, which Greek word we also use in
For as we more commonly speak of
Latin.
schemata than of figures, so we more comAnd
monly speak of tropes than of modes.
it is a very difficult and uncommon thing to
express the names of the several modes or
tropes in Latin, so as to refer its appropriate
name to each. And hence some Latin translators, through unwillingness to employ a Greek
word, where the apostle says, "Which things
are an allegory,"
2 have rendered it by a circumlocution Which things signify one thing
But there are several species of
by another.
this kind of trope that is called allegory, and
one of them is that which is called enisjma.
Now the definition of the generic term must
necessarily embrace also all its species; and
hence, as every horse is an animal, but not
every animal is a horse, so every enigma is
an allegory, but every allegory is not an
What then is an allegory, but a
enigma.

as
"

trope wherein one thing is understood from
another ?
the Thesin the Epistle to
Let us not therefore sleep, as
salonians,
do others; but let us watch and be sober:
for they who sleep, sleep in the night; and
they who are drunken, are drunken in the
night: but let us who are of the day, be
But this allegory is not an enigma,
sober." 3
for here the meaning is patent to all but the
very dull; but an enigma is, to explain it
briefly, an obscure allegory, as, e.g., "The
horseleech had three daughters," 4 and othei
But when the apostle spoke
like instances.
of an allegory, he does not find it in the
words, but in the fact; since he has shown
that the two Testaments are to be understood
by the two sons of Abraham, one by a bondmaid, and the other by a free woman, which
was a thing not said, but also done. And
before this was explained, it was obscure;
and accordingly such an allegory, which is the
generic name, could be specifically called an
enigma.

in an enigma."

" we now see;

16. But because it is not only those that
are ignorant of the books that contain the
doctrine of tropes, who inquire the apostle's
meaning, when he said that we "
see now in
an enigma, but those, too, who are acquainted
with the doctrine, but yet desire to know
"
what that enigma is in which
we must find a single meaning for the two
" we see now
phrases, viz. for that which says,
through a glass," and for that which adds,
"
For it makes but one sentence, when the whole is so uttered, "We
see now through a glass in an enigma."
Accordingly, as far as my judgment goes, as by
the word glass he meant to signify an image,
so by that of enigma any likeness you will,
but yet one obscure, and difficult
see
While, therefore, any likenesses
through.
whatever may be understood as signified by
the apostle when he speaks of a glass and an
enigma, so that they are adapted to the understanding of God, in such way as He can
be understood; yet nothing is better adapted
to this purpose than that which is not vainly
Let no one, then, wonder,
called His image.
that we labor to see in any way at all, even in
that fashion of seeing which is granted to us
in this life, viz. through a glass, in an enigma.
For we should not hear of an enigma in this
And this is a yet
place if sight were easy.
greater enigma, that we do not see what we
For who does not see his
cannot but see.
own thought ? And yet who does see his own
thought, I do not say with the eye of the
flesh, but with the inner sight itself? Who

to

1 1 John iii.

2 G al. iv. 24.

3 1 Thess. v. 6-8.

4 Prov. xxx. 15.

[Book XV.

does not see it, and who does see it ?
Since
thought is a kind of sight of the mind;
whether those things are present which are
seen also by the bodily eyes, or perceived by
the other senses; or whether they are not
present, but their likenesses are discerned by
thought; or whether neither of these is the
that are
case, but things are thought of
neither bodily things nor likenesses of bodily
things, as the virtues and vices; or as, indeed, thought itself is thought of; or whether
it be those things which are the subjects of instruction and of liberal sciences ; or whether the
higher causes and reasons themselves of all
these things in the unchangeable nature are
thought of; or whether it be even evil, and
vain, and false things that we are thinking of,
with either the sense not consenting, or erring
in its consent.

CHAP. IO.

CONCERNING THE WORD OF THE
MIND, IN WHICH WE SEE THE WORD OF GOD,
AS IN A GLASS AND AN ENIGMA.
17. But let us now speak of those things
of which we think as known, and have in our
knowledge even if we do not think of them;
whether they belong to
the contemplative
knowledge, which, as I have argued, is properly to be called wisdom, or to the active,
which is properly to be called knowledge.
For both together belong to one mind, and
But when we treat of
are one image of God.
the lower of the two distinctly and separately,
then it is not to be called an image of God,
although even then, too, some likeness of that
Trinity may be found in it; as we showed in
the thirteenth book. We speak now, therefore, of the entire knowledge of man altogether, in which whatever is known to us is
known; that, at any rate, which is true; otherFor no one
wise it would not be known.
knows what is false, except when he knows it
to be false; and if he knows this, then he
knows what is true: for it is true that that is
false. We treat, therefore, now of those things
which we think as known, and which are known
to us even if they are not being thought of.
But certainly, if we would utter them in
words, we can only do so by thinking them.
For although there were no words spoken, at
any rate, he who thinks speaks in his heart.
And hence that passage in the book of Wisdom: "They said within themselves, thinking not aright.
They
said within themselves," are explained by the
addition of "thinking." A like passage to
certain
this
scribes, when they heard the Lord's words to

For the words,

Gospel,

is that

that

the

in

"

"

the same thing

the paralytic man, "Be of good cheer, my
son, thy sins are forgiven thee," said within
"
This man blasphemeth.
For
themselves,
"
how did they
say within themselves," ex-
" And when
cept by thinking ? Then follows,
Jesus saw their thoughts, He said, Why think
ye evil in your thoughts ?" 2 So far Matthew.
But Luke narrates
thus:
"The scribes and Pharisees began to think,
saying, Who is this that speaketh blasphemies ? Who can forgive sins but God alone?
But when Jesus perceived their thoughts, He,
answering, said unto them, What think ye in
That which in the book of
your hearts ?" 3
Wisdom is, "They said, thinking," is the
same here with, "They thought, saying."
For both there and here it is declared, that
they spake within themselves, and in their
own heart, i.e. spake by thinking.
For they
'spake within themselves," and it was said
" What think ye ?" And the Lord
to them,
Himself says of that rich man whose ground
" And he thought
brought forth plentifully,
within himself, saying.''

18. Some thoughts, then, are speeches of
the heart, wherein the Lord also shows that
" Not that
there is a mouth, when He says,
which entereth into the mouth defileth a man;
but that which proceedeth out of the mouth,
In one sentence He
that defileth a man."
has comprised two diverse mouths of the
man, one of the body, one of the heart.
For
assuredly, that from which they thought the
man to be defiled, enters into the mouth of
the body; but that from which the Lord said
the man was defiled, proceedeth out of the
So certainly He Himmouth of the heart.
self explained what He had said.
For a little
after, He says also to His disciples concerning the same thing: "Are ye also yet without
understanding? Do ye not understand, that
whatsoever entereth in at the mouth goeth
into the belly, and
into the
"
Here He most certainly pointed
draught ?
to the mouth of the body.
But in that which
follows He plainly speaks of the mouth of the
" But those things
heart, where He says,
which proceed out of the mouth come forth
from the heart; and they defile the man.
For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts," 5
What is clearer than this explanation ?
etc.
And yet, when we call thoughts speeches of
the heart, it does not follow that they are not
also acts of sight, arising from the sight of
knowledge, when they are true.
For when
these things are done outwardly by means of
the body, then speech and sight are different
things; but when we think inwardly, the two

is cast

out

1 Wisd. ii. 1.

2 Matt. ix. 2-4.
4 Luke xii. 17.

3 Luke v. 21, 22.
5 Matt. xv. 10-20.

Chap. XL]

ON THE TRINITY.

just as sight and hearing are two
are one,
things mutually distinct in the bodily senses,
but to see and hear are the same thing in the
mind; and hence, while speech is not seen
but rather heard outwardly, yet the inward
speeches, i.e. thoughts, are said by the holy
Gospel to have been seen, not heard, by the
They said within themselves, This
Lord.
man blasphemeth," says the Gospel; and then
subjoined, "And when
Jesus saw their
Therefore He saw, what they
thoughts."
For by His own thought He saw their
said.
thoughts, which they supposed no one saw
but themselves.

"

19. Whoever, then, is able to understand a
word, not only before it is uttered in sound,
but also before the images of its sounds are
for this it is which
considered in thought,
belongs to no tongue, to wit, of those which
are called the tongues of nations, of which
our Latin tongue is one;
whoever, I say, is
able to understand this, is able now to see
through this glass and in this enigma some
" In
likeness of that Word of whom it is said,
the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God." ' For
of necessity, when we speak what is true, i.e.
speak what we know, there is born from the
knowledge itself which the memory retains, a
word that is altogether of the same kind with
For
that knowledge from which it is born.
the thought that is formed by the thing which
we know, is the word which we speak in the
heart: which word is neither Greek nor Latin,
nor of any other tongue.
is
needful to convey this to the knowledge of
those to whom we speak, then some sign is
assumed whereby to signify it. And generally a sound, sometimes a nod, is exhibited,
the former to the ears, the latter to the eyes,
that the word which we bear in our mind may
become known also by bodily signs to the
bodily senses. For what is to nod or beckon,
except to speak in some way to the sight?
And Holy Scripture gives its testimony to
this; for we read in the Gospel according to
John: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that
Then the discione of you shall betray me.
ples looked one upon another, doubting of
whom He spake. Now there was leaning on
Jesus' breast one of His disciples whom Jesus
Simon Peter therefore beckons to
loved.
him, and says to him, Who is it of whom He
speaks?" 2 Here he spoke by beckoning
what he did not venture to speak by sounds.
But whereas we exhibit these and the like
bodily signs either to ears or eyes of persons
present to whom we speak, letters have been

But when it

invented that we might be able to converse
also with the absent; but these are signs of
words, as words themselves are signs in our
conversation of those things which we think.

CHAP. II.

THE LIKENESS OF THE DIVINE
WORD, SUCH AS IT IS, IS TO BE SOUGHT, NOT
IN OUR OWN OUTER AND SENSIBLE WORD,
BUT IN THE INNER AND MENTAL ONE. THERE
IS THE GREATEST POSSIBLE UNLIKENESS BETWEEN OUR WORD AND KNOWLEDGE AND THE
DIVINE WORD AND KNOWLEDGE.
20. Accordingly, the word that sounds
outwardly is the sign of the word that gives
light inwardly; which latter has the greater
For that which is
claim to be called a word.
uttered with the mouth of the flesh, is the
articulate sound of a word; and is itself also
called a word, on account of that to make
which outwardly apparent it is itself assumed.
For our word is so made in some way into an
articulate sound of the body, by assuming
that articulate sound by which it may be
manifested to men's senses, as the Word of
God was made flesh, by assuming that flesh
in which, itself also might be manifested to
men's senses. And as our word becomes an
articulate sound, yet is not changed into one;
so the Word of God became flesh, but far be
it from us to say He was changed into flesh.
For both that word of ours became an articulate sound, and that other Word became
flesh, by assuming it, not by consuming itself
And therefore
so as to be changed into it.
whoever desires to arrive at any likeness, be
it of what sort it may, of the Word of God,
however in many respects unlike, must not
regard the word of ours that sounds in the
ears, either when it is uttered in an articulate
sound or when it
For
the words of all tongues that are uttered in
sound are also silently thought, and the mind
runs over verses while the bodily mouth is
And not only the numbers of syllasilent.
bles, but the tunes also of songs, since they
are corporeal, and pertain to that sense of
the body which is called hearing, are at hand
by certain incorporeal images appropriate to
them, to those who think of them, and who
But we
silently revolve al! these things.
must pass by this, in order to arrive at that
word of man, by the likeness of which, be it
of what sort it may, the Word of God may
Not that
be somehow seen as in an enigma.
word which was spoken to this or that proe> Now the word
phet, and of which it is said,
of God grew and multiplied;" 3 and again,
"
Faith then cometh by hearing, and hearing

is silently thought.

: John i.

= John xiii. 21-24.

3 Acts vi. 7.

2IO

[Book XV.

is

" x and again,

" When
by the word of Christ;
ye received the word of God which ye heard
of us, ye received it not as the word of men,
but, as it is in truth, the word of God " -
(and
there are countless other like sayings in the
Scriptures respecting the word of God, which
is disseminated in the sounds of many and
diverse languages through the hearts and
mouths of men; and which is therefore called
the word of God, because the doctrine that
is delivered is not human, but divine);
but
we are now seeking to see, in whatsoever way
we can, by means of this likeness, that Word
" The Word was
of God of which it is said,
God;" of which it is said, "All things were
is said, "The
made by Him;" of which it
Word became flesh;" of which it
said,
"The Word of God on high is the fountain
of wisdom." 3 We must go on, then, to that
word of man, to the word of the rational animal, to the word of that image of God, that
is not born of God, but made by God; which
is neither utterable in sound nor capable of
being thought under the likeness of sound,
such as must needs be with the word of anv
tongue; but which precedes all the signs by
which it is signified, and is begotten from the
knowledge that continues in the mind, when
that same knowledge is
spoken inwardly
For the sight of
according as it really is.
of
thinking is exceedingly like
For when it is uttered by sound,
knowledge.
or by any bodily sign, it
is not uttered according as it really is, but as it can be seen
or heard by the body.
When, therefore,,
that is in the word which is in the knowledge, then there is a true word, and truth,
such as is looked for from man; such that
what is in the knowledge is also in the word,
and what is not in the knowledge is also not
in the word.
recognized,
4 And so this like-
"Yea, yea; nay, nay.''
ness of the image that is made, approaches
as nearly as is possible to that likeness of
the image that is born, by which God the Son
is declared to be in all things like in subWe must notice in
stance to the Father.
this enigma also another likeness of the word
of God; viz. that, as it
is said of that Word,
"
All things were made by Him," where God
is declared to have made the universe by His
only-begotten Son, so there are no works of
man that are not first spoken in his heart:
" A word is the beginwhence it is written,
ning of every work." 5
But here also, it is
when the word is true, that then it is the beAnd a word is true
ginning of a good work.
when it is begotten from the knowledge of

Here may be

sight

the

working good works, so that there too may be
preserved the "yea yea, nay nay;" in order
that whatever is in that knowledge by which
we are to live, may be also in the word by
which we are to work, and whatever is not in
the one may not be in the other.
Otherwise
such a word will be a lie, not truth; and what
comes thence will be a sin, and not a good
There is yet this other likeness of the
work.
Word of God in this likeness of our word,
that there can be a word of ours with no work
following it, but there cannot be any work
unless a word precedes; just as the Word of
God could have existed though no creature
existed, but no creature could exist unless by
that Word by which all things are made.
And therefore not God the Father, not the
Holy Spirit, not the Trinity itself, but the
Son only, which is the Word of God, was
made flesh; although the Trinity was the
maker: in order that we might live rightly
through our word following and imitating
His example, i.e. by having no lie
in either
the thought or the work of our word.
But
this perfection of this image is one to be at
some time hereafter.
In order to attain this
it is that the good master teaches us by
Christian faith, and by pious doctrine, that
"with face unveiled" from the veil of the
law, which is the shadow of things to come,
"beholding as in a glass the glory of the
" we
Lord," i.e. gazing at it through a glass,
may be transformed into the same image
from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the
Lord;

" 6 as we explained above.

21. When, therefore, this image shall have
been renewed to perfection by this transformation, then we shall be like God, because we
shall see Him, not through a glass, but "as
He is;" 7 which the Apostle Paul expresses
But now, who can exby
plain how great is the unlikeness also, in this
glass, in this enigma, in this likeness such as
Yet I will touch upon some points, as

face to face." 8

it is ?

"

I can, by which to indicate it.

CHAP. 12.

THE ACADEMIC PHILOSOPHY.

First, of what sort and how great is the very
knowledge itself that a man can attain, be he
ever so skillful and learned, by which our
thought is formed with truth, when we speak
what we know?
For to pass by those things
that come into the mind from the bodily
senses, among which so many are otherwise
than they seem to be, that he who is overmuch pressed down by their resemblance to
truth, seems sane to himself, but really is not

1 Rom. x. 17.
4 Matt. v. 37.

2 1 Thess. ii. 13.
5 Ecclus. xxxvii. 20.

3 Ecclus. i. 5.

6 2 Cor. iii. 17.

1 John iii. 4

1 Cor. xiii. 12.

Chai\ XII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

21 1

whence it is that the Academic 1
sane;
philosophy has so prevailed as to be still more
wretchedly insane by doubting all things;
passing by, then, those things that come into
the mind by the bodily senses, how large a
proportion is left of things which we know in
such manner as we know that we live ?
In
regard to this, indeed, we are absolutely without any fear lest perchance we are being deceived by some resemblance of the truth;
since it is certain, that he who is deceived,
And this again is not reckoned
yet lives.
among those objects of sight that are presented from without, so that the eye may be
is when an
deceived in it; in such way as it
oar in the water looks bent, and towers seem
to move as you sail past them, and a thousand
other things that are otherwise than they seem
to be: for this is not a thing that is discerned
The knowledge by
by the eye of the flesh.
which we know that we live is the most inward
of all knowledge, of which even the Academic
cannot insinuate: Perhaps you are asleep, and
do not know it, and you see things in your
For who does not know that what
sleep.
people see in dreams is precisely like what they
But he who is certain of
see when awake ?
his own life, does not
the knowledge of
therein say, I know I am awake, but, I know
I am alive; therefore, whether he be asleep
Nor can he be deor awake, he is alive.
ceived in that knowledge by dreams; since it
belongs to a living man both to sleep and to
Nor can the Academic again
see in sleep.
say, in confutation of this knowledge: Perhaps you are mad, and do not know it: for
what madmen see is precisely like what they
also see who are sane; but he who is mad is
Nor does he answer the Academic by
alive.
saying, I know I am not mad, but, I know I
am alive.
Therefore he who says he knows
he is alive, can neither be deceived nor lie.
Let a thousand kinds, then, of deceitful objects of sight be presented to him who says,
I know I am alive; yet he will fear none of
them, for he who is deceived yet is alive.
But if such things alone pertain to human
knowledge, they are very few indeed; unless
that they can be so multiplied in each kind,
as not only not to be few, but to reach in the
For he who says, I know I
result to infinity.
am alive, says that he knows one single thing.
Further, if he says, I know that I know I am
alive, now there are two; but that he knows
these two is a third thing to know. And so
he can add a fourth and a fifth, and innumerBut since he
able others, if he holds out.

1 [Not the Old Academy of Plato and his immediate disciples,
ew Academy, to which Augus-

who were anti-skeptical; but the
tin has previously referred (XIV. xix. 26).
W. G. T. S.]

This was skeptical.

cannot either comprehend an innumerable
number by additions of units, or say a thing
innumerable times, he comprehends this at
least, and with perfect certainty, viz. that this
is both true and so innumerable that he cannot truly comprehend and say its
infinite
This same thing may be noticed
number.
For
also in the case of a will that is certain.
it would be an impudent answer to make to
any one who should say, I will to be happy,
And if he
that perhaps you are deceived.
should say, I know that I will this, and I know
that I know it, he can add yet a third to
these two, viz. that he knows these two; and
a fourth, that he knows that he knows these
two; and so on ad infinitum.
Likewise, if any
one were to say, I will not to be mistaken;
will it not be true, whether he is mistaken or
whether he is not, that nevertheless he does
Would it not be
will not to be mistaken ?
most impudent to say to him, Perhaps you
are deceived ? when beyond doubt, whereinsoever he may be deceived, he is nevertheless
not deceived in thinking that he wills not to
And if he says he knows this,
be deceived.
he adds any number he choses of things
known, and perceives that number to be inFor he who says, I will not to be definite.
ceived, and I know that I will not to be so,
and I know that I know it, is able now to set
forth an infinite number here also, however
And
awkward may be the expression of it.
other things too are to be found capable of
refuting the Academics, who contend that
man can know nothing.
But we must restrict
ourselves, especially as this is not the subject
we have undertaken in the present work.
There are three books of ours on that sub2 written in the early time of our converject,
sion, which he who can and will read, and
who understands them, will doubtless not be
much moved by any of the many arguments
which they have found out against the disFor whereas there are two
covery of truth.
kinds of knowable things,
one, of those
things which the mind perceives by the bodily senses; the other, of those which it perthese philosophers have
ceives by itself,
babbled much against the bodily senses, but
have never been able to throw doubt upon
those most certain perceptions of things true,
which the mind knows by itself, such as is
that which I have mentioned, I know that I
am alive.
But far be it from us to doubt the
truth of what we have learned by the bodily
senses; since by them we have learned to
know the heaven and the earth, and those
things in them which are known to us, so far

2 Libri Tres contra Academicos.

[Book XV.

as He who created both us and them has
willed them to be within our knowledge.
Far
be it from us too to deny, that we know what
we have learned by the testimony of others:
otherwise we know not that there is an ocean;
we know not that the lands and cities exist
which most copious report commends to us;
we know not that those men were, and their
works, which we have learned by reading history; we know not the news that is
daily
brought us from this quarter or that, and confirmed by consistent and conspiring evidence;
lastly, we know not at what place or from
whom we have been born: since in all these
things we have believed
the testimony of
others. And if it is most absurd to say this,
then we must confess, that not only our own
senses, but those of other persons also, have
added very much indeed to our knowledge.

22.

All

these things, then, both those
which the human mind knows by itself, and
those which it knows by the bodily senses,
and those which it has received and knows by
the testimony of others, are laid up and retained in the storehouse of the memory; and
from these is begotten a word that is true,
when we speak what we know, but a word
that is before all sound, before all thought of
For the word is then most like to
a sound.
the thing known, from which also its image
is begotten, since the sight of thinking arises
from the sight of knowledge; when it
is a
word belonging to no tongue, but is a true
word concerning a true thing, having nothing
of its own, but wholly derived from that
Nor does
knowledge from which it is born.
it signify when he learned it, who speaks what
he knows; for sometimes he says it immediately upon learning it; provided only that the
word is true, i.e. sprung from things that are
known.

CHAP. 13.

STILL FURTHER OF THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN THE KNOWLEDGE AND WORD OF
OUR MIND, AND THE KNOWLEDGE AND WORD
OF GOD.

But is

it so, that God the Father, from
whom is born the Word that is God of God,
is it so, then, that God the Father, in respect to that wisdom which He is to Himself,
has learned some things by His bodily senses,
and others by Himself ? Who could say this,
who thinks of God, not as a rational animal,
but as One above the rational soul ?
So far
at least as He can be thought of, by those
who place Him above all animals and all
souls, although they see Him by conjecture
through a glass and in an enigma, not yet
face to face as He is.
Is it that God the
Father has learned those very things which

He knows, not by the body, for He has none,
but by Himself, from elsewhere from some
one ? or has stood in need of messengers or
witnesses that He might know them ?
Certainly not; since His own perfection enables
Him to know all things that He knows. No
doubt He has messengers, viz. the angels;
but not to announce to Him things that He
knows not, for there is nothing He does not
But their good lies in consulting the
know.
truth about their own works. And this it is
which is meant by saying that they bring Him
word of some things, not that He may learn
of them, but they of Him by His word withThey bring Him word,
out bodily sound.
too, of that which He wills, being sent by
Him to whomever He wills, and hearing all
from Him by that word of His, i.e. finding in
His truth what themselves are to do: what,
to whom, and when, they are to bring word.
For we too pray to Him, yet do not inform
" For your
Him what our necessities are.
Father knoweth," says His Word, "what
things ye have need of, before you ask Him." 1
Nor did He become acquainted with them, so
as to know them, at any definite time; but
He knew beforehand, without any beginning,
all things to come in time, and among them
also both what we should ask of Him, and
when; and to whom He would either listen
or not listen, and on what subjects. And
with respect to all His creatures, both spiritual and corporeal, He does not know them
because they are, but they are because He
For He was not ignorant of
knows them.
what He was about to create; therefore He
created because He knew; He did not know
because He created. Nor did He know them
when created in any other way than He knew
them when still to be created, for nothing accrued to His wisdom from them; but that
wisdom remained as it was, while they came
into existence as it was fitting and when it
So, too, it is written in the book
was fitting.
of Ecclesiasticus: "All things are known to
Him ere ever they were created: so also after
"So," he says, not
they were perfected."
otherwise; so were they known to Him, both
ere ever they were created, and after they
This knowledge, therefore,
were perfected.
is far unlike our knowledge. And the knowledge of God is itself also His wisdom, and
His wisdom is itself His essence or substance.
Because in the marvellous simplicity of that
nature, it is not one thing to be wise and another to be, but to be wise is to be; as we
have often said already also in the earlier
But our knowledge is in most things
books.

Matt. vi. 8.

2 Ecclus. xxiii. 20.

Chap. XV.]

ON THE TRINITY.

capable both of being lost and of being recovered, because to us to be is not the same as
to know or to be wise; since it is possible for
us to be, even although we know not, neither
are wise in that which we have learned from
Therefore, as our knowledge is
elsewhere.
unlike that knowledge of God, so is our word
also, which is born from our knowledge, unlike that Word of God which is born from the
essence of the Father.
should say. born from the Father's knowledge, from the Father's wisdom; or still more
exactly, from the Father who is knowledge,
from the Father who is wisdom.

And this is as if

CHAP. 14.

THE WORD OF GOD IS IN ALL
THINGS EQUAL TO THE FATHER, FROM WHOM
IT IS.
23. The Word of God, then, the only-begotten Son of the Father, in all things like
and equal to the Father, God of God, Light
of Light, Wisdom of Wisdom, Essence of Essence, is altogether that which the Father is,
yet is not the Father, because the one is Son,
the other is Father. And hence He knows
all that the Father knows; but to Him to
know, as to be, is from the Father, for to
know and to be is there one. And therefore,
as to be is not to the Father from the Son, so
neither is to know. Accordingly, as though
uttering Himself, the Father begat the Word
equal to Himself in all things; for He would
not have uttered Himself wholly and perfectly, if there were in His Word anything
And here
more or less than in Himself.
"
that is recognized in the highest sense,
Yea,
1 And therefore this Word
3'ea; nay, nay."
is truly truth, since whatever is in that knowledge from which it is born is also in itself,
and whatever is not in that knowledge is not
in the Word. And this Word can never have
anything false, because it
is unchangeable,
as He is from whom it is.
For "the Son can
do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth
the Father do." 2 Through power He cannot
do this; nor is it infirmity, but strength, by
Therefore God
which truth cannot be false.
the Father knows all things in Himself, knows
all things in the Son; but in Himself as
though Himself, in the Son as though His own
Word which Word is spoken concerning all
those things that are in Himself.
Similarly
the Son knows all things, viz. in Himself, as
things which are born of those which the
Father knows in Himself, and in the Father,
as those of which they are born, which the Son
The Father,
Himself knows in
then, and -the Son know mutually; but the

Himself.

1 Matt. v. 37.

2 John v. 19.

one by begetting, the other by being born.
And each of them sees simultaneously all
things that are in their knowledge, in their
wisdom, in their essence: not by parts or
singly, as though by alternately looking from
this side to that, and from that side to this,
and again from this or that object to this or
that object, so as not to be able to see some
things without at the same time not seeing
others; but, as I said, sees all things simultaneously, whereof there is not one that He
does not always see.

24. And that word, then, of ours which has
neither sound nor thought of sound, but is of
that thing in seeing which we speak inwardly,
and which therefore belongs to no tongue;
and hence is in some sort like, in this enigma,
to that Word of God which is also God; since
this too is born of our knowledge, in such
manner as that also is born of the knowledge
of the Father: such a word, I say, of ours,
which we find to be in some way like that
Word, let us not be slow to consider how unlike also it is, as it may be in our power to
utter it.

CHAP. 15.

HOW GREAT IS THE UNLIKENESS
BETWEEN OUR WORD AND THE DIVINE WORD.
OUR WORD CANNOT BE OR BE CALLED ETERNAL.

Is our word, then, born of our knowledge
only ? Do we not say many things also that
we do not know? And say them not with
doubt, but thinking them to be true; while if
perchance they are true
in respect to the
things themselves of which we speak, they
are yet not true in respect to our word, because a word is not true unless it is born of a
thing that is known.
In this sense, then, our
word is false, not when we lie, but when we
And when we doubt, our word
are deceived.
is not yet of the thing of which we doubt, but
it is a word concerning the doubt itself.
For
although we do not know whether that is true
of which we doubt, yet we do know that we
doubt; and hence, when we say we doubt, we
say a word that is true, for we say what we
know. And what, too, of its being possible
for us to lie ? And when we do, certainly we
both willingly and knowingly have a word that
is false, wherein there is a word that is true,
And when
viz. that we lie, for this we know.
we confess that we have lied, we speak that
which is true; for we say what we know, for
we know that we lied.
But that Word which
is God, and can do more than we, cannot do
can do nothing except what it
this.
"
sees the Father do;" and it
speaks not of
itself," but it has from the Father all that it

For it

"

[Book XV.

speaks, since the Father speaks it in a special
way; and the great might of that Word is
that it cannot lie, because there cannot be
there "yea and nay,"
1 but "yea yea, nay
Well, but that is not even to be called
nay."
a word, which is not true.
I willingly assent,
What, then, if our word is true,
if so it be.
and therefore is rightly called a word ?
Is it
the case that, as we can speak of sight of
sight, and knowledge of knowledge, so we can
speak of essence of essence, as that Word of
God is especially spoken of, and is especially
Because to us,
to be spoken of? Why so?
to be is not the same as to know; since we
know many things which in some sense live
by memory, and so in some sense die by
being forgotten; and so, when those things are
no longer in our knowledge, yet we still are;
and while our knowledge has slipped away and
perished out of our mind, we are still alive.

25. In respect to those things also which
are so known that they can never escape the
memory, because they are present, and belong to the nature of the mind itself,
as, e.g.,
the knowing that we are alive (for this continues so long as the mind continues; and because the mind continues always, this also
continues always);
I say, in respect to this
and to any other like instances, in which we
are the rather to contemplate the image of
God, it is difficult to make out in what way,
although they are always known, yet because
they are not always also thought of, an eternal word can be spoken respecting them, when
For it is
our word is spoken in our thought.
eternal to the soul to live; it is eternal to
know that it lives.
Yet it is not eternal to it
to be thinking of its own life, or to be thinking of its own knowledge of its own life; since,
in entering upon this or that occupation, it
will cease to think of this, although it does
not cease from knowing it. And hence it
comes to pass, that if there can be in the
mind any knowledge that is eternal, while the
thought of that knowledge cannot be eternal,
and any inner and true word of ours is only
said by our thought, then God alone can be
understood to have a Word that is eternal,
and co-eternal with Himself.
Unless, perhaps, we are to say that the very possibility
since that which is known is caof thought
pable of being truly thought, even at the time
when it
constitutes a
word as perpetual as the knowledge itself is
But how is that a word which is
perpetual.
not yet formed in the vision of the thought ?
How will it be like the knowledge of which it
is born, if it has not the form of that knowl-

is not being thought

edge, and is only now called a word because
For it is much as if one were
it can have it ?
to say that a word is to be so called because
But what is this that can
it can be a word.
be a word, and is therefore already held
worthy of the name of a word ?
What, I say,
is this thing that is formable, but not yet
formed, except a something in our mind,
which we toss to and fro by revolving it this
way or that, while we think of first one thing
and then another, according as they are found
by or occur to us ? And the true word then
comes into being, when, as I said, that which
we toss to and fro by revolving it arrives at
that which we know, and is formed by that,
in taking its entire likeness; so that in what
manner each thing is known, in that manner
also it is thought, i.e. is said in this manner
in the heart, without articulate sound, without thought of articulate sound, such as no
doubt belongs to some particular tongue.
And hence if we even admit, in order not to
dispute laboriously about a name, that this
something of our mind, which can be formed
from our knowledge, is to be already called
a word, even before it is so formed, because
it is, so to say, already formable, who would
not see how great would be the unlikeness between it and that Word of God, which is so
in the form of God, as not to have been formable before it was formed, or to have been
capable at any time of being formless, but isa simple form, and simply equal to Him from
whom it is, and with whom it
is wonderfully
co-eternal ?

CHAP. 1 6.

OUR WORD IS NEVER TO BE EQUALLED TO THE DIVINE WORD, NOT EVEN WHEN
WE SHALL BE LIKE GOD.
Wherefore that Word of God is in such
wise so called, as not to be called a thought
of God, lest we believe that there is anything
in God which can be revolved, so that it at
one time receives and at another recovers a
form, so as to be a word, and again can lose
that form and be revolved in some sense
Certainly that excellent master
formlessly.
of speech knew well the force of words, and
had looked into the nature of thought, who
said in his poem, "And revolves with himself
i.e. thinks of
the varying issues of war,"
That Son of God, then, is not called
them.
the Thought of God, but the Word of God.
For our own thought, attaining to what we
know, and formed thereby, is our true word.
And so the Word of God ought to be understood without any thought on the part of
God, so that it be understood as the simple

1 2 Cor. 1. 19.

2 JEn. x. 159, 160.

Chap. XVII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

form itself, but containing nothing formable
There are, inthat can be also unformed.
deed, passages of Holy Scripture that speak
of God's thoughts; but this is after the same
mode of speech by which the forgetfulness of
God is also there spoken of, whereas in strict
propriety of language there is in Him certainly no forgetfulness.

26. Wherefore, since we have found now
in this enigma so great an unlikeness to Cxod
and the Word of God, wherein yet there was
found before some likeness, this, too, must
be admitted, that even when we shall be like
Him, when "we shall see Him as He is'' 1
(and certainly he who said this was aware be3'ond doubt of our present unlikeness), not
even then shall we be equal to Him in nature.
For that nature which is made is ever less
And at that time
than that which makes.
our word will not indeed be false, because we
shall neither lie nor be deceived.
Perhaps,
too, our thoughts will.no longer revolve by
passing and repassing from one thing to an
other, but we shall see all our knowledge at
Still, when even
once, and at one glance.
this shall have come to pass, if indeed it shall
come to pass, the creature which was formable will indeed have been formed, so that
nothing will be wanting of that form to which
it ought to attain; yet nevertheless it will not
be to be equalled to that simplicity wherein
there is not anything formable, which has
been formed or re-formed, but only form;
and which being neither formless nor formed,
itself is eternal and unchangeable substance.

CHAP. 17. HOW THE HOLY SPIRIT IS CALLED
LOVE, AND WHETHER HE ALONE IS SO CALLED.
THAT THE HOLY SPIRIT IS IN THE SCRIPTURES
PROPERLY CALLED P-Y THE NAME OF LOVE.
27. We have sufficiently spoken of
the
Father and of the Son, so far as was possible
for us to see through this glass and in this
enigma. We must now treat of the Holy
Spirit, so far as by God's gift it is permitted
to see Him. And the Holy Spirit, according
to the Holy Scriptures,
the
Father alone, nor of the Son alone, but of
both; and so intimates to us a mutual love,
wherewith the Father and the Son reciprocally
But the language of the
love one another.
Word of God, in order to exercise us, has
caused those things to be sought into with the
greater zeal, which do not lie on the surface,
but are to be scrutinized in hidden depths,
The
and to be drawn out from thence.
Scriptures, accordingly, have not said, The
If they had said so,
Holy Spirit is Love.

is neither of

1 1 John iii. 2.

"

"

they would have done away with no small
But they have said,
part of this inquiry.
"God is love;"
2 so that it is uncertain? and
remains to be inquired whether God the
Father is love, or God the Son, or God the
Holy Ghost, or the Trinity itself which is
For we are not going to say that God
God.
is called Love because love itself is a substance worthy of the name of God, but because it is a gift of God, as it is said to God,
"Thou art my patience." 3
For this is not
said because our patience is God's substance,
but in that He Himself gives it to us; as it is
Since from Him is my
elsewhere read,
For the usage of words itself in
patience." 4
Scripture sufficiently refutes this interpreta-
" Thou art my patience
is of the
tion; for
same kind as "Thou, Lord, art my hope," 5
and " The Lord my God is my mercy/'
6 and
many like texts. And it is not said, O Lord
my love, or, Thou art my love, or, God my
" God is love," as it
love; but it is said thus,
is said, "God is a Spirit.''
7 And he who
does not discern this, must ask understanding
from the Lord, not an explanation from us;
for we cannot say anything more clearly.

"

"

28.

God," then,

is love;" but the question is, whether the Father, or the Son, or the
Holy Spirit, or the Trinity itself: because the
Trinity is not three Gods, but one God.
But
I have already argued above in this book,
that the Trinity, which is God, is not so to be
understood from those three things which
have been set forth in the trinity of our mind,
as that the Father should be the memory of
all three, and the Son the understanding of
all three, and the Holy Spirit the love of all
three; as though the Father should neither
understand nor love for Himself, but the Son
should understand for Him, and the Holy
Spirit love for Him, but He Himself should
remember only both for Himself and for them ;
nor the Son remember nor love for Himself,
but the Father should remember for Him,
and the Holy Spirit love for Him, but He
Himself understand only both for Himself
and them; nor likewise that the Holy Spirit
should neither remember nor understand for
Himself, but the Father should remember for
Him, and the Son understand for Him, while
He Himself should love only both for Himself and for them; but rather in this way, that
both all and each have all three each in His
own nature.
Nor that these things should
differ in them, as in us memory is one thing,
understanding another, love or charity another, but should be some one thing that is

2 1 John iv. 16.
4 Ps. lxii. 5.
6 Ps. lix. 17.

3 Ps. lxxi. S.
5 Ps. xci. 9.
7 John iv. 24.

2l6

equivalent to all, as wisdom itself; and should
be so contained in the nature of each, as that
He who has it is that which He has, as being
an unchangeable and simple substance.
If
all this, then, has been understood, and so
far as is granted to us to see or conjecture in
things so great, has been made patently true,
I know not why both the Father and the Son
and the Holy Spirit should not be called
Love, and all together one love, just as both
the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit
is called Wisdom, and all together not three,
For so also both the Father
but one wisdom.
is God, and the Son God, and the Floly Ghost
God, and all three together one God.

29. And yet it is not to no purpose that
in this Trinity the Son and none other is
called the Word of God, and the Holy Spirit
and none other the Gift of God, and God the
Father alone is He from whom the Word is
born, and from whom the Holy Spirit principally proceeds. And therefore I have added
the word principally, because we find that the
But
Holy Spirit proceeds from the Son also.
the Father gave Him this too, not as to one
already existing, and not yet having it; but
whatever He gave to the only-begotten Word,
Therefore He
He gave by begetting Him.
so begat Him as that the common Gift should
proceed from Him also, and the Holy Spirit
This distincshould be the Spirit of both.
tion, then, of the inseparable Trinity is not to
be merely accepted in passing, but to be carefully considered; for hence it was that the
Word of God was specially called also the
Wisdom of God, although both Father and
If, then, any one
Holy Spirit are wisdom.
of the three is to be specially called Love,
what more fitting than that it should be the
namely, that in that simple and
Holy Spirit ?
highest nature, substance should not be one
thing and love another, but that substance itself should be love, and love itself should be
substance, whether in the Father, or in the
Son, or in the Holy Spirit; and yet that the
Holy Spirit should be specially called Love.
30. Just as sometimes all the utterances
of the Old Testament together in the Holy
Scriptures are signified by the name of the
Law. For the apostle, in citing a text from the
" With divers
prophet Isaiah, where he says,
tongues and with divers lips will I speak to
It is written
this people," yet prefaced it by,
in the Law." x And the Lord Himself says,
"
It is written in their Law, They hated me
without a cause," - whereas this is read in the
Psalm. 3 And sometimes that which was given
by Moses is specially called the Law: as it is

"

[Rook XV.
" The Law and the Prophets were until
said,
" On these two commandments
John;" 4 and,
hang all the Law and the Prophets." 5
Here,
certainly, that is specially called the Law
which was from Mount Sinai. And the
Psalms, too, are signified under the name of
the Prophets; and yet in another place the
"
All things must needs
Saviour Himself says,
be fulfilled, which are written in the Law, and
Prophets, and "the Psalms concerning
the
Here, on the other side, He meant
me." 6
the name of Prophets to be taken as not inTherefore the Law with
cluding the Psalms.
the Prophets and thie Psalms taken together
is called the Law universally, and the Law is
also specially so called which was given by
Likewise the Prophets are so called
Moses.
in common together with the Psalms, and
they are also specially so called exclusive of
And many other instances
the
might be adduced to teach us, that many
names of things are both put universally, and
also specially applied to particular things,
were it not that a long discourse is to be
so
avoided in a plain case.
much, lest any one should think that it was
therefore unsuitable for us to call the Holy
Spirit Love, because both God the Father
and God the Son can be called Love.

I have said

Psalms.

"

31. As, then, we call the only Word of God
specially by the name of Wisdom, although
universally both the Holy Spirit and the
Father Himself is wisdom; so the Holy Spirit
is specially called by the name of Love, although universally both the Father and the
But the Word of God, i.e. the
Son are love.
Son of
God, is
expressly
only-begotten
called the Wisdom of God by the mouth of
the apostle, where he says,
Christ the power
But
of God, and the wisdom of God." 7
where the Holy Spirit is called Love, is to be
found by careful scrutiny of the language of
' BeJohn the apostle, who, after saying,
loved, let us love one another, for love is of
" And every one
God," has gone on to say,
that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God.
He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God
Here, manifestly, he has called
is love."
that love God, which he said was of God;
therefore God of God is love.
But because
both the Son is born of God the Father, and
the Holy Spirit proceeds from God the
Father, it is rightly asked which of them we
ought here to think is the rather called the
For the Father only is so
love that is God.
God as not to be of God; and hence the love
that is so God as to be of God, is either the
But when, in what
Son or the Holy Spirit.

1 Isa. xxviii, n and 1 Cor. xiv. 21.
2 John xv. 25.

3 Ps. xxxv. 19.

4 Matt. xi. 13.
6 Luke xxiv. 44.

5 Matt. xxii. 40.
7 1 Cor. i. 24.

Chap. XIX.]

ON THE TRINITY.

"

follows, the apostle had mentioned the love
of God, not that by which we love Him, but
that by which He "
loved us, and sent His
1 and
Son to be a propitiator for our sins,"
thereupon had exhorted us also to love one
another, and that so God would abide in us,
because, namely, he had called God Love;
immediately, in his wish to speak yet more
expressly on the subject,
Hereby," he says,
" know we that we dwell in Him, and He in
us, because He hath given us of His Spirit."
Therefore the Holy Spirit, of whom He hath
given us, makes us to abide in God, and Him
in us; and this it is that love does.
Therefore He is the God that is love.
Lastly, a
little after, when he had repeated the same
thing, and had said "God is love." he im5 ' And he who abideth
mediately subjoined,
in love, abideth in God, and God abideth in
him;" whence he had said above, "Hereby
we know that we abide in Him, and He in us,
because He hath given us of His Spirit/' He
therefore is signified, where we read that God
Therefore God the Holy Spirit, who
is love.
proceedeth from the Father, when He has
been given to man, inflames him to the love
of God and of his neighbor, and is Himself
For man has not whence to love God,
love.
unless from God; and therefore he says a litLet us love Him, because He first
tle after,
loved us." 2 The Apostle Paul, too, says,
" The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts
by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us." 3

"

CHAP. 18.

NO GIFT OF GOD IS MORE EXCEL-

LENT THAN LOVE.

32. There is no gift of God more excellent
than this.
It alone distinguishes the sons of
the eternal kingdom and the sons of eternal
Other gifts, too, are given by the
perdition.
Holy Spirit; but without love they profit nothUnless, therefore, the Holy Spirit is so
ing.
far imparted to each, as to make him one who
loves God and his neighbor, he is not removed from the left hand to the right.
Nor
is the Spirit specially called the Gift, unless
on account of love. And he who has not this
love, "though he speak with the tongues of
men and angels, is sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal; and though he have the gift of
prophecy, and know all mysteries and all
knowledge, and though he have all faith, so
that he can remove mountains, he is nothing;
and though he bestow all his goods to feed
the poor, and though he give his body to be
profiteth him nothing." 4 How
burned, it
great a good, then,
is that without which

goods so great bring no one to eternal life !
But love or charity itself,
for they are two
names for one thing,
if he have it that does
not speak with tongues, nor has the gift of
prophecy, nor knows all mysteries and all
knowledge, nor gives all his goods to the
poor, either because he has none to give or
because some necessity hinders, nor delivers
his body to be burned, if no trial of such a
suffering overtakes him, brings that man to
the kingdom, so that faith itself is only rendered profitable by love, since faith without
love can indeed exist, but cannot profit. And
therefore also the Apostle Paul says, "In
Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith thatwork-
" 5 so distinguishing it from that
eth by love:
faith by which even "the devils believe and
Love, therefore, which is of God
tremble." 6
and is God, is specially the Holy Spirit, by
whom the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts, by which love the whole Trinity dwells
in us. And therefore most rightly is the Holy
Spirit, although He is God, called also the
gift of God. 7 And by that gift what else can
properly be understood except love, which
brings to God, and without which any other
gift of God whatsoever does not bring to God ?

CHAP. 19.

THE HOLY SPIRIT IS CALLED THE
GIFT OF GOD IN THE SCRIPTURES.
BY THE
GIFT OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IS MEANT THE
THE HOLY
GIFT WHICH IS THE HOLY SPIRIT.
SPIRIT IS SPECIALLY CALLED LOVE, ALTHOUGH
NOT ONLY THE HOLY SPIRIT IN THE TRINITY
IS LOVE.

"

32,. Is this too to be proved, that the Holy
Spirit is called in the sagred books the gift of
God ?
If people look for this too, we have in
the Gospel according to John the words of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who says,
If any one
thirst, let him come to me and drink: he that
believeth on me, as the Scripture saith, out of
his belly shall flow rivers of living water."
And the evangelist has gone on further to
" And this He spake of the Spirit, which
add,
they should receive who believe in Him." 8
And hence Paul the apostle also says, "And
we have all been made to drink into one
The question then
is, whether
Spirit." 9
that water is called the gift of God which is
But as we find here that
the Holy Spirit.
this water is the Holy Spirit, so we find elsewhere in the Gospel itself that this water is
For when the same
called the gift of God.
Lord was talking with the woman of Samaria
Give me
at the well, to whom He had said,

"

1 John
3 Rom.

- 1 John iv. 7-19.
4 1 Cor. xih. i-s.

5 Gal. v. 6.
8 John vii. 37-39.

Jas. ii. 19.
9 1 Cor. xii.

7 Acts viii. 20.

2l8

[Book XV.

"

"

"

"

to drink," and she had answered that the
Jews "have no dealings
'' with the Samaritans, Jesus answered and said unto her,
If
thou hadst known the gift of God, and who it
is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou
wouldest have asked of Him, and He would
The woman
have given thee living water.
saith unto Him, Sir, thou hast nothing to
draw with, and the well is deep: whence then
Jesus anhast thou this living water, etc. ?
swered and said unto her, Every one that
drinketh of this water shall thirst again; but
whoso shall drink of the water that I shall
give him, shall never thirst; but the water
that I shall give him, shall be in him a fountain of water springing up unto eternal life.'' *
Because this living water, then, as the evangelist has explained to us, is the Holy Spirit,
without doubt the Spirit is the gift of God, of
which the Lord says here,
If thou hadst
known the gift of God, and who it
is that
saith unto thee, Give me to
drink, thou
wouldest have asked of Him, and He would
For that
have given thee living water."
Out of his belly
which is in the one passage,
shall flow rivers of living water," is in the
shall be in him a fountain of water
other,
springing up unto eternal life."

34. Paul the apostle also says, "To each
of us is given grace according to the measure
of the gift of Christ;" and then, that he
might show that by the gift of Christ he meant
the Holy Spirit, he has gone on to add,
" Wherefore He saith, He hath ascended up
on high, He hath led captivity captive, and
hath given gifts to men." 2 And everyone
knows that the Lord Jesus, when He had ascended into heaven after the resurrection
from the dead, gave the Holy Spirit, with
whom they who believed were filled, and
And
spake with the tongues of all nations.
let no one object that he says gifts, not gift:
for he quoted the text from the Psalm. And
" Thou hast asin the Psalm it is read thus,
cended up on high. Thou hast led captivity
captive, Thou hast received gifts in men.'' 3
For so it stands in many mss., especially in
the Greek mss. , and so we have it translated
from the Hebrew.
therefore
But
said gifts, as the prophet did, not gift.
" Thou hast rewhereas the prophet said,
ceived gifts in men,'' the apostle has pre-
" He gave gifts to men: " and
ferred saying,
this in order that the fullest sense may be
gathered from both expressions, the one prophetic, the other apostolic; because both posFor
sess the authority of a divine utterance.
both are true, as well that He gave to men,

The apostle

1 John iv. 7-14.

2 Eph. iv. 7, 8.

3 Ps. lxviii. 18.

"

"

"

as that He received in men. He gave to
men, as the head to His own members: He
Himself that gave, received in men, no doubt
as in His own members; on account of which,
namely, His own members, He cried from
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
heaven,
me?" 4 And of which, namely, His own
members, He says,
Since ye have done it to
one of the least of these that are mine, ye
have done it unto me." 5
Christ Himself,
therefore, both gave from heaven and received on earth. And further, both prophet
and apostle have said gifts for this reason,
because many gifts, which are proper to each,
are divided in common to all the members of
Christ, by the Gift, which is the Holy Spirit.
For each severally has not all, but some have
these and some have those; although all have
the Gift itself by which that which is proper
to each is divided to Him, i.e. the Holy
For elsewhere also, when he had
Spirit.
mentioned many gifts,
All these," he says,
"
worketh that one and the self-same Spirit,
dividing to each severally as He will.'' 6 And
this word is found also in the Epistle to the
" God also bearHebrews, where it is written,
ing witness both with signs and wonders, and
with divers miracles, and gifts
7 of the Holy
Ghost." 8 And so here, when he had said,
" He ascended up on high, He led captivity
captive, He gave gifts to men," he says furBut that He ascended, what is it but
ther,
that He also first descended into the lower
parts of the earth ? He who descended is the
same also that ascended up far above all
heavens, that He might fill all things.
And
He gave some apostles, some prophets, and
some evangelists, and some pastors and doc-
(This we see is the reason why gifts
tors.''
are spoken of; because, as he says elsewhere,
" Are all apostles ? are all prophets ?
etc.)
" For the perfecting
And here he has added,
of the saints, for the work of the ministry,
for the building up of the body of Christ." IO
This is the house which, as the Psalm sings,
since the
is built up after the captivity;
house of Christ, which house is called His
Church, is built up of those who have been
rescued from the devil, by whom they were
But He Himself led this capheld captive.
And
tivity captive, who conquered the devil.
that he might not draw with him into eternal
punishment those who were to become the
members of the Holy Head, He bound him
first by the bonds of righteousness, and then
The devil himself, thereby those of might.

" 9

"

4 Acts ix. 4.
6 1 Cor. xii. 11.
8 Heb. ii. 4.
10 Eph. iv. 7-12.

5 Matt. xxv. 40.
7 Distributionibus.
9 1 Cor. xii. 29.
11 Ps. exxvi. 1.

Chap. XIX.]

ON THE TRINITY.

"

"

"

fore, is called captivity, which He led captive
who ascended up on high, and gave gifts to
men, or received gifts in men.

35. And Peter the apostle, as we read in
that canonical book, wherein the Acts of the
when the hearts of
Apostles are recorded,
the Jews were troubled as he spake of Christ,
Brethren, what shall we do?
and they said,
said to them, "Repent, and be
tell us,"
baptized every one of you in the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins:
and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
1 And we read likewise in the same
Spirit."
book, that Simon Magus desired to give
money to the apostles, that he might receive
power from them, whereby the Holy Spirit
might be given by the laying on of his hands.
And the same Peter said to him,
Thy money
perish with thee: because thou hast thought
to purchase for money the gift of God." 2
And in another place of the same book, when
Peter was speaking to Cornelius, and to those
who were with him, and was announcing and
While
preaching Christ, the Scripture says,
Peter was still speaking these words, the Holy
Spirit fell upon all them that heard the word;
and they of the circumcision that believed, as
many as came with Peter, were astonished,
because that upon the Gentiles also the gift of
For they
the Holy Spirit was poured out.
heard them speak with tongues, and magnify
God." 3 And when Peter afterwards was giving an account to the brethren that were at
Jerusalem of this act of his, that he had baptized those who were not circumcised, because the Holy Spirit, to cut the knot of the
question, had come upon them before they
were baptized, and the brethren at Jerusalem
were moved when they heard it, he says,
" And when I beafter the rest of his words,
gan to speak to them, the Holy Spirit fell
upon them, as upon us in the beginning.
And I remembered the word of the Lord,
how He said, that John indeed baptized with
water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy
If, therefore, He gave a like gift to
Spirit.
them, as also to us who believed in the Lord
Jesus Christ, who was I, that I could hinder
God from giving to them the Holy Spirit ?
And there are many other testimonies of the
Scriptures, which unanimously attest that the
Holy Spirit is the gift of God, in so far as He
is given to those who by Him love God.
But
it is too long a task to collect them all. And
what is enough to satisfy those who are not
satisfied with those we have alleged ?

'' 4

36. Certainly they must be warned, since
they now see that the Holy Spirit is called

"

the gift of God, that when they hear of
the
gift of the Holy Spirit,'' they should recognize therein that mode of speech which is
found in the words, "In the spoiling of the
For as the body of the
body of the flesh." 5
flesh is nothing else but the flesh, so the gift
of the Holy Spirit is nothing else but the
Holy Spirit. He is then the gift of God, so
far as He is given to those to whom Fie is
But in Himself He is God, although
given.
He were given to no one, because He was
God co- eternal with the Father and the Son
before He was given to any one.
Nor is He
less than they, because they give, and He is
For He is given as a gift of God in
given.
such way that He Himself also gives Himself
For He cannot be said not to
as being God.
be in His own power, of whom it
is said,
" The Spirit bloweth where it listeth;"
6 and
the apostle says, as I have already mentioned
above, "All these things worketh that selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally
as He will." We have not here the creating
of Him that is given, and the rule of them
that give, but the concord of the given and
the givers.

37. Wherefore, if Holy Scripture proclaims
that God is love, and that love is of God, and
works this in us that we abide in God and He
in us, and that hereby we know this, because
He has given us of His Spirit, then the Spirit
Himself is God, who is love.
Next, if there
be among the gifts of God none greater than
love, and there is no greater gift of God than
the Holy Spirit, what follows more naturally
than that He is Himself love, who is called
both God and of God ? And if the love by
which the Father loves the Son, and the Son
loves the Father, ineffably demonstrates the
communion of both, what is more suitable
than that He should be specially called love,
who is the Spirit common to both ?
For this
is the sounder thing both to believe and to
understand, that the Holy Spirit is not alone
love in that Trinity, yet is not specially called
love to no purpose, for the reasons we have
alleged; just as He is not alone in that Trinity either a Spirit or holy, since both the
Father is a Spirit, and the Son is a Spirit;
and both the Father is holy, and the Son is
as piety doubts not. And yet it is not
holy,
to no purpose that He is specially called the
Holy Spirit; for because He is common to
both, He is specially called that which both
are in common.
Otherwise, if in that Trinity the Holy Spirit alone is love, then doubtless the Son too turns out to be the Son, not
of the Father only, but also of the Holy

1 Acts ii. 37, 38.
3 Acts x. 44, 46.

- Acts viii. 18-20.
4 Acts xi. 15-17.

5 Col. 11. IT.

6 John iii. 6.

[Book XV.

it

"

; but He says,

For He is both said and read in
Spirit.
countless places to be so,
the only-begotten
Son of God the Father; as that what the apos-
" Who
tle says of God the Father is true too:
hath delivered us from the power of darkness,
and hath translated us into the kingdom of
the Son of His own love." 1 He did not say,
If He had so said, He
"of His own Son.''
would have said it most truly, just as He did
say it most truly, because He has often said
the Son of His own love."
Therefore He is the Son also of the Holy
Spirit, if there is in that Trinity no love in
And if this is
God except the Holy Spirit.
most absurd, it remains that the Holy Spirit
is not alone therein love, but is 'specially so
called for the reasons I have sufficiently set
forth; and that the words, "Son of His own
love," mean nothing else than His own bethe Son, in short, of His own
loved Son,
For the love in the Father, which
substance.
is in His ineffably simple nature, is nothing
else than His very nature and substance itself,
as we have already often said, and are not
ashamed of often repeating. And hence the
"Son of His love," is none other than He
who is born of His substance.

CHAP. 20.

AGAINST EUNOMIUS, SAYING THAT
THE SON OF GOD IS THE SON, NOT OF HIS
NATURE, BUT OF HIS WILL.
EPILOGUE TO
WHAT HAS BEEN SAID ALREADY.

38. Wherefore the logic of Eunomius, from
whom the Eunomian heretics sprang, is ridicFor when he could not understand,
ulous.
and would not believe, that the only-begotten
Word of God, by which all things were made,
is the Son of God by nature,
i.e. born of the
he alleged that He
substance of the Father,
was not the Son of His own nature or substance or essence, but the Son of the will of
God; so as to mean to assert that the will by
which he begat the Son was something accidental [and optional] to God,
to wit, in that
way that we ourselves sometimes will something which before we did not will, as though
it was not for these very things that our nature is perceived to be changeable,
a thing
which far be it from us to believe of God.
"
For it is written,
Many are the thoughts in
the heart of man, but the counsel of the Lord
2 for no other reason except
abideth for ever,"
that we may understand or believe that as
God is eternal, so is His counsel for eternity,
and therefore unchangeable, as He himself is.
And what is said of thoughts can most truly
be said also of the will: there are many wills
in the heart of man, but the will of the Lord

abideth for ever.
Some, again, to escape
saying that the only-begotten Word is the Son
of the counsel or will of God, have affirmed
the same Word to be the counsel or will itself
But it is better in my judgof the Father.
ment to say counsel of counsel, and will of
will, as substance of substance, wisdom of
wisdom, that we may not be led into that absurdity, which we have refuted already, and
say that the Son makes the Father wise or
willing, if the Father has not in His own subIt was certainly
stance either counsel or will.
a sharp answer that somebody gave to the
heretic, who most subtly asked him whether
God begat the Son willingly or unwillingly, in
order that if he said unwillingly, it would follow most absurdly that God was miserable;
but if willingly, he would forthwith infer, as
though by an invincible reason, that at which
he was aiming, viz. that He was the Son, not
of His nature, but of His will.
But that
other, with great wakefulness, demanded of
him in turn, whether God the Father was God
willingly or unwillingly; in order that if he
answered unwillingly, that misery would follow, which to believe of God is sheer madness; and if he said willingly, it would be replied to him, Then He is God too by His own
What remained,
will, not by His nature.
then, except that he should hold his peace,
and discern that he was himself bound by his
own question in an insoluble bond ?
But if
any person in the Trinity is also to be specially called the will of God, this name, like
love, is better suited to the Holy Spirit; for
what else is love, except will ?

39. I see that my argument in this book
respecting the Holy Spirit, according to the
Holy Scripture, is quite enough for faithful
men who know already that the Holy Spirit
is God, and not of another substance, nor less
than the Father and the Son,
as we have
shown to be true in the former books, according to the same Scriptures. We have reasoned
also from the creature which God made, and,
as far as we could, have warned those who
demand a reason on such subjects to behold
and understand His invisible things, so far as
they could, by those things which are made, 3
and especially by the rational or intellectual
creature which is made after the image of
God; through which glass, so to say, they
might discern as far as they could, if they
could, the Trinity which is God, in our own
Which three
memory, understanding, will.
things, if any one intelligently regards as by
nature divinely appointed in his own mind,
and remembers by memory, contemplates by

1 Col.

2 Prov. xix. 21.

3 Rom. i. 20.

Chap. XXII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

understanding, embraces by love, how great
a thing that is in the mind, whereby even the
eternal and unchangeable nature can be recollected, beheld, desired, doubtless that man
finds an image of that highest Trinity. And
he ought to refer the whole of his life to the
remembering, seeing,
highest
Trinity, in order that he may recollect, conBut I have
template, be delighted by it.
far as seemed sufficient,
warned him, so
that he must not so compare this image thus
wrought by that Trinity, and by his own fault
changed for the worse, to that same Trinity
as to think it in all points like to it, but rather
that he should discern in that likeness, of
whatever sort it be, a great unlikeness also.

loving

that

CHAP. 21.

OF THE LIKENESS OF THE FATHER
AND OF THE SON ALLEGED TO BE IN OUR
MEMORY AND UNDERSTANDING.
OF THE
LIKENESS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN OUR WILL
OR LOVE.

40. I have undoubtedly taken pains so far
as I could, not indeed so that the thing might
be seen face to face, but that it might be seen
by this likeness in an enigma, 1 in how small
a degree soever, by conjecture, in our memory and understanding, to intimate God the
Father and God the Son: i.e. God the begetter, who has in some way spoken by His
own co-eternal Word all things that He has
in His substance; and God His Word Himself, who Himself has nothing either more or
less in substance than is in Him, who, not
lyingly but truly, hath begotten the Word;
and I have assigned to memory everything
that we know, even if we were not thinking
of it, but to understanding the formation after
a certain special mode of the thought.
For we
are usually said to understand what, by thinking of it, we have found to be true; and this
it is again that we leave in the memory.
But
that is a still more hidden depth of our memory, wherein we found this also first when we
thought of it, and wherein an inner word is
begotten such as belongs to no tongue,
as it
were, knowledge of knowledge, vision of
vision, and understanding which appears in
[reflective] thought; of understanding which
had indeed existed before in the memory, but
was latent there, although, unless the thought
itself had also some sort of memory of its
own, it would not return to those things which
it had left in the memory while it turned to
think of other things.

41. But I have shown nothing in

this
enigma respecting the Holy Spirit such as
might appear to be like Him, except our own

1 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

Further, if

will, or love, or affection, which is a stronger
will, since our will which we have naturally is
variously affected, according as various objects are adjacent or occur to it, by which we
are attracted or offended.
What, then, is
Are we to say that our will, when it is
this ?
right, knows not what to desire, what to
avoid ?
it knows, doubtless then
it has a kind of knowledge of its own, such as
cannot be without memory and understandOr are we to listen to any one who
ing.
should say that love knows not what it does,
which does not do wrongly ?
As, then, there
are both understanding and love in that primary memory wherein we find provided and
stored up that to which we can come in
thought, because we find
those two
things there, when we find by thinking that
we both understand and love anything; which
things were there too when we were not thinking of them: and as there are memory and
love in that understanding, which is formed
by thought, which true word we say inwardly
without the tongue of any nation when we
say what we know; for
the gaze of our
thought does not return to anything except
by remembering it, and does not care to return unless by loving it: so love, which combines the vision brought about in the memory, and the vision of the thought formed
thereby, as if parent and offspring, would not
know what to love rightly unless it had a
knowledge of what it desired, which it cannot
have without memory and understanding.

also

CHAP. 22. HOW GREAT THE UNLIKENESS IS BETWEEN THE IMAGE OF THE TRINITY WHICH
WE HAVE FOUND IN OURSELVES, AND THE
TRINITY ITSELF.

For it is

42. But since these are in one person, as
man is, some one may say to us, These three
things, memory, understanding, and love, are
mine, not their own; neither do they do that
which they do for themselves, but for me, or
I who rerather I do it by them.
member by memory, and understand by understanding, and love by love: and when I
direct the mind's eye to my memory, and so
say in my heart the thing I know, and a true
word is begotten of my knowledge, both are
mine, both the knowledge certainly and the
For it is I who know, and it is I who
word.
say in my heart the thing I know. And when
I come to find in my memory by thinking
that I understand and love anything, which
understanding and love were there plso beis my own underfore I thought thereon, it
standing and my own love that I find in my
own memory, whereby it is I that understand,

[Book XV.

and I that love, not those things themselves.
Likewise, when my thought is mindful, and
wills to return to those things which it had
left in the memory, and to understand and
behold them, and say them inwardly, it is my
own memory that is mindful, and it
is my
own, not its will, wherewith it wills. When
my very love itself, too, remembers and understands what it ought to desire and what to
avoid, it remembers by my, not by its own
memory; and understands that which it intelligently loves by my, not by its own, underIn brief, by all these three things,
standing.
I that remember, I that understand, I
it
that love, who am neither memory, nor understanding, nor love, but who have them. These
things, then, can be said by a single person,
which has these three, but is not these three.
But in the simplicity of that Highest Nature,
which is God, although there is one God, there
are three persons, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit.

is

CHAP. 23.

AUGUSTIN DWELLS STILL FURTHER
ON THE DISPARITY BETWEEN THE TRINITY
WHICH IS IN MAN, AND THE TRINITY WHICH
THE TRINITY IS NOW SEEN THROUGH
IS GOD.
A GLASS BY THE HELP OF FAITH, THAT IT MAY
HEREAFTER BE MORE CLEARLY SEEN IN THE
PROMISED SIGHT FACE TO FACE.
43. A thing itself, then, which is a trinity
is different from the image of a trinity in
some other thing; by reason of which image,
at the same time that also in which these
three things are is called an image; just as
both the panel, and the picture painted on it,
are at the same time called an image; but by
reason of the picture painted on it, the panel
also is called bv the name of ima^e.
But in
that Highest Trinity, which is incomparably
above all things, there is so great an indivisibility, that whereas a trinity of men cannot
be called one man, in that, there both is said
to be and is one God, nor is that Trinity in
one God, but it is one God.
Nor, again, as
that image in the case of man has these three
things but is one person, so is
it with the
Trinity; but therein are three persons, the
Father of the Son, and the Son of the Father,
and the Spirit of both Father and Son.
For
although the memory in the case of man, and
especially that memory which beasts have
viz. the memory by which things intellinot
gible are so contained as that they have not
entered that memory through the bodily
has in this image of the Trinity, in
senses 1

likeness

proportion to its own small measure, a likeness of the Father, incomparably unequal,
yet of some sort, whatever it be: and likewise
the understanding in the case of man, which
by the purpose of the thought is formed
thereby, when that which is known is said,
and there is a word of the heart belonging to
its own great disparity
no tongue, has in
some likeness of the Son; and love in the case
of man proceeding from knowledge, and combining memory and understanding, as though
common to parent and offspring, whereby it
is understood to be neither parent nor offspring, has in that image, some, however exof the Holy
ceedingly unequal,
is nevertheless not the case, that,
Spirit: it
as in that image of the Trinity, these three
are not one man, but belong to one man, so
in the Highest Trinity itself, of which this is
an image, these three belong to one God, but
they are one God, and these are three persons, not one. A thing certainly wonderfully
ineffable, or ineffably wonderful, that while
this image of the Trinity is one person, but
the Highest Trinity itself is three persons,
yet that Trinity of three persons is more inFor that [Trindivisible than this of one.
ity], in the nature of the Divinity, or perhaps
is, and is mubetter Deity, is that which it
tually and always unchangeably equal: and
there was no time when it was not, or when it
was otherwise; and there will be no time when
it will not be, or when it will be otherwise.
But these three that are in the inadequate
image, although they are not separate
in
place, for they are not bodies, yet are now in
this life mutually separate in magnitude.
For that there are therein no several bulks,
does not hinder our seeing that memory is
greater than understanding in one man, but
the contrary in another; and that in yet another these two are overpassed by the greatness of love; and this whether the two themselves are or are not equal to one another.
And so each two by each" one, and each one
by each two, and each one by each one: the
And when
less are surpassed by the greater.
they have been healed of all infirmity, and
are mutually equal, not even then will that
thing which by grace will not be changed, be
made equal to that which by nature cannot
creature cannot be
change,
equalled to the Creator, and when it shall be
healed from all infirmity, will be changed.

because the

44. But when the sight shall have come
which is promised anew to us face to face, we

1 [The reader will observe that Augustin has employed the
term " memory" in a wider sense than in the modern ordinary
use. With him, it is the mind as including all that is potential or
latent in it. The innate ideas, in this use, are laid up in the

"
memory," and called into consciousness or "remembered" by
reflection. The idea of God, for example, is not in the " memory"
when not elicited by reflection. The same is true of the ideas of
space and time, etc. W. G. T, S.]

Chap. XXVI.]

ON THE TRINITY.

22'

shall see this not only incorporeal but also
absolutely indivisible and truly unchangeable
Trinity far more clearly and certainly than we
now see its image which we ourselves are:
and yet they who see through this glass and
in this enigma, as it is permitted in this life
to see, are not those who behold in their own
mind the things which we have set in order
and pressed upon them; but those who see
this as if an image, so as to be able to refer
what they see, in some way be it what it may,
to Him whose image it
is, and to see that
also by conjecturing, which they see through
the image by beholding, since they cannot
For the apostle does
yet see face to face.
not say, We see now a glass, but, We see now
through a glass.

CHAP. 24.

THE INFIRMITY OF THE HUMAN

MIND.
They, then, who see their own mind, in
whatever way that is possible, and in it that
Trinity of which I have treated as I could in
many ways, and yet do not believe or understand it to be an image of God, see indeed a
glass, but do not so far see through the glass
Him who is now to be seen through the glass,
that they do not even know the glass itself
which they see to be a glass, i.e. an image.
And if they knew this, perhaps they would
feel that He too whose glass this is, should
by it be sought, and somehow provisionally
be seen, an unfeigned faith purging their
2 that He who is now seen through a
hearts,
glass may be able to be seen face to face.
And if they despise this faith that purifies the
heart, what do they accomplish by understanding the most subtle disputes concerning
the nature of the human mind, unless that
they be condemned also by the witness of
their own understanding? And they would
in understanding, and
certainly not so fail
hardly arrive at anything certain, were they
not involved in penal darkness, and burdened
with the corruptible body that presses down
And for what demerit save that
the soul. 3
Whereof sin is this evil inflicted on them ?
fore, being warned by the magnitude of so
great an evil, they ought to follow the Lamb
that taketh away the sins of the world. 4

CHAP. 25 .

THE QUESTION WHY THE HOLY SPIRIT
IS NOT BEGOTTEN, AND HOW HE PROCEEDS
FROM THE FATHER AND THE SON, WILL ONLY
BE UNDERSTOOD WHEN WE ARE IN BLISS.
For if any belong to Him, although far
duller in intellect than those, yet when they
are freed from the body at the end of this
life, the envious powers have no right to hold

1 Cor. xiii. 12.
3 Wisd. ix. 15.

2 1 Tim. i. 5.
4 John i. 29.

For that Lamb that was slain by them
them.
without any debt of sin has conquered them;
but not by the might of power before He had
And
done so by the righteousness of blood.
free accordingly from the power of the devil,
they are borne up by holy angels, being set
free from all evils by the mediator of God
and men, the man Christ Jesus. 5
Since by
the harmonious testimony of the Divine
Scriptures, both Old and New, both those by
which Christ was foretold, and those by which
He was announced, there is no other name
under heaven whereby men must be saved. 6
And when purged from all contagion of corruption, they are placed in peaceful abodes
until they take their bodies again, their own,
but now incorruptible, to adorn, not to burden
For this is the will of the best and
them.
most wise Creator, that the spirit of a man,
when piously subject to God, should have a
body happily subject, and that this happiness
should last for ever.

45. There we shall see the truth without
any difficulty, and shall enjoy it to the full,
Nor shall we
most clear and most certain.
be inquiring into anything by a mind that
reasons, but shall discern by a mind that contemplates, why the Holy Spirit is not a Son,
although He proceeds from the Father.
In
that light there will be no place for inquiry:
but here, by experience itself it has appeared
to me so difficult,
as beyond doubt it will
likewise appear to them also who shall carefully and intelligently read what I have writthat although in the second book 7 I
ten,
promised that I would speak thereof in another place, yet as often as I have desired to
illustrate it by the creaturely image of it which
we ourselves are, so often, let my meaning be
of what sort it might, did adequate utterance
entirely fail me; nay, even in my very meanfelt that I had attained to endeavor
ing I
I had indeed
rather than accomplishment.
found in one person, such as is a man, an image of that Highest Trinity, and had desired,
especially in the ninth book, to illustrate and
render more intelligible the relation of the
Three Persons by that which is subject to
But three things belonging
time and change.
to one person cannot suit those Three Persons, as man's purpose demands; and this we
have demonstrated in this fifteenth book.

CHAP. 26.

THE HOLY SPIRIT TWICE GIVEN BY
CHRIST. THE PROCESSION OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
FROM THE FATHER AND FROM THE SON IS
APART FROM TIME, NOR CAN HE BE CALLED
THE SON OF BOTH.
Further, in that Highest Trinity which is
6 Acts iv. 12.
5 1 Tim. ii.

5.

[Book XV.

"

at

least

God, there are- no intervals of time, by which
it could be shown, or
inquired,
whether the Son was born of the Father first,
and then afterwards the Holy Spirit proceeded from both; since Holy Scripture calls
For it is He of whom
Him the Spirit of both.
But because ye are sons,
the apostle says,
God hath sent forth the Spirit of His Son into
your hearts:" * and it is He of whom the same
*' For it is not ye who speak, but
Son says,
the Spirit of your Father who speaketh in
2 And it is proved by many other tesyou."
timonies of the Divine Word, that the Spirit,
who is specially called in the Trinity the Holy
Spirit, is of the Father and of the Son: of
" Whom
whom likewise the Son Himself says,
I will send unto you from the Father;" 3 and
" Whom the Father will send
in another place,
in my name." 4 And we are so taught that
He proceeds from both, because the Son
Himself says, He proceeds from the Father.
And when He had risen from the dead, and
" He breathed
had appeared to His disciples,
upon them, and said, Receive the Holy
Ghost," s so as to show that He proceeded also
from Himself. And Itself is that very "power
that went out from Him,'' as we read in the
Gospel, "and healed them all." 6

46. But the reason why, after His resurrection, He both gave the Holy Spirit, first on
earth, 7 and afterwards sent Him from heaven,
is in my judgment this: that "love is shed
abroad in our hearts," 9 by that Gift itself,
whereby we love God and our neighbors, according to those two commandments, "on
which hang all the law and the prophets.-"
And Jesus Christ, in order to signify this,
gave to them the Holy Spirit, once upon
earth, on Recount of the love of our neighbor,
and a second time from heaven, on account
And if some other reaof the love of God.
son may perhaps be given for this double gift
of the Holy Spirit, at any rate we ought not
to doubt that the same Holy Spirit was given
when Jesus breathed upon them, of whom He
by and by says, "Go, baptize all nations in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Spirit," where this Trinity is especially commended to us.
It is therefore
He who was also given from heaven on the
day of Pentecost, i.e. ten days after the Lord
ascended into heaven.
How, therefore, is
He not God, who gives the Holy Spirit?
Nay, how great a God is He who gives God!
For no one of His disciples gave the Holy
Spirit, since they prayed that He might come

upon those upon whom they laid their hands:
they did not give Him themselves.
And the
Church preserves this custom even now in the
Lastly, Simon Magus
case of her rulers.
also, when he offered the apostles money,
does not say, "Give me also this power, that
I may give" the Holy Spirit; but, "that on
whomsoever I may lay my hands, he may reBecause neither had
ceive the Holy Spirit."
the Scriptures said before, And Simon, seeing
that the apostles gave the Holy Spirit; but it
had said," And Simon, seeing that the Holy
Spirit was given by the laying on of the apostles' hands." 11 Therefore also the Lord Jesus
Christ Himself not only gave the Holy Spirit
as God, but also received it as man, and
therefore He is said to be full of grace,
12 and
13 And in the Acts of the
of the Holy Spirit.
Apostles it is more plainly written of Him,
"
Because God anointed Him with the Holy
Certainly not with visible oil but
Spirit."
with the gift of grace which is signified by the
visible ointment wherewith the Church anoints
the baptized. And Christ was certainly not
then anointed with the Holy Spirit, when He,
as a dove, descended upon Him at His bapFor at that time He deigned to pretism. 15
figure His body, i.e. His Church, in which
receive the Holy
especially the
But He is to be understood to have
Spirit.
been then anointed with that mystical and invisible unction, when the Word of God was
i.e. when human nature, without
made flesh,
any precedent merits of good works, was
joined to God the Word in the womb of the
Virgin, so that with it it became one person.
Therefore it is that we confess Him to have
been born of the Floly Spirit and of the VirFor it is most absurd to believe
gin Mary.
Him to have received the Holy Spirit when
He was near thirty years old: for at that age
He was baptized by John; 17 but that He came
to baptism as without any sin at all, so not
without the Holy Spirit. For if it was written
of His servant and forerunner John himself,
" He shall be filled with the Holy Spirit, even
from his mother's womb," 18 because, although
generated by his father, yet he received the
Holy Spirit when formed in the womb; what
must be understood and believed of the man
Christ, of whose flesh the very conception was
Both natures, too,
not carnal, but spiritual ?
as well the human as the divine, are shown in
that also that is written of Him, that He received of the Father the promise of the Holy
Spirit, and shed forth the Holy Spirit:
19 seeing

baptized

' Gal. iv. 6.
3 John xv. 26.
5 John xx. 23.
7 John xx. 22.
9 Rom. v. 5.

2 Matt. x. 20.
4 John xiv. 26.
6 Luke vi. 19.
8 Acts ii. 4.
10 Matt. xxii. 37-40.

11 Acts viii. 18, 19.
T 3 Luke ii. 52 and iv. 1.
X S Matt. iii. 16.
'7 Luke iii. 21-23.

12 John i. 14.
M Acts x. 38.
16 John i. 14.
lS Luke i. 15.

*9Acts ii. 33.

Chap. XXVII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

its

that He received as man, and shed forth as
God. And we indeed can receive that gift
according to our small measure, but assuredly
we cannot shed it forth upon others; but,
that this may be done, we invoke over them
God, by whom this is accomplished.

47. Are we therefore able to ask whether
the Holy Spirit had already proceeded from
the Father when the Son was born, or had
not yet proceeded, and when He was born,
proceeded from both, wherein there is no
such thing as distinct times: just as we have
been able to ask, in a case where we do find
times, that the will proceeds from the human
mind first, in order that that may be sought
which, when found, may be called offspring;
which offspring being already brought forth
or born, that will is made perfect, resting in
this end, so that what had been its desire
love when enjoying;
when seeking, is
which love now proceeds from both, i.e. from
the mind that begets, and from the notion
that is begotten, as if from parent and offThese things it is absolutely imposspring ?
sible to ask in this case, where nothing is begun in time, so as to be perfected in a time
Wherefore let him who can unfollowing.
derstand the generation of the Son from the
Father without time, understand also the procession of the Holy Spirit from both without
time. And let him who can understand, in
" As the Father hath
that which the Son says,
life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son
to have life in Himself," ' not that the Father
gave life to the Son already existing without
life, but that He so begat Him apart from
time, that the life which the Father gave to
the Son by begetting Him is co-eternal with
the life of the Father who gave it:
2 let him,
I say, understand, that as the Father has in
Himself that the Holy Spirit should proceed
from Him, so has He given to the Son that
the same Holy Spirit should proceed from
Him, and be both apart from time: and that
the Holy Spirit is so said to proceed from the
Father as that it be understood that His proceeding also from the Son, is a property deFor if the
rived by the Son from the Father.
Son has of the Father whatever He has, then
certainly He has of the Father, that the Holy
But let no
Spirit proceeds also from Him.
one think of any times therein which imply a
sooner and a later; because these things are
How, then, would it not be
not there at all.
most absurd to call Him the Son of both:

1 John v. 26.
2 [Says Turrettin, III. xxix. 21.

" The Father does not generate
the Son either as previously existing, for in this case there would
be no need of generation ; nor yet as not yet existing, for in this
case the Son would not be eternal; but as cp-existing; because he
Is from eternity in the God-head." W. G. T. S.]

when, just as generation from the Father,
without any changeableness of nature, gives
to the Son essence, without beginning of time;
so procession from both, without any changeableness of nature, gives to the Holy Spirit
essence without beginning of time ? For while
we do not say that the Holy Spirit is begotten,
yet we do not therefore dare to say that He
is unbegotten, lest any one suspect in this
word either two Fathers in that Trinity, or
two who are not from another.
For the
Father alone is not from another, and therefore He alone is called unbegotten, not indeed in the Scriptures, 3 but in the usage of
disputants, who employ such language as
they can on so great a subject. And the Son
is born of the Father; and the Holy Spirit
proceeds from the Father principally, the
Father giving the procession without any interval of time, yet in common from both
But He would be called
[Father and Son].
the Son of the Father and of the Son, if
a
thing abhorrent to the feeling of all sound
minds -both had begotten Him.
Therefore
the Spirit of both is not begotten of both, but
proceeds from both.

CHAP. 27. WHAT IT IS THAT SUFFICES HERE TO
SOLVE THE QUESTION WHY THE SPIRIT IS NOT
SAID TO BE BEGOTTEN, AND WHY THE FATHER
ALONE IS UNBEGOTTEN. WHAT THEY OUGHT
TO DO WHO DO NOT UNDERSTAND THESE
THINGS.

48. But because it is most difficult to distinguish generation from procession in that
co-eternal, and equal, and incorporeal, and
ineffably unchangeable and indivisible Trinlet it suffice meanwhile to put before
ity,
those who are not able to be drawn on further,
what we said upon this subject in a sermon
to be delivered in
Christian
people, and after saying wrote it down.
For
when, among other things, I had taught them
by testimonies of the Holy Scriptures that
the Holy Spirit proceeds from both, I conIf, then, the Holy Spirit proceeds
tinue:
both from the Father and from the Son, why
' He proceedeth from the
did the Son say,
" 5 Why, think you, except as He is
Father ?'
wont to refer to Him, that also which is His

the ears

of

"

"

3 [The terra

unbegotten" is not found in Scripture, but it is
implied in the terms "begotten" and "only-begotten," which
are found. The term "unity" is not applied to God in Scripture,
but it
W. G. T. S.]

is implied in the term "one" which is so applied.

4 [The spiration and procession of the Holy Spirit is not by
two separate acts, one of the Father, and one of the Son as
perhaps might be inferred from Augustin's remark that " the
Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father principally." As Turrettin
" The Father and Son spirate the Spirit, not as two different
says."
essences in each of which resides a spirative energy, but as two
personal subsistences of one essence, who concur in one act of
spiration."

Institutio III. xxxi. 6. W. G. T. S.]

5 John xv. 26.

[Book XV.

" *

own, from whom also He Himself is ? Whence
" My doctrine is
also is that which He saith,
not mine own, but His that sent me ?
If,
therefore, it is His doctrine that is here understood, which yet He said was not His own,
but His that sent Him, how much more is it
there to be understood that the Holy Spirit
proceeds also from Himself, where He so
says, He proceedeth from the Father, as not
to say, He proceedeth not from me ? From
Him, certainly, from whom the Son had his
Divine nature, for He is God of God, He has
also, that from Him too proceeds the Holy
Spirit; and hence the Holy Spirit has from
the Father Himself, that He should proceed
from the Son also, as He proceeds from the
Here, too, in some way may this
Father.
also be understood, so far as it can be understood by such as we are, why the Holy
Spirit is not said to be born, but rather to
2 since if He, too, was called a Son,
proceed;
He would certainly be called the Son of both,
which is most absurd, since no one is son of
But far be
two, save of father and mother.
it from us to surmise any such thing as this
between God the Father and God the Son.
Because not even the son of men proceeds at
the same time from both father and mother;
but when he proceeds from the father into the
mother, he does not at that time proceed
from the mother; and when he proceeds from
the mother into this present light, he does
not at that time proceed from the father.
But the Holy Spirit does not proceed from
the Father into the Son, and from the Son
proceed to sanctify the creature, but proceeds
at once from both; although the Father has
given this to the Son, that He should proceed,
as from Himself, so also from Him.
For we
cannot say that the Holy Spirit is not life,
while the Father is life, and the Son is life:
and hence as the Father, while He has life in
Himself, has given also to the Son to have
life in Himself; so has He given also to Him
that life should proceed from Him, as it also
proceeds from Himself." 3
I have transferred

hence the Spirit is called Love.

1 John vii. 16.
2 [Generation and procession are each an emanation of the esNeither of them is a creation ex
sence by which it is modified.
nihilo. The school-men attempted to explain the difference between the two emanations, by saying that the generation of the
Son is by the mode of the intellect
hence the Son is called
Wisdom, or Word (Logos); but the procession of the Spirit is by
the mode of the will
Turrettin
distinguishes the difference by the following particulars: i. In
Generation is from the Father alone; prorespect to the source.
cession is from Father and Son. 2. In respect to effects. Generation
yields not only personality, but resemblance. The Son is the
"image" of the Father; but the Spirit is not the image of the
Father and Son.
Generation is accompanied with the power to
communicate the essence; procession is not.
3. In respect to order
In the
of relationship. Generation is second, procession is third.
order of nature, not of time (for both generation and procession
are eternal, therefore simultaneous), procession is after generation.
Institutio III. xxxi. 3. W. G .T. S.]

3 Serm. injoh. Evang. tract. 99, n. 8, 9.

this from that sermon into this book, but I
was speaking to believers, not to unbelievers.
49. But if they are not competent to gaze
upon this image, and to see how true these
things are which are in their mind, and yet
which are not so three as to be three persons,
but all three belong to a man who is one person; why do they not believe what they find
in the sacred books respecting that highest
Trinity which is God, rather than insist on
the clearest reason being rendered them,
which cannot be comprehended by the human
mind, dull and infirm as it is? And to be
sure, when they have steadfastly believed the
Holy Scriptures as most true witnesses, let
them strive, by praying and seeking and living well, that they may understand, i.e. that
so far as it can be seen, that may be seen by
the mind which is held fast by faith. Who
would forbid this?
Nay, who would not
rather exhort them to it ?
But if they think
they ought to deny that these things are, because they, with their blind minds, cannot
discern them, they, too, who are blind from
their birth, ought to deny that there is a sun.
The light then shineth in darkness; but if the
let them first be
darkness comprehend it not,
illuminated by the gift of God, that they may
be believers, and let them begin to be light in
comparison with the unbelievers; and when
this foundation is first laid, let them be built
up to see what they believe, that at some time
For some things
they may be able to see.
are so believed, that they cannot be seen at
For Christ is not to be seen a second
all.
time on the cross; but unless this be believed
which has been so done and seen, that it
is
not now to be hoped for as about to be and to
be seen, there is no coming to Christ, such as
without end He is to be seen.
But as far as
relates to the discerning in some way by the
understanding that highest, ineffable, incorporeal, and unchangeable nature the sight of
the human mind can nowhere better exercise
itself, so only that the rule of faith govern it,
than in that which man himself has in his own
nature better than the other animals, better
also than the other parts of his own soul,
which is the mind itself, to which has been
assigned a certain sight of things invisible,
and to which, as though honorably presiding
in a higher and inner place, the bodily senses
also bring word of all things, that they may
be judged, and than which there is no higher,
to which it is to be subject, and by which it
is to be governed, except God.

50. But among these many things which I
have now said, and of which there is nothing

4 John i. 5.

Chap. XXVIII.]

ON THE TRINITY.

that I dare to profess myself to have said
worthy of the ineffableness of that highest
Trinity, but rather to confess that the wonderful knowledge of Him is too great for me,
and that I cannot attain 1 to it: O thou, my
soul, where dost thou feel thyself to be ?
where dost thou lie ? where dost thou stand ?
until all thy infirmities be healed by Him who
Thou perhas forgiven all thy iniquities.
ceivest thyself assuredly to be in that inn
whither that Samaritan brought him whom he
found with many wounds inflicted by thieves,
And yet thou hast seen many
half-dead. 3
things that are true, not by those eyes by
which colored objects are seen, but by those
for which he prayed who said, "Let mine
eyes behold the things that are equal." 4
Certainly, then, thou hast seen many things
that are true, and hast distinguished them
from that light by the light of which thou
hast seen them.
Lift up thine eyes to the
light itself, and fix them upon it if thou canst.
For so thou wilt see how the birth of the
Word of God differs from the procession of
the Gift of God, on account of which the
only-begotten Son did not say that the Holy
Spirit is begotten of the Father, otherwise He
would be His brother, but that He proceeds
from Him.
Whence, since the Spirit of both
is a kind of consubstantial communion of
Father and Son, He is not called, far be it
from us to say so, the Son of both.
But thou
canst not fix thy sight there, so as to discern
this lucidly and clearly; I know thou canst
I say the truth, I say to myself, I know
not.
what I cannot do; yet that light itself shows
to thee these three things in thyself, wherein
thou mayest recognize an image of the highest Trinity itself, which thou canst not yet
contemplate with steady eye.
Itself shows
to thee that there is in thee a true word, when
it is born of thy knowledge, i.e. when we say
what we know: although we neither utter nor
think of any articulate word that is significant
in any tongue of any nation, but our thought
is formed by that which we know; and there
is in the mind's eye of the thinker an image
resembling that thought which the memory
contained, will or love as a third combining
these two as parent and offspring. And he
who can, sees and discerns that this will proceeds indeed from thought (for no one wills
that of which he is absolutely ignorant what
or of what sort it is), yet is not an image of
the thought: and so that there is insinuated
in this intelligible thing a sort of difference
between birth and procession, since to behold
by thought is not the same as to desire, or

Thou, too, hast been
even to enjoy will.
able [to discern this], although thou hast not
been, neither art, able to unfold with adequate speech what, amidst the clouds of bodily likenesses, which cease not to flit up and
down before human thoughts, thou
hast
But that light which is not
scarcely seen.
thyself shows thee this too, that these incorporeal likenesses of bodies are different from
the truth, which, by rejecting them, we contemplate with the
These,
and other things similarly certain, that light
What reahath shown to thine inner eyes.
son, then, is there why thou canst not see
that light itself with steady eye, except certainly infirmity ? And what has produced this
in thee, except iniquity? Who, then, is
it
that healeth all thine infirmities, unless it be
He that forgiveth all thine iniquities ? And
therefore I will now at length finish this book
by a prayer better than by an argument.

understanding.

CHAP. 28.

THE CONCLUSION OF THE BOOK
WITH A PRAYER, AND AN APOLOGY FOR MULTITUDE OF WORDS.

51. O Lord our God, we believe in Thee,
the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit.
For the Truth would not say, Go, baptize all
nations in the name of the Father and of the
Son and of the Holy Spirit, unless Thou wast
Nor wouldest thou, O Lord God,
a Trinity.
bid us to be baptized in the name of Him who
Nor would the divine
is not the Lord God.
voice have said, Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy
God is one God, unless Thou wert so a Trinity as to be one Lord God. And if Thou, O
God, wert Thyself the Father, and wert Thyself the Son, Thy Word Jesus Christ, and the
Holy Spirit your gift, we should not read in
" God sent His Son;" 5 nor
the book of truth,
wouldest Thou, O Only-begotten, say of the
" Whom the Father will send in
Holy Spirit,
" Whom I will send to you
my name;" 6
and,
Directing my purpose by
from the Father." 7
this rule of faith, so far as I have been able,
so far as Thou hast made me to be able, I
have sought Thee, and have desired to see
with my understanding what I believed; and
I have argued and labored much. O Lord
my God, my one hope, hearken to me, lest
through weariness I be unwilling to seek
Thee, "but that I may always ardently seek
Thy face."8 Do Thou give strength to seek,
who hast made me find Thee, and hast given
the hope of finding Thee more and more.
My strength and my infirmity are in Thy
sight: preserve the one, and heal the other.

1 Ps. cxxxix.
3 Luke x. 50, 34-

2 Ps. ciii. 3.
4 Ps. xvii. 2.

5 Gal. lv. 5 and John 111. 17.
7 John xv. 26.

6 John xiv. 26.
8 Ps. cv. 4.

[Book XV

My knowledge and my ignorance are in Thy
sight; where Thou hast opened to me, receive
me as I enter; where Thou hast closed, open
to me as I knock. May I remember Thee,
understand Thee, love Thee.
Increase these
things in me, until Thou renewest me wholly.
"
I know it is written,
In the multitude of
But O
speech, thou shalt not escape sin/' '
that I might speak only in preaching Thy
word, and in praising Thee ! Not only should
I so flee from sin, but I should earn good deFor a man
sert, however much I so spake.
blessed of Thee would not enjoin a sin upon
his own true son in the faith, to whom he
wrote, "Preach the word: be instant in seaAre we to say that he
so , out of season." 2
has not spoken much, who was not silent
about Thy word, O Lord, not only in season,
But therefore it was not
but out of season ?
much, because it was only what was necessary.
Set me free, O God, from that multitude of
speech which I suffer inwardly in my soul,
wretched as it is in Thy sight, and flying for
refuge to Thy mercy; for I am not silent in
And if,
thoughts, even when silent in words.
I thought of nothing save what
indeed,
pleased Thee, certainly I would not ask Thee

to set me free from such multitude of speech.
But many are my thoughts, such as Thou
"
thoughts of man, since they are
knowest,
Grant to me not to consent to them ;
vain. ' ' 3
and if ever they delight me, nevertheless to
condemn them, and not to dwell in them, as
Nor let them so prevail
though I slumbered.
in me, as that anything in my acts should
proceed from them; but at least let my opinions, let my conscience, be safe from them,
under Thy protection. When the wise man
spake of Thee in his book, which is now
called by the special name of Ecclesiasticus,
" We speak," he said,
much, and yet come
short; and in sum of words, He is
all." 4
When, therefore, we shall have come to Thee,
these very many things that we speak, and
yet come short, will cease; and Thou, as One.
all in all." 5 And we shall say
wilt remain
one thing without end, in praising Thee in
T O
One, ourselves also made one in Thee.
Lord the one God, God the Trinity, whatever
I have said in these books that is of Thine,
may they acknowledge who are Thine; if
anything of my own, may it be pardoned both
by Thee and by those who are Thine.
Amen.

"

"

1 Prov. x. 19.

2 2 Tim. iv. 2.

3 Ps. xciv. 11.

4 Ecclus. xliii. 29.

5 i Cor. xv. 28.

ST. AUGUSTIN:

THE ENCHIRIDION;

OR

ON FAITH, HOPE, AND LOVE.

TRANSLATED BY

PROFESSOR J

F. SHAW,

LONDONDERRY.

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE

By the Editor.

St. Augustin speaks of this book in his Retractations, 1. ii. c. 63, as follows:
"

I also wrote a book on Faith, Hope, and Charity, at the request of the person to
whom I addressed it, that he might have a work of mine which should never be out of his
hands, such as the Greeks call an Enchiridion [Hand-Book).
There I think I have pretty
carefully treated of the manner in which God is to be worshipped, which knowledge divine
Scripture defines to be the true wisdom of man. The book begins:
I cannot express,'
etc. 1
The Enchiridion is among the latest books of Augustin.
It was written after the death of
Jerome, which occurred Sept. 30, 420; for he alludes in ch. 87 to Jerome "of blessed
memory" (sanctce memoriae Hieronymus presbyter).

"

'

It is addressed to Laurentius, in answer to his questions.

This person is otherwise
unknown. One MS. calls him a deacon, another a notary of the city of Rome. He was
probably a layman.

The author usually calls the book " On Faith, Hope and Love," because he treats the
subject under these three heads (comp. I Cor. xiii. 13). He follows under the first head
the order of the Apostles' Creed, and refutes, without naming them, the Manichaean, ApolUnder the second head he gives a brief exposition
linarian, Arian, and Pelagian heresies.
of the Lord's Prayer.

The third part is a discourse on Christian love.
The original is in the sixth volume of the Benedictine edition. A neat edition of the
Latin text, with three other small tracts of Augustin, [De Catechizandis Rudibus ; De Fide
Rerum quce non creduntur j De Utilitate Credendi), is also published in C. Marriott's S. Anrelius A ugustinus, 4th ed. by H. de Romestin, Oxford and London (Parker and Comp.),
1885 (pp. 150-251.) An English edition of the same tracts by H. de Romestin, Oxford and
His English translation is based on that of C. L. Cornish,
London, 1885 (pp. 151-251).
Library of the Fathers," Oxford 1847 (" Seventeen
M.A., which appeared in the Oxford
Short Treatises of St. Aug." pp. 85-158).

"

The present translation by Professor Shaw was first published in Dr. Dods's series of
It is more free and idioI have in a few cases conformed it more closely to the original.

A.ugustin's works, Edinburgh, (T. and T. Clark,) 3d ed. 1883.
matic than that of Cornish.

P. S.

J "

Scripsi etiam librtim ' de Fide, Spe et Charitate'1 cum a me ad quern scriptus est postulasset ut aliquod opusculum
Ubi satis diligenter milii zndeor
Hie liber

haberet meum de suis manibus nunquam recessurum, quod genus Grceci enchiridion vocant.
esse romplexus quomodo sit colendus Dens quam sapientiam esse hominis utique veram Divina Scriptura definit.
sic incipit,

' Dici non potest, dilectissime Jili Laurent i, quantum tud eruditione delecter?

"

CONTENTS OF THE ENCHIRIDION.

PAGE

Chap. I.
Chap. II.

('hap. III.
Chap. IV.
Chap. V.
Chap. VI.
Chap. VII.
Chap. VIII.

The author desires the gift of true wisdom for Laurentius,
The fear of God is man's true wisdom,
God is to be worshipped through faith, hope, and love,
The questions propounded by Laurentius,
Brief answers to these questions,
Controversy out of place in a hand-book like the present
The Creed and the Lord's Prayer demand the exercise of faith, hope, and love,
The distinction between faith and hope, and the mutual dependence of faith, hope and

.... 238

love,

Chap. IX. What we are to believe.

In regard to nature it is not necessary for the Christian to know

more than that the goodness of the Creator is the cause of all things
The supremely good Creator made all things good,
Chap. X.
Chap. XL What is called evil in the universe is but the absence of good,
Chap. XII.
Chap. XIII.
Chap. XIV.

All beings were made good, but not being made perfectly good, are liable to corruption,
There can be no evil where there is no good ; and an evil man is an evil good,
Good and evil are an exception to the rule that contrary attributes cannot be predicated of

.... 241
Evil springs up in what is good, and cannot exist except in what is good, .... 241

the same subject.

. 240

.

Chap. XV.

The preceding argument is in no wise inconsistent with the saying of our Lord : "A good

tree cannot bring forth evil fruit,"

Chap. XVI.

It

is not essential to man's happiness that he should know the causes of physical con-

vulsions ; but it is, that he should know the causes of good and evil

.

Chap. XVII.

The nature of error.

All error is not hurtful, though it is man's duty as far as possible

to avoid it,
Chap. XVIII.

It is never allowable to tell a lie ; but lies differ very much in guilt, according to the

intention and the subject,

Chap. XIX.

Men's errors vary very much in the magnitude of the evils they produce ; but yet every

error is in itself an evil

Chap. XX. Every error is not a sin. An examination of the opinion of the academic philosophers,

that to avoid error we should in all cases suspend belief,

Error, though not always a sin, is always an evil,

Chap. XXI.
Chap. XXII. A lie is not allowable, even to save another from injury,
Chap. XXIII.
Chap. XXIV.
Chap. XXV. God's judgments upon fallen men and angels.

Summary of the results of the preceding discussion
The secondary causes of evil are ignorance and lust,

The death of the body is man's peculiar

punishment,

Chap. XXVI.

Through Adam's sin his whole posterity were corrupted, and were born under the penalty

of death, which he had incurred

Chap. XXVII.

The state of misery to which Adam's sin reduced mankind, and the restoration effected

through the mercy of God,

Chap. XXVIII. When the rebellious angels were cast out, the rest remained in the enjoyment of eternal

happiness with God

Chap. XXIX. The restored part of humanity shall, in accordance with the promises of God, succeed to

the place which the rebellious angels lost,

,

.

. 244

. 245

,

.

PAGE

2 47

24S

24S
2 49

249.

.

CONTENTS.

Chap. XXX. Men are not saved by good works, nor by the free determination of their own will, but by

the grace of God through faith,

Chap. XXXI.
Chap. XXXII.
to do

Faith itself is the gift of God ; and good works will not be wanting in those who believe,
The freedom of the will is also the gift of God, for God worketh in us both to will and

Chap. XXXIII.

Men, being by nature the children of wrath, needed a Mediator.

In what sense God

is said to be angry

Chap. XXXIV. The ineffable mystery of the birth of Christ the Mediator through the virgin Mary, .
Chap. XXXV. Jesus Christ, being the only Son of God, is at the same time man,
Chap. XXXVI. The grace of God is clearly and remarkably displayed in raising the man Christ Jesus

.

to the dignity of the Son of God,

Chap. XXXVII. The same grace is further clearly manifested in this, that the birth of Christ according

*

to the flesh is of the Holy Ghost,

Chap. XXXVIII. Jesus Christ, according to the flesh, was not born of the Holy Spirit in such a sense

that the Holy Spirit is His Faiher,

Chap. XXXIX. Not everything that is born of another is to be called a son of that other
Chap. XL.
Chap. XLI.

Christ's birth through the Holy Spirit manifests to us the grace of God,
Christ, who was himself free from sin, was made sin for us, that we might be reconciled

...... 251

to God,

Chap. XLII.

The sacrament of Baptism indicates our death with Christ to sin, and our resurrection

with Him to newness of life,

Chap. XLIII.
Chap. XLIV.

Baptism and the grace which it typifies are open to all, both infants and adults
In speaking of sin, the singular number is often put for the plural, and the plural for the

singular,
Chap. XLV.
Chap. XLVI.

In Adam's first sin, many kinds of sin were involved,
It is probable that children are involved in the guilt not only of the first pair.but of their

own immediate parents,

Chap. XLVII.

It is difficult to decide whether the sin's of a man's other progenitors are imputed to

.

him

Chap. XLVIII.

The guilt of the first sin is so great that it can be washed away only in the blood of the

Mediator, Jesus Christ

Chap. XLIX. Christ was not regenerated in the baptism of John, but submitted to

us
an example of humility, just as he submitted to death, not as the punishment of sin, but to take away the
sin of the world,

it to give

Chap. L.
Chap. LI.

Christ took away not only the one original sin, but all the other sins that have been added to it,
All men born of Adam are under condemnation, and only if new born in Christ are freed

from condemnation,

,

,

Chap. LII.

In baptism, which is the similitude of the
infants and adults, die to sin that they may walk in newness of life

death and resurrection of Christ, all, both

Chap. LIII.

Christ's cross and burial,
God, are images of the christian life,

resurrection, ascension, and sitting down at the right hand of

Chap. LIV.

Christ's second coming does not belong to the past, but will take place at the end of the

world,
Chap. LV.

The expression, "Christ shall judge the quick and the dead," maybe understood in either

of two senses,

The Holy Spirit and the Church.
The condition of the Church in heaven,

Chap. LVI.
Chap. LVI I.
Chap. LVIII. We have no certain knowledge of the organization of the angelic society
Chap. LIX.

The Church is the temple of God,

The bodies assumed by angels raise a very difficult, and not very useful, subject of dis-

cussion,
Chap. LX.

It is more necessary to be able to detect the wiles of Satan when he transforms himself into

an angel of light,

Chap. LXI.
Chap. LXII.

The Church on earth has been redeemed from sin by the blood of a Mediator,
By the sacrifice of Christ all things are restored, and peace is made between earth and

heaven,
Chap. LXIII.
Chap. LXIV.

The peace of God, which reigneth in heaven, passeth all understanding,
Pardon of sin extends over the whole mortal life of the saints, which, though free from

crime, is not free from sin,

. 253

CONTENTS.

Chap. LXV.

God pardons sins, but on condition of penitence, certain times for which have been fixed

by the law of the Church,

Chap. LXVI.
Chap. LXVII.
Chap. LXVIII.
as by fire,
Chap. LXIX.

life,

The pardon of sin has reference chiefly to the future Judgment,
Faith without works is dead, and cannot save a man,
The true sense of the passage (1. Cor. III. 11-15) about those who are saved, yet so

It is not impossible that some believers may pass through a purgatorial fire in the future

Chap. LXX. Almsgiving will not atone for sin unless the life be changed,
Chap. LXXI.
Chap. LXXII.

The daily prayer of the believer makes satisfaction for the trivial sins that daily stain his life,
There are many kinds of alms, the giving of which assists to procure pardon for our

sins

Chap. LXXIII.
Chap. LXX1V. God does not pardon the sins of those who do not from the heart forgive others,
Chap. LXXV. The wicked and the unbelieving are not made clean by the giving of alms, except they

The greatest of all alms is to forgive our debtors and to love our enemies

.

.

be born again,

Chap. LXXVI. To give alms aright, we should begin with ourselves, and have pity upon our own

souls,

Chap. LXXVII. If we would give alms to ourselves, we must flee iniquity ; for he who loveth iniquity

hateth his soul
Chap. LXXVIII.
Chap. LXXIX. Sins which appear very trifling, are sometimes in reality very serious,
Chap. LXXX. Sins, however great and detestable, seem trivial when we are accustomed to them,
Chap. LXXXI

What sins are trivial and what heinous is a matter for God's judgment,

There are two causes of sin, ignorance and weakness ; and we need divine help to

overcome both,

The mercy of God is necessary to true repentance
The man who despises the mercy of God is guilty of the sin against the Holy Ghost,

Chap. LXXXII.
Chap. LXXXIII.
Chap. LXXXIV. The resurrection of the body gives rise to numerous questions
Chap. LXXXV. The case of abortive conceptions,
Chap. LXXXVI. If they have ever lived, they must of course have died, and therefore shall have a

share in the resurrection of the dead,

.

. 265

Chap. LXXXVII. The case of monstrous births,
Chap. LXXXVIII. The material of the body never perishes,
Chap. LXXXIX. But this material may be differently arranged in the resurrection body
Chap. XC.

If there be differences and inequalities among the bodies of those who rise again, there

.

shall be nothing offensive or disproportionate in any,

Chap. XCI. The bodies of the saints shall at the resurrection be spiritual bodies,
Chap. XCII.
Chap. XCIII.

The resurrection of the lost,
Both the first and the second deaths are the consequence of sin.

Punishment is pro-

portioned to guilt,

The saints shall know more fully in the next world the benefits they have received by grace,

Chap. XCIV.
Chap. XCV. God's judgments shall then be explained,
Chap. XCVI.
Chap. XCVII.

The omnipotent God does well even in the permission of evil,
In what sense does the Apostle say that "God will have all men to be saved," when,

as a matter of fact, all are not saved ?

Predestination to eternal life is wholly of God's free grace

Chap. XCVIII.
Chap. XCIX. As God's mercy is free, so His judgments are just, and cannot be gainsaid
Chap. C.
Chap. CI.
Chap. CII.
Chap. CHI.
Chap. CIV.
Chap. CV. Man was so created as to be able to choose either good or evil : in the future life, the choice

The will of God is never defeated, though much is done that is contrary to His will, .... 269
The will of God, which is always good, is sometimes fulfilled through the evil will of man,
The will of the omnipotent God is never defeated, and is never evil,
Interpretation of the expression in
God, foreknowing the sin of the first man, ordered His own purposes accordingly, .... 271

1 Tim. 11. 4; "Who will have all men to be saved,"

. 270

.

of evil will be impossible,

The grace of God was necessary to man's salvation before the fall as well as after it,
Chap. CVI.
Chap. CVII.
Eternal life, though the reward of good works, is itself the gift of God,
Chap. CVIII. A mediator was necessary to reconcile us to God ; and unless this mediator had been God,

.

.

he could not have been our Redeemer,

. 271

PAGE

. 260

. 261

.

. 267

26S

.

. 263

.

CONTENTS.

Chap. CIX.
Chap. CX.
Chap. CXI.

The state of the soul during the interval between death and the resurrection,
The benefit to the souls of the dead from the sacraments and alms of their living friends,
After the resurrection there shall be two distinct Kingdoms, one of eternal happiness, the

.

other of eternal misery,

Chap. CXII.

There is no ground in Scripture for the opinion of those who deny the eternity of future

punishments

Chap. CXIII.
Chap. CXIV.

The death of the wicked shall be eternal in the same sense as the life of the saints,
Having dealt with faith, we now come to speak of hope.

Everything that pertains to

PAGE

. 272

.

. 273

hope is embraced in the Lord's Prayer,

Chap. CXV.
Chap. CXVI.
Chap. CXVII.
Ghost
Chap. CXVIII.

The seven petitions of the Lord's Prayer, according to Matthew,
Luke expresses the substance of these seven petitions more briefly in five,
Love, which is greater than faith and hope, is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy

The four stages of the Christian's life, and the four corresponding stages of the

Church's history,

The grace of regeneration washes away all past sin and all original guilt

Chap. CXIX.
Chap. CXX. Death cannot injure those who have received the grace of regeneration
Chap. CXXI.
Love is the end of all the commandments, and God Himself is love,
Chap. CXXII. Conclusion,

THE ENCHIRIDION,

i

ADDRESSED TO LAURENTIUS ;

BEING A TREATISE ON FAITH, HOPE AND LOVE.

ARGUMENT.

LAURENTIUS HAVING ASKED AUGUSTIN TO FURNISH HIM WITH A HANDBOOK OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE, CONTAINING IN BRIEF COMPASS ANSWERS TO SEVERAL QUESTIONS WHICH HE HAD
PROPOSED, AUGUSTIN SHOWS HIM THAT THESE QUESTIONS CAN BE FULLY ANSWERED BY ANY
ONE WHO KNOWS THE PROPER OBJECTS OF FAITH, HOPE, AND LOVE.
HE THEN PROCEEDS,
IN THE FIRST PART OF THE WORK (CHAP. IX.-CXIII.), TO EXPOUND THE OBJECTS OF FAITH,
TAKING AS HIS TEXT THE APOSTLES' CREED ; AND IN THE COURSE OF THIS EXPOSITION, BESIDES REFUTING DIVERS HERESIES, HE THROWS OUT MANY OBSERVATIONS ON THE CONDUCT
THE SECOND TART OF THE WORK (CHAP. CXIV.-CXVI.) TREATS OF THE OBJECTS
OF LIFE.
OF HOPE, AND CONSISTS OF A VERY BRIEF EXPOSITION OF THE SEVERAL PETITIONS IN THE
THE THIRD AND CONCLUDING PART (CHAP. CXVII.-CXXII.) TREATS OF THE
LORD'S PRAYER.
OBJECTS OF LOVE, SHOWING THE PRE-EMINENCE OF THIS GRACE IN THE GOSPEL SYSTEM, THAT
IT IS THE END. OF THE COMMANDMENT AND THE FULFILLING OF THE LAW, AND THAT GOD
HIMSELF IS LOVE.

CHAP. I.

THE AUTHOR DESIRES THE GIFT OF

TRUE WISDOM FOR LAURENTIUS.

I cannot express, my beloved son Laurentius, the delight with which I witness your
progress in knowledge, and the earnest desire
I have that you should be a wise man: not one
of those of whom it is said, "Where is the wise?
where is the scribe? where is the disputer of
this world ? hath not God made foolish the
wisdom of this world?" 1 but one of those of
" The multitude of the wise
whom it is said,
2 and such as the
is the welfare of the world,"
apostles wishes those to become, whom he
tells," I would have you wise unto that which
is good, and simple concerning evil." 3 Now,
just as no one can exist of himself, so no one

1 i Cor. i. 20.
2 Wisd. vi. 24. [Greek text, ver. 25 : jrAjjtfos <to$Z>v <7wr)pia

Koarpov.

P. S.]

3 Rom. xvi. 19.

can be wise of himself, but only by the enlightening influence of Him of whom it is
written," All wisdom cometh from the Lord."4

CHAP. 2.

THE FEAR OF GOD IS MAN'S TRUE

WISDOM.

The true wisdom of man is piety.

You
For we read
find this in the book of holy Job.
to man:
there what wisdom itself has said
"Behold, the fear of the Lord \J)ietas\ that
If you ask further what is
is wisdom." 5
meant in that place by pietas, the Greek calls
that is, the worit more definitely Ozoaifizia,
The Greeks sometimes call
ship of God.
which signifies right worship,
piety eutrifieta,
though this, of course, refers specially to the
But when we are defining
worship of God.

4 Ecclus. i. 1.

5 Job xxviii. 28.

2.;8o

[Chap. VII.

in what man's true wisdom consists, the most
convenient word to use is that which distinctly expresses the fear of God. And can
you, who are anxious that I should treat of
great matters in few words, wish for a briefer
form of expression ? Or perhaps you are
anxious that this expression should itself be
briefly explained, and that I should unfold in
a short discourse the proper mode of worshipping God ?

CHAP. 3.

GOD IS TO BE WORSHIPPED THROUGH
FAITH, HOPE, AND LOVE.
Now if I should answer, that God is to be
worshipped with faith, hope, and love, you
will at once say that this answer is too brief,
and will ask me briefly to unfold the objects
of each of these three graces, viz., what we are
to believe, what we are to hope for, and what
And when I have done this,
we are to love.
you will have an answer to all the questions
If you have kept a
you asked in your letter.
copy of your letter, you can easily turn it up
and read it over again: if you have not, you
will have no difficulty in recalling it when I
refresh your memory.

CHAP. 4.

THE QUESTIONS PROPOUNDED BY

LAURENTIUS.

You are anxious, you say, that I should
write a sort of handbook for you, which you
might always keep beside you, containing
answers to the questions you put, viz. : what
ought to be man's chief end in life ; what he
ought, in view of the various heresies, chiefly
to avoid; to what extent religion is supported
by reason ; what there is in reason that lends
no support to faith, when faith stands alone;
what is the starting-point, what the goal, of
religion; what is the sum of the whole body
sure and proper
of doctrine ; what is the
foundation of the catholic faith.
Now, undoubtedly, you will know the answers to all
these questions, if you know thoroughly the
proper objects of faith, hope, and love.
For
these must be the chief, nay, the exclusive
objects of pursuit in religion. He who speaks
against these is either a total stranger to the
name of Christ, or is a heretic.
These are to
be defended by reason, which must have its
starting-point either in the bodily senses or in
And what we
the intuitions of the mind.
have neither had experience of through our
bodily senses, nor have been able to reach
through the intellect, must undoubtedly be
believed on the testimony of those witnesses
by whom the Scriptures, justly called divine,
were written ; and who by divine assistance
were enabled, either through bodily sense or

intellectual perception, to see or to foresee the
things in question.

CHAP. 5 .

BRIEF ANSWERS TO THESE QUESTIONS.
Moreover, when the mind has been imbued
with the first elements of that faith which
worketh by love,
it endeavors by purity of
life to attain unto sight, where the pure and
perfect in heart know that unspeakable beauty,
the full vision of which is supreme happiness.
Here surely is an answer to your question as
to what is the starting-point, and what the
goal : we begin in faith, and are made perfect
This also is the sum of the whole
by sight.
But the sure and proper
body of doctrine.
foundation of the catholic faith is Christ.
"For other foundation," says the apostle,
"can no man lay than that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ." 2 Nor are we to deny that this
is the proper foundation of the catholic faith,
because it may be supposed that some heretics
hold this in common with us. For if we carefully consider
the things
that pertain to
Christ, we shall find that, among those heretics who call themselves Christians, Christ is
present in name only : in deed and in truth
He is not among them.
But to show this
would occupy us too long, for we should require
to go over all the heresies which have existed,
which do exist, or which could exist, under
the Christian name, and to show that this is
a discussion which
true in the case of each,
would occupy so many volumes as to be all
but interminable.

CHAP. 6.

CONTROVERSY OUT OF PLACE IN A

HANDBOOK LIKE THE PRESENT.
Now you ask of me a handbook, that is, one
that can be carried in the hand, not one to
load your shelves. To return, then, to the
three graces through which, as I have said,
God should be worshipped -faith, hope, and
love: to state what are the true and proper
But to deobjects of each of these is easy.
fend this true doctrine against the assaults of
those who hold an opposite opinion, requires
much fuller and more elaborate instruction.
And the true way to obtain this instruction is
not to have a short treatise put into one's
hands, but to have a great zeal kindled in one's
heart.

CHAP. 7.

THE CREED AND THE LORD'S PRAYER
DEMAND THE EXERCISE OF FAITH, HOPE, AND
LOVE.

For you have the Creed and the Lord's
What can be briefer to hear or to
Prayer.
read? What easier to commit to memory?

1 Gal. v. 6.

2 1 Cor. 111. 11.

Chap. IX.]

ENCHIRIDION.

2 39

When, as the result of sin, the human race
was groaning under a heavy load of misery,
and was in urgent need of the divine compassion, one of the prophets, anticipating the
" And it shall
time of God's grace, declared :
come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the
name of the Lord shall be delivered." 1
Hence the Lord's Prayer.
But the apostle,
when, for the purpose of commending this
very grace, he had quoted this prophetic tes-
" How then shall
timony, immediately added:
they call on Him in whom they have not beHence the Creed.
In these two
lieved?" 2
you have those three graces exemplified: faith
But without
believes, hope and love pray.
faith the two last cannot exist, and therefore
Whence
we may say that faith also prays.
" How shall they call on Him in
it is written:
whom they have not believed ?

"

CHAP. 8.

THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN FAITH
AND HOPE, AND THE MUTUAL DEPENDENCE
OF FAITH, HOPE, AND LOVE.
Again, can anything be hoped for which is
not an object of faith ?
It is true that a thing
which is not an object of hope may be beWhat true Christian, for example,
lieved.
does not believe in the punishment of the
wicked ? And yet such an one does not hope
for it. And the man who believes that punishment to be hanging over himself, and who
shrinks in horror from the prospect, is more
properly said to fear than to hope. And these
two states of mind the poet carefully dis-
" Permit the feartinguishes, when he says :
Another poet, who is
ful to have hope." 3
usually much superior to this one, makes
a wrong use of the word, when he says :
"If I have been able to hope for so great
a grief as this." 4 And some grammarians
an example of improtake this case
priety of speech, saying, "He said sperare
Accord-
[to hope] instead of timere [to fear]."
ingly, faith may have for its object evil 'as
for both good and evil are
well as good ;
believed, and the faith that believes them is
Faith, moreover, is connot evil, but good.
cerned with the past, the present, and the
future, all three. We believe, for example,
an event in the past ; we
that Christ died,
believe that He is sitting at the right hand of
a state of things which is present ; we
God,
believe that He will come to judge the quick
and the dead,
an event
the future.
Again, faith applies both to one's own circumstances and those of others.
Every one,
for example, believes that his own existence

of

as

had a beginning, and was not eternal, and he
believes the same both of other men and
Many of our beliefs in regard
other things.
to religious matters, again, have reference
not merely to other men, but to angels also.
But hope has for its object only what is good,
only what is future, and only what affects the
man who entertains the hope. For these reasons, then, faith must be distinguished from
hope, not merely as a matter of verbal propriety, but because they are essentially different. The fact that we do not see either what
we believe or what we hope for, is all that is
common to faith and hope.
In the Epistle
to the Hebrews, for example, faith is defined
(and eminent, defenders of the catholic faith
have used the definition as a standard) "the
evidence of things not seen." 5
Although,
should any one say that he believes, that is,
has grounded his faith, not on words, nor on
witnesses, nor on any reasoning whatever, but
on the direct evidence of his own senses, he
would not be guilty of such an impropriety of
speech as to be justly liable to the criticism,
' 'You saw, therefore you did not believe." And
hence it does not follow that an object of faith
is not an object of sight.
But it is better that
we should
the word "faith" as the
Scriptures have taught us, applying it to those
things which are not seen.
Concerning hope,
"
again, the apostle says:
Hope that is seen
is not hope ; for what a man seeth, why doth
But if we hope for that we
he yet hope for ?
see not, then do we with patience wait for it." 6
When, then, we believe that good is about to
come, this is nothing else but to hope for it.
Now what shall I say of love ?
Without it,
faith profits nothing; and in its absence, hope
The Apostle James says :
cannot
"The devils also believe, and tremble." 7
that
is, they, having neither hope nor love, but believing that what we love and hope for is
about to come, are in terror. And so the
Apostle Paul approves and commends the
"
faith that worketh by love;" 8 and this certainly cannot exist without hope.
Wherefore
there is no love without hope, no hope without
love, and neither love nor hope without faith.

exist.

use

CHAP. 9. WHAT WE ARE TO BELIEVE.

IN
REGARD TO NATURE IT IS NOT NECESSARY
FOR THE CHRISTIAN TO KNOW MORE THAN
THAT THE GOODNESS OF THE CREATOR IS THE
CAUSE OF ALL THINGS.

When, then, the question is asked what we
are to believe in regard to religion, it is not
necessary to probe into the nature of things,

1 Joel. ii. 32.
3 Lucan, Pilars, ii. 15.

2 Rom. x. 14.
4 Virgil. sEneid, iv. 419.

5 Heb. xi. 1.
7 Jas. ii. 19.

6 Rom. viii. 24, 25.
8 Gal. v. 6.

[Chap. XII.

as was done by those whom the Greeks call
physici; nor need we be in alarm lest the
Christian should be ignorant of the force and
number of the elements,
the motion, and
order, and eclipses of the heavenly bodies;
the form of the heavens ; the species and the
natures of animals, plants, stones, fountains,
rivers, mountains; about chronology and distances ; the signs of coming storms ; and a
thousand other things which those philosophers either have found out, or think they
For even these men themhave found out.
selves, endowed though they are with so much
genius, burning with zeal, abounding in leisure, tracking some things by the aid of human
conjecture, searching into others with the aids
of history and experience, have not found out
all things; and even their boasted discoveries
are oftener mere guesses than certain knowIt is enough for the Christian to beledge.
lieve that the only cause of all created things,
whether heavenly or earthly, whether visible
or invisible, is the goodness of the Creator,
the one true God; and that nothing exists but
Himself that does not derive its existence
from Him ; and that He is the Trinity
to
wit, the Father, and the Son begotten of the
Father, and the Holy Spirit proceeding from
the same Father, but one and the same Spirit
of Father and Son.

CHAP. IO.

THE SUPREMELY GOOD CREATOR

MADE ALL THINGS GOOD.

By the Trinity, thus supremely and equally
and unchangeably good, all things were created; and these are not supremely and equally
and unchangeably good, but yet they are
Taken as a
good, even taken separately.
whole, however, they are very good, because
their ensemble constitutes the universe in all
its wonderful order and beauty.

CHAP. II. WHAT IS CALLED EVIL IN THE UNIVERSE IS BUT THE ABSENCE OF GOOD.

And in the universe, even that which is
called evil, when it is regulated and put in its
own place, only enhances our admiration of
the good ; for we enjoy and value the good more
when we compare it with the evil.
For the
Almighty God, who, as even the heathen acknowledge, has supreme power over all things,
being Himself supremely good, would never
permit the existence of anything evil among
His works, if He were not so omnipotent and
good that He can bring good even out of evil.
For what is that which we call evil but the abIn the bodies of animals,
sence of good ?
disease and wounds mean nothing but the absence of health ; for when a cure is effected,

namely, the diseases and wounds

that does not mean that the evils which were
present
go away from the body and dwell elsewhere :
they altogether cease to exist ; for the wound
or disease is not a substance, but a defect in
the fleshly substance,
the flesh itself being a
substance, and therefore something good, of
which those evils
that is, privations of the
good which we call health
are accidents.
Just in the same way, what are called vices in
the soul are nothing but privations of natural
good. And when they are cured, they are not
transferred elsewhere : when they cease to
exist in the healthy soul, they cannot exist
anywhere else.

CHAP.

12.

ALL BEINGS WERE MADE GOOD,
BUT NOT BEING MADE PERFECTLY GOOD, ARE
LIABLE TO CORRUPTION.

All things that exist, therefore, seeing that
the Creator of them all is supremely good,
' But because they are
are themselves good,
not, like their Creator, supremely and unchangeably good, their good may be diminished and increased.
But for good to be diminished is an evil, although, however much
it may be diminished, it is necessary, if the
being is to continue, that some good should
remain to constitute the being.
For however
small or of whatever kind the being may be,
the good which makes it a being cannot be
destroyed without destroying the being itself.
An uncorrupted nature is justly held in esBut if, still further, it be incorruptteem.

ible,

it

is undoubtedly considered of

still

higher value. When it is corrupted, however,
its corruption is an evil, because it
is deprived of some sort of good.
For if it be deprived of no good, it receives no injury; but
it does receive injury, therefore it is deprived
of good.
Therefore, so long as a being is in
process of corruption, there is in it some good
of which it is being deprived; and if a part of
the being should remain which cannot be corrupted, this will certainly be an incorruptible
being, and accordingly the process of corruption will result in the manifestation of this
But if it do not cease to be corgreat good.
rupted, neither can it cease to possess good
of which corruption may deprive it.
But if
it should be thoroughly and completely consumed by corruption, there will then be no
good left, because there will be no bein_>.
Wherefore corruption can consume the good
only by consuming the being.
Every being,
therefore, is a good ; a great good, if
it can
not be corrupted; a little good, if it can : but
in any case, only the foolish or ignorant will
And if it be wholly
deny that it

is a good.

Chap. XV.]

ENCHIRIDION.

consumed by corruption, then the corruption
itself must cease to exist, as there is no beingleft in which it can dwell.

13.

CHAP.

THERE CAN BE NO EVIL WHERE
THERE IS NO GOOD; AND AN EVIL MAN IS AN
EVIL GOOD.
Accordingly, there is nothing of what we
But a
call evil, if there be nothing good.
good which is wholly without evil is a perfect
A good, on the other hand, which
good.
contains evil is a faulty or imperfect good;
and there can be no evil where there is no
From all this we arrive at the curious
good.
result: that since every being, so far as it is
a being, is good, when we say that a faulty
being is an evil being, we just seem to say
that what is good is evil, and that nothing but
what is good can be evil, seeing that every
being is good, and that no evil can exist exNothing, then, can be evil
cept in a being.
except something which is good. And although this, when stated, seems to be a contradiction, yet the strictness of reasoning
leaves us no escape from the conclusion. We
must, however, beware
the
prophetic condemnation: "Woe unto them
that call evil good, and good evil: that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness:
that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter." 1 And yet our Lord says: "An evil man
out of the evil treasure of his heart bringeth
Now, what is an
forth that which is evil." 2
evil man but an evil being ? for a man is a
Now, if a man is a good thing bebeing.
cause he is a being, what is an evil man but
Yet, when we accurately disan evil good ?
tinguish these two things, we find that it
not because he is a man that he is an evil, or
because he is wicked that he is a good; but
that he is a good because he is a man, and
an evil because he is wicked.
Whoever, then,
" To be a man is an evil," or, "To be
says,
wicked is a good," falls under the prophetic
" Woe unto them that call evil
denunciation:
For he condemns
good, and good evil !
the work of God, which is the man, and
praises the defect of man, which is the wickTherefore every being, even if it be
edness.
is a being is
a defective one, in so far as it
good, and in so far as it is defective is evil.

incurring

of

is

"

CHAP.

14.

GOOD AND EVIL ARE AN EXCEPTION TO THE RULE THAT CONTRARY ATTRIBUTES CANNOT BE PREDICATED OF THE SAME
SUBJECT. EVIL SPRINGS UP IN WHAT IS GOOD,
AND CANNOT EXIST EXCEPT IN WHAT IS GOOD.

Accordingly, in the case of these contraries

which we call good and evil, the rule of the
logicians, that two contraries cannot be predicated at the same time of the same thing,
does not hold. No weather is at the same
time dark and bright: no food or drink is at
the same time sweet and bitter: no body is at
the same time and in the same place black
and white: none is at the same time and in
the same place deformed and beautiful. And
this ru e is found to hold in regard to many,
indeed nearly all, contraries, that they cannot exist at the same time in any one thing.
But although no one can doubt that good and
evil are contraries, not only can they exist at
the same time, but evil cannot exist without
good, or in anything that is not good.
Good,
For a man
however, can exist without evil.
or an angel can exist without being wicked;
but nothing can be wicked except a man or an
angel: and so far as he is a man or an angel,
he is good; so far as he is wicked, he is an
evil. And these two contraries are so far
co-existent, that if good did not exist in what
is evil, neither could evil exist; because corruption could not have either a place to dwell
in, or a source to spring from, if there were
nothing that could be corrupted; and nothing
can be corrupted except what is good, for
corruption is nothing else but the destruction
of good. From what is good, then, evils arose,
and except in what is good they do not exist;
nor was there any other source from which
For if there
any evil nature could arise.
were, then, in so far as this was a being, it
was certainly a good: and a being which was
incorruptible would be a great good; and even
one which was corruptible must be to some
extent a good, for only by corrupting what
was good in it could corruption do it harm.

CHAP. 15.

THE PRECEDING ARGUMENT IS IN
NO WISE INCONSISTENT WITH THE SAYING OF
OUR LORD: " A GOOD TREE CANNOT BRING
FORTH EVIL FRUIT."
But when we say that evil springs out of
good, let it not be thought that this contradicts our Lord's saying: "A good tree cannot
For, as He who is
bring forth evil fruit." 3
the Truth says, you cannot gather grapes of
thorns, 4 because grapes do not grow on thorns.
But we see that on good soil both vines and
And in the same way,
thorns may be grown.
just as an evil tree cannot bring forth good
so an evil will cannot produce good
fruit,
But from the nature of man, which
works.
is good, may spring either a good or an evil
will. And certainly there was at first no source
from which an evil will could spring, except

1 Isa. v. 20.

2 Luke vi. 45.

3 Matt. vii. 18.

4 Matt. vii. 16.

24-2

[Chap. XVII.

"

For He says:

the nature of angel or of man, which was good.
And our Lord Himself clearly shows this in
the very same place where He speaks about
the tree and its fruit.
Either
make the tree good, and his fruit good; or
else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corclearly enough warning us that evil
rupt,"
fruits do not grow on a good tree, nor good
fruits on an evil tree; but that nevertheless
the ground itself, by which He meant those
whom He was then addressing, might grow
either kind of trees.

'

CHAP.

16.

IT IS NOT ESSENTIAL TO MAN'S
HAPPINESS THAT HE SHOULD KNOW THE
CAUSES OF PHYSICAL CONVULSIONS; BUT IT
IS, THAT HE SHOULD KNOW THE CAUSES OF
GOOD AND EVIL.

"

Now, in view of these considerations, when
we are pleased with that line of Maro,
Happy
the man who has attained to the knowledge
2 we should not supof the causes of things,"
pose that it is necessary to happiness to know
the causes of the great physical convulsions,
causes which lie hid in the most secret recesses
of nature's kingdom, "whence comes the
earthquake whose force makes the deep seas
to swell and burst their barriers, and again to
return upon themselves and settle down." 3
But we ought to know the causes of good and
evil as far as man may in this life know them,
in order to avoid the mistakes and troubles of
which this life is so full.
For our aim must
always be to reach that state of happiness in
which no trouble shall distress us, and no
If we must know the causes
error mislead us.
of physical convulsions, there are none which
it concerns us more to know than those which
affect our own health.
But seeing that, in
our ignorance of these, we are fain to resort
to physicians, it would seem that we might
bear with considerable patience our ignorance
of the secrets that lie hid in the earth and
heavens.

17.

CHAP.

THE NATURE OF ERROR.

ALL
ERROR IS NOT HURTFUL, THOUGH IT IS MAN'S
DUTY AS FAR AS POSSIBLE TO AVOID IT.
For although we ought with the greatest
possible care to avoid error, not only in great
but even in little things, and although we cannot err except through ignorance, it does not
follow that, if a man is ignorant of a thing, he
must forthwith fall into error. That is rather
the fate of the man who thinks he knows what
For he accepts what is
he does not know.
false as if it were true, and that is the essence

like

But it is a point of very great imporof error.
tance what the subject is in regard to which a
man makes a mistake.
For on one and the
same subject we rightly prefer an instructed
man to an ignorant one, and a man who is
not in error to one who is.
In the case of
that is, when
different subjects, however,
one man knows one thing, and another a different thing, and when what the former knows is
useful, and what the latter knows is not so usewho would not, in
ful, or is actually hurtful,
regard to the things the latter knows, prefer
the ignorance of the former to the knowledge
For there are points on which
of the latter ?
ignorance is better than knowledge. And in
the same way, it has sometimes been an advantage to depart from the right way,
in
travelling, however, not in morals.
It has
happened to myself to take the wrong road
where two ways met, so that I did not pass by
the place where an armed band of Donatists
Yet I arrived at the place
lay in wait for me.
whither I was bent, though by a roundabout
route; and when I heard of the ambush, I
congratulated myself on my mistake, and
gave thanks to God for it.
Now, who would
not rather be the traveller who made a misthis, than the highwayman who
take
made no mistake ? And hence, perhaps, it
is that the prince of poets puts these words
into the mouth of a lover in misery: 4 " How
I am undone, how I have been carried away
by an evil error !
for there is an error which
is good, as it not merely does no harm, but
produces some actual advantage.
But when
we look more closely into the nature of truth,
and consider that to err is just to take the
false for the true, and the true for the false,
or to hold what is certain as uncertain, and
what is uncertain as certain, and that error in
the soul is hideous and repulsive just in proportion as it appears fair and plausible when
we utter it, or assent to it, saying,
Yea, yea;
surely this life that we live is
Nay, nay,"
wretched indeed, if only on this account, that
sometimes, in order to preserve it, it is necGod forbid that
essary to fall into error.
such should be that other life, where truth itself is the life of the soul, where no one deceives, and no one is deceived.
But here
men deceive and are deceived, and they are
more to be pitied when they lead others astray
than when they are themselves led astray by
Yet so much does a raputting trust in liars.
tional soul shrink from what is false, and so
earnestly does it struggle against error, that
even those who love to deceive are most unFor the liar does not
willing to be deceived.

"

"

1 Matt. xii. 33.

Virgil, GeorgicSy ii. 490.

3 Ibid.

4 Virgil, Eclog. viii. 41.

Chap. XIX.]

ENCHIRIDION.

think that he errs, but that he leads another
And certainly he
who trusts him into error.
does not err in regard to the matter about
which he lies, if he himself knows the truth;
but he is deceived in this, that he thinks his
lie does him no harm, whereas every sin is
more hurtful to the sinner than to the sinned

against.

CHAP.

IT

18.

IS NEVER ALLOWABLE TO
TELL A LIE; BUT LIES DIFFER VERY MUCH IN
GUILT, ACCORDING TO THE INTENTION AND
THE SUBJECT.

distorts

But here arises a very difficult and very intricate question, about which I once wrote a
large book, finding it necessary to give it an
The question is this: whether at any
answer.
time it can become the duty of a good man
For some go so far as to conto tell a lie ?
tend that there are occasions on which it is a
good and pious work to commit perjury even,
and to say what is false about matters that relate to the worship of God, and about the very
To me, however, it
nature of God Himself.
seems certain that every lie is a sin, though
it makes a great difference with what intention
For the sin of
and on what subject one lies.
the man who tells a lie to help another is not
so heinous as that of the man who tells a lie
to injure another; and the man who by his
lying puts a traveller on the wrong road, does
not do so much harm as the man who by false
the
or misleading representations
whole course of a life. No one, of course, is
to be condemned as a liar who says what is
false, believing it to be true, because such an
one does not consciously deceive, but rather
And, on the same prinis himself deceived.
ciple, a man is not to be accused of lying,
though he may sometimes be open to the
charge of rashness, if through carelessness he
takes up what is false and holds it as true;
but, on the other hand, the man who says
what is true, believing it to be false, is, so far
as his own consciousness is concerned, a liar.
For in saying what he does not believe, he
says what to his own conscience is false, even
though it should in fact be true; nor is the
man in any sense free from lying who with his
mouth speaks the truth without knowing it,
but in his heart wills to tell a lie.
And, therefore, not looking at the matter spoken of, but
solely at the intention of the speaker, the man
who unwittingly says what is false, thinking
all the time that it is true, is a better man than
the one who unwittingly says what is true,
For
but in his conscience intends to deceive.
the former does not think one thing and say
another; but the latter, though his statements

may be true in fact, has one thought in his
heart and another on his lips: and that is the
But when we come
very essence of lying.
to consider truth and falsehood in respect to
the subjects spoken of, the point on which
one deceives or is deceived becomes a matter
For although, as
of the utmost importance.
far as a man's own conscience is concerned, it
is a greater evil to deceive than to be deceived, nevertheless it is a far less evil to tell
a lie in regard to matters that do not relate
to religion, than to be led into error in regard
to matters the knowledge and belief of which
are essential to the right worship of God.
To illustrate this by example: suppose that
one man should say of some one who is dead
that he is still alive, knowing this to be untrue; and that another man should, being deceived, believe that Christ shall at the end of
some time (make the time as long as you
please) die; would it not be incomparably
better to lie like the former, than to be deceived like the latter? and would it not be a
much less evil to lead some man into the
former error, than to be led by any man into
the latter ?

CHAP. 19.

MEN'S ERRORS VARY VERY MUCH
IN THE MAGNITUDE OF THE EVILS THEY PRODUCE; BUT YET EVERY ERROR IS IN ITSELF
AN EVIL.

In some things, then, it

is a great evil to
be deceived; in some it
is a small evil; in
some no evil at all; and in some it is an actual advantage.
It is to his grievous injury
that a man is deceived when he does not believe what leads to eternal life, or believes what
It is a small evil for
leads to eternal death.
a man to be deceived, when, by taking falsehood for truth, he brings upon himself temporal annoyances; for the patience of the believer will turn even these to a good use, as
when, for example, taking a bad man for a
But one
good, he receives injury from him.
who believes a bad man to be good, and yet
suffers no injury, is nothing the worse for being deceived, nor does he fall under the pro-
" Woe to those who call
phetic denunciation:
" 1 For we are to understand that
evil good !
this is spoken not about evil men, but about
the things that make men evil. Hence the
man who calls adultery good, falls justly under
that prophetic denunciation. But the man who
calls the adulterer good, thinking him to be
chaste, and not knowing him to be an adulterer,
falls into no error in regard to the nature of
good and evil, but only makes a mistake as
to the secrets of human conduct. He calls

1 Isa. v. 20.

[Chai\ XXI.

the man good on the ground of believing him
to be what is undoubtedly good; he calls the
adulterer evil, and the pure man good; and
he calls this man good, not knowing him to
be an adulterer, but believing him to be pure.
Further, if by making a mistake one escape
death, as I have said above once happened to
me,. one even derives some advantage from
But when I assert that in cerone's mistake.
tain cases a man may be deceived without any
injury to himself, or even with some advantage to himself, I do not mean that the mistake in itself is no evil, or is in any sense a
good; I refer only to -the evil that is avoided,
or the advantage that is gained, through makFor the mistake, considered
ing the mistake.
in itself, is an evil: a great evil if it concern
a great matter, a small evil if
it concern a
small matter, but yet always an evil.
For
who that is of sound mind can deny that it is
an evil to receive what is false as if
it were
true, and to reject what is true as if it were
false, or to hold what is uncertain as certain,
and what is certain as uncertain ?
But it is
one thing to think a man good when he is
really bad, which is a mistake; it is another
thing to suffer no ulterior injury in consequence of the mistake, supposing that the bad
man whom we think good inflicts no damage
In the same way, it is one thing to
upon us.
think that we are on the right road when we
are not; it is another thing when this mistake
of ours, which is an evil, leads to some good,
such as saving us from an ambush of wicked
men.

CHAP. 20.

EVERY ERROR IS NOT A SIN. AN
EXAMINATION OF THE OPINION OF THE ACADEMIC PHILOSOPHERS, THAT TO AVOID ERROR
WE SHOULD IN ALL CASES SUSPEND BELIEF.
I am not sure whether mistakes such as the
when one forms a good opinion
following,
of a bad man, not knowing what sort of man
he is; or when, instead of the ordinary perceptions through the bodily senses, other appearances of a similar kind present themselves, which we perceive in the spirit, but
think we perceive in the body, or perceive in
the body, but think we perceive in the spirit
(such a mistake as the Apostle Peter made
when the angel suddenly freed him from his
chains and imprisonment, and he thought he
saw a vision 1
); or when, in the case of sensible objects themselves, we mistake rough for
smooth, or bitter for sweet, or think that
putrid matter has a good smell; or when we
mistake the passing of a carriage for thunder; or mistake one man for another, the two
being very much alike, as often happens in

),

" 2

the case of twins (hence our great poet calls
it "a mistake pleasing to parents
whether
these, and other mistakes of this kind, ought
Nor do I now undertake
to be called sins.
to solve a very knotty question, which perplexed those very acute thinkers, the Acawhether a wise man
demic philosophers:
ought to give his assent to anything, seeing
that he may fall into error by assenting to
falsehood: for all things, as they assert, are
either unknown or uncertain. Now I wrote
three volumes shortly after my conversion, to
remove out of my way the objections which
lie, as it were, on the very threshold of faith.
And assuredly it was necessary at the very
outset to remove this utter despair of reaching truth, which seems to be strengthened by
the arguments of these philosophers. Now
in their eyes every error is regarded as a sin,
and they think that error can only be avoided
For they say
by entirely suspending belief.
that the man who assents to what is uncertain falls into error; and they strive by the
most acute, but most audacious arguments,
to show that, even though a man's opinion
should by chance be true, yet that there is no
certainty of its truth, owing to the impossibility of distinguishing truth from falsehood.
But with us, "the just shall live by faith." 3
Now, if assent be taken away, faith goes too;
for without assent there can be no belief.
And there are truths, whether we know them
or not, which must be believed if we would
attain to a happy life, that is, to eternal life.
But I am not sure whether one ought to argue
with men who not only do not know that there
is an eternal life before them, but do not know
whether they are living at the present moment; nay, say that they do not know what
For
it is impossible they can be ignorant of.
it is impossible that any one should be ignorant that he is alive, seeing that if he be not
alive it is impossible for him to be ignorant;
for not knowledge merely, but ignorance too,
can be an attribute only of the living.
But,
forsooth, they think that by not acknowledging that they are alive they avoid error, when
even their very error proves that they are
alive, since one who is not alive cannot err.
As, then, it is not only true, but certain, that
Ave are alive, so there are many other things
both true and certain; and God forbid that it
should ever be called wisdom, and not the
height of folly, to refuse assent to these.

CHAP. 21.

ERROR, THOUGH NOT ALWAYS A

SIN, IS ALWAYS AN EVIL.

But as to those matters in regard to which

1 Acts xii. 9.

Virgil, .'En. x. 392.

1 Rom. i. 17.

Chap. XXIV.]

ENCHIRIDION.

2 45

"

worketh by love." 1

our belief or disbelief, and indeed their truth
or supposed truth or falsity, are of no importance whatever, so far as attaining the
kingdom of God is concerned: to make a
mistake in such matters is not to be looked
on as a sin, or at least as a very small and
In short, a mistake in matters
trifling sin.
of this kind, whatever its nature and magnitude, does not relate to the way of approach
to God, which is the faith of Christ that
"
For the "mistake
in the case of the twin
pleasing to parents
children was no deviation from this way; nor
did the Apostle Peter deviate from this way,
when, thinking that he saw a vision, he so
mistook one thing for another, that, till the
angel who delivered him had departed from
him, he did not distinguish the real objects
among which he was moving from the visionary objects of a dream; 2 nor did the patriarch
Jacob deviate from this way, when he believed
that his son, who was really alive, had been
In the case of these and
slain by a beast. 3
other false impressions of the same kind, we
are indeed deceived, but our faith in God remains secure. We go astray, but we do not
leave the way that leads us to Him.
But yet
these errors, though they are not sinful, are
to be reckoned among the evils of this life,
which is so far made subject to vanity, that
we receive what is false as if it were true, reject what is true as if it were false, and cling
to what is uncertain as if it were certain. And
although they do not trench upon that true
and certain faith through which we reach
eternal blessedness, yet they have much to
do with that misery in which we are now living. And assuredly, if we were now in the
enjoyment of the true and perfect happiness
that lies before us, we should not be subject
to any deception through any sense, whether
of body or of mind.

CHAP. 22.

A LIE IS NOT ALLOWABLE, EVEN

TO SAVE ANOTHER FROM INJURY.

But every lie must be called a sin, because
not only when a man knows the truth, but
ven when, as a man may be, he is mistaken
and deceived, it is his duty to say what he
thinks in his heart, whether it be true, or
whether he only think it to be true. But every
liar says the opposite of what he thinks in his
heart, with purpose to deceive. Now it
is
evident that speech was given to man, not
that men might therewith deceive one another,
but that one man might make known his
thoughts to another. To use speech, then, for

the purpose of deception, and not for its apNor are we to suppose
pointed end, is a sin.
that there is any lie that is not a sin, because
it is sometimes possible, by telling a lie, to
do service to another.
For it is possible to
do this by theft also, as when we steal from a
rich man who never feels the loss, to give to
a poor man who is sensibly benefited by what
he gets. And the same can be said of adultery also, when, for instance, some woman
appears likely to die of love unless we consent
to her wishes, while if she lived she might
purify herself by repentance; but yet no one
will assert that on this account such an adultery is not a sin. And if we justly place so
high a value upon chastity, what offense have
we taken at truth, that, while no prospect of
advantage to another will lead us to violate the
former by adultery, we should be ready to
It cannot be deviolate the latter by lying ?
nied that they have attained a very high
standard of goodness who never lie except to
save a man from injury; but in the case of
men who have reached this standard, it is not
the deceit, but their good intention, that is
justly praised, and sometimes even rewarded.
It is quite enough that the deception should
be pardoned, without its being made an object
of laudation, especially among the heirs of
the new covenant, to whom it is said:
Let
your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay:
for whatsoever is more than these cometh of
evil." 4 And it
is on account of this evil,
which never ceases to creep in while we retain
this mortal vesture, that the co-heirs of Christ
themselves say,

Forgive us our debts. "

"

"

CHAP.

23.

SUMMARY OF THE RESULTS OF

As it

THE PRECEDING DISCUSSION.
is right that we should know the
causes of good and evil, so much of them at
least as will suffice for the way that leads us
to the kingdom, where there will be life without the shadow of death, truth without any
alloy of error, and happiness unbroken by
any sorrow, I have discussed these subjects
with the brevity which my limited space deAnd I think there cannot now be
manded.
any doubt, that the only cause of any good
that we enjoy is the goodness of God, and that
the only cause of evil is the falling away from
the unchangeable good of a being made good
but changeable, first in the case of an angel,
and afterwards in the case of man.

CHAP. 24.

THE SECONDARY CAUSES OF EVIL

ARE IGNORANCE AND LUST.

This is the first evil that befell the intelli-

1 Gal. v. 6.
3 Gen. xxxvii. 33.

2 Acts xii. 9-11.

4 Matt. v. 37.

5 Matt. vi. 12.

[Chap XXVIII.

its

that is,

first privation of
gent creation
Following upon this crept in, and now
good.
even in opposition to man's will, ignorance of
duty, and lust after what is hurtful: and these
brought in their train error and suffering,
which, when they are felt to be imminent,
produce that shrinking of the mind which is
Further, when the mind attains
called fear.
the objects of its desire, however hurtful or
empty they may be, error prevents it from
perceiving their true nature, or its perceptions
are overborne by a diseased appetite, and so
From these
it is puffed up with a foolish joy\
fountains of evil, which spring out of defect
rather than superfluity, flows every form of
misery that besets a rational nature.

CHAP. 25.

GOD'S JUDGMENTS UPON FALLEN
MEN AND ANGELS. THE DEATH OF THE BODY
IS MAN'S PECULIAR PUNISHMENT.
And yet such a nature, in the midst of all
its evils, could not lose the craving after happiness. Now the evils I "have mentioned are
common to all who for their wickedness have
been justly condemned by God, whether they
be men or angels.
But there is one form of
punishment peculiar to man the death of the
God had threatened him with this
body.
punishment of death if he should sin,
leaving
him indeed to the freedom of his own will,
but yet commanding his obedience under pain
of death; and He placed him amid the happiness of Eden, as it were in a protected nook
of life, with the intention that, if he preserved
his righteousness, he should thence ascend to
a better place.

CHAP. 26.

THROUGH ADAM'S SIN HIS WHOLE
POSTERITY WERE CORRUPTED, AND WERE
BORN UNDER THE PENALTY OF DEATH, WHICH
HE HAD INCURRED.

Thence, after his sin, he was driven into
exile, and by his sin the whole race of which
he was the root was corrupted in him, and
thereby subjected to the penalty of death.
And so it happens that all descended from
him, and from the woman who had led him
into sin, and was condemned at the same time
being the offspring of carnal lust
with him,
on which the same punishment of disobediwere tainted with the origence was visited,
inal sin, and were by it drawn through divers
errors and sufferings into that last and endless
punishment which they suffer in common with
the fallen angels, their corrupters and masters,
And thus
and the partakers of their doom.
"
by one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin; and so death passed upon all

men, for that all have sinned." 2 By "the
world" the apostle, of course, means in this
place the whole human race.

CHAP. 27.

THE STATE OF MISERY TO WHICH
ADAM'S SIN REDUCED MANKIND, AND THE
RESTORATION EFFECTED THROUGH THE MERCY
OF GOD.
Thus, then, matters stood.

The whole
mass of the human race was under condemnation, was lying steeped and wallowing in
misery, and was being tossed from one form
of evil to another, and, having joined the faction of the fallen angels, was paying the wellmerited penalty of that impious rebellion.
For whatever the wicked freely do through
blind and unbridled lust, and whatever they
suffer against their will in the way of open
punishment, this all evidently pertains to the
just wrath of God.
But the goodness of the
Creator never fails either to supply life and
vital power to the wicked angels (without
which their existence would soon come to an
end); or, in the case of mankind, who spring
from a condemned and corrupt stock, to impart form and life to their seed, to fashion
their members, and through the various sensons of their life, and in the different parts of
the earth, to quicken their senses, and bestow upon them the nourishment they need.
For He judged it better to bring good out of
evil, than not to permit any evil to exist.
And if He had determined that in the case
of men, as in the case of the fallen angels,
there should be no restoration to happiness,
would it not have been quite just, that the
being who rebelled against God, who in the
abuse of his freeddm spurned and transgressed the command of his Creator when he
could so easily have kept it, who defaced in
himself the image of his Creator by stubbornly
turning away from His light, who by an evil
free-will broke away from his
use of his
wholesome bondage to the Creator's laws,
would it not have been just that such a being
should have been wholly and to all eternity
deserted by God, and left to suffer the everlasting punishment he had so richly earned ?
Certainly so God would have dene, had He
been only just and not also merciful, and had
He not designed that His unmerited mercy
should shine forth the more brightly in contrast with the unworthiness of its objects.

CHAP.

28. WHEN THE REBELLIOUS ANGELS
WERE CAST OUT, THE REST REMAINED IN THE
ENJOYMENT OF ETERNAL HAPPINESS WITH
GOD.
Whilst some of the angels, then, in their

1 Gen. ii. 17.

2 Rom. v. 12.

Chap. XXXL]

ENCHIRIDION.

pride and impiety rebelled against God, and
were cast down from their heavenly abode
into the lowest darkness, the remaining number dwelt with God in eternal and unchangFor all were not
ing purity and happiness.
sprung from one angel who had fallen and
been condemned, so that they were not all,
like men, involved by one original sin in the
bonds of an inherited guilt, and so made subject to the penalty which one had incurred ;
but when he, who afterwards became the
devil, was with his associates in crime exalted
in pride, and by that very exaltation was with
them cast down, the rest remained steadfast in
piety and obedience to their Lord, and obtained, what before they had not enjoyed, a
sure and certain knowledge of their eternal
safety, and freedom from the possibility of
falling.

CHAP. 29.

THE RESTORED PART OF HUMANITY
SHALL, IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROMISES
OF GOD, SUCCEED TO THE PLACE WHICH THE
REBELLIOUS ANGELS LOST.
And so it pleased God, the Creator and
the universe, that, since the
Governor of
whole body of the angels had not fallen into
rebellion, the part of them which had fallen
should remain in perdition eternally, and that
the other part, which had in the rebellion remained steadfastly loyal, should rejoice in the
sure and certain knowledge of their eternal
happiness; but that, on the other hand, mankind, who constituted the remainder of the
intelligent creation, having perished without
exception under sin, both original and actual,
and the consequent punishments, should be
in part restored, and should fill up the gap
which the rebellion and fall of the devils had
For this
left in the company of the angels.
is the promise to the saints, that at the resurrection they shall be equal to the angels of
God. r And thus the Jerusalem which is
above, which is the mother of us all, the city
of God, shall not be spoiled of any of the
number of her citizens, shall perhaps reign
over even a more abundant population. We
do not know the number either of the saints
or of the devils ; but we know that the children of the holy mother who was called barren
on earth shall succeed to the place of the
fallen angels, and shall dwell for ever in that
But the
peaceful abode from which they fell.
number of the citizens, whether as it now is or
as it shall be, is present to the thoughts of the
great Creator, who calls those things which
2 and ordereth all
are not as though they were,
things in measure, and number, and weight.

CHAP.

30.

MEN ARE NOT SAVED BY GOOD
WORKS, NOR BY THE FREE DETERMINATION OF
THEIR OWN WILL, BUT BY THE GRACE OF GOD
THROUGH FAITH.
But this part of the human race to which
God has promised pardon and a share in His
eternal kingdom, can they be restored through
the merit of their own works ? God forbid.
For what good work can a lost man perform,
except so far as he has been delivered from
perdition ? Can they do anything by the free
determination of their own will ?
Again I
say, God forbid.
For it was by the evil use
of his free-will that man destroyed both it and
For, as a man who kills himself
himself.
must, of course, be alive when he kills himself, but after he has killed himself ceases to
live, and cannot restore himself to life;
so,
when man by his own free-will sinned, then
sin being victorious over him, the freedom of
' ' For of whom a man is overhis will was lost.
come, of the same is he brought in bondage." 4
This is the judgment of the Apostle Peter.
And as it is certainly true, what kind of liberty,
I ask, can the bond-slave possess, except when
For he is freely in
it pleases him to sin?
bondage who does with pleasure the will of
Accordingly, he who is the serhis master.
vant of sin is free to sin. And hence he will not
be free to do right, until, being freed from sin,
he shall begin to be the servant of righteousness. And this is true liberty, for he has
pleasure in the righteous deed; and it is at
the same time a holy bondage, for he is
But whence
obedient to the will of God.'
comes this liberty to do right to the man who
is in bondage and sold under sin, except he
be redeemed by Him who has said,
If the
Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed?" 5 And before
this redemption is
wrought in a man, when he is not yet free to
do what is right, how can he talk of the freedom of his will and his good works, except
he be inflated by that foolish pride of boasting which the apostle restrains when he says,
"
By grace are ye saved, through faith." 6

"

CHAP. 31.

FAITH ITSELF IS THE GIFT OF GOD;
AND GOOD WORKS WILL NOT BE WANTING IN
THOSE WHO BELIEVE.

And lest men should arrogate to themselves
the merit of their own faith at least, not understanding that this too is the gift of God,
this same apostle, who says in another place
that he had "
obtained mercy of the Lord to
" and that nt
be faithful," 7 here also adds:

Luke xx. 36.

- Rom. iv. 17.

3 Wisd. xi. 20.

4 2 Pet. ii. 19.
6 Kph. ii. 8.

S John viii. 36.
7 1 Cor. vii. 25.

[Chap. XXXIII.

of yourselves; it is the gift of God: not of
works, lest any man should boast." 1 And
lest it should be thought that good works will
be wanting in those who believe, he adds
"For we are His workmanship,
further:
created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God hath before ordained that we
should walk in them." 2 We shall be made
truly free, then, when God fashions us, that
is, forms and creates us anew, not as men
for He has done that already
but as good
men, which His grace is now doing, that we
may be a new creation in Christ Jesus, ac-
"
Create in me a clean
cording as it is said:
heart, O God ." 3 For God had already created
his heart, so far as the physical structure of
the human heart is concerned; but the psalmist prays for the renewal of the life which was
still lingering in his heart.

CHAP. 32.

THE FREEDOM OF THE WILL IS ALSO
THE GIFT OF GOD, FOR GOD WORKETH IN US
BOTH TO WILL AND TO DO.
And further, should any one be inclined to
boast, not indeed of his works, but of the
freedom of his will, as if the first merit bevery liberty of good
longed to him, this
action being given to him as a reward he had
earned, let him listen to this same preacher
" For it is God which
of grace, when he says:
worketh in you, both to will and to do of His
own good pleasure;" 4 and in another place:
is not of him that willeth, nor
"So, then, it
of him that runneth, but of God that showeth
mercy." s Now as, undoubtedly, if a man is
of the age to use his reason, he cannot believe, hope, love, unless he will to do so, nor
obtain the prize of the high calling of God
unless he voluntarily run for it; in what sense
not of him that willeth, nor of him that
is it
runneth, but of God that showeth mercy,"
the preparation
except that, as it is written,
of the heart is from the Lord ?" 6
Otherwise,
is said, "It is not of him that willeth,
if it
nor of him that runneth, but of God that
showeth mercy," because it is of both, that is,
both of the will of man and of the mercy of
God, so that we are to understand the saying,
"It is not of him that willeth, nor of him
that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy,"
as if it meant the will of man alone is not
sufficient, if the mercy of God go not with it;
then it will follow that the mercy of God
alone is not sufficient, if the will of man go
not with it; and therefore, if we may rightly
say, "it is not of man that willeth, but of
God that showeth mercy," because the will of

"

"

1 Eph. li. 8, 9.
3 Ps. li. 10.
S Rom. ix. 16.

2 Eph. ii. 10.
4 Phil. ii. 13.
6 Prov. xvi. 1.

man by itself is not enough, why may we not
also rightly put it in the converse way: "It
is not of God that showeth mercy, but of man
that willeth," because the mercy of God by
Surely, if no Chrisitself does not suffice?
tian will dare to say this, "It is not of God
that showeth mercy, but of man that willeth,"
lest he should openly contradict the apostle,
it follows that the true interpretation of the
saying, "It is not of him that willeth, nor of
him that runneth, but of God that showeth
mercy," is that the whole work belongs to
God, who both makes the will of man righteous, and thus prepares it for assistance, and
assists it when it is prepared.
For the man's
righteousness of will precedes many of God's
gifts, but not all; and it must itself be included among those which it does not precede. We read in Holy Scripture, both that
"
shall meet me," 7 and that His
God's mercy
mercy "shall follow me." 8
It goes before
the unwilling to make him willing; it follows
the willing to make his will effectual. Why
are we taught to pray for our enemies, 9 who
are plainly unwilling to lead a holy life, unless
that God may work willingness in them ? And
why are we ourselves taught to ask that we
10 unless that He who has created
may receive,
in us the wish, may Himself satisfy the wish ?
We pray, then, for our enemies, that the
mercy of God may prevent them, as it has
prevented us: we pray for ourselves that His
mercy may follow us.

is

CHAP. 33.

MEN, BEING BY NATURE THE CHILIN

Of which wrath it

DREN OF WRATH, NEEDED A MEDIATOR.
WHAT SENSE GOD IS SAID TO BE ANGRY.
And so the human race was lying under a
just condemnation, and all men were the
children of wrath.
written: "All our days are passed away in
Thy wrath; we spend our years as a tale that
Of which wrath also Job says:
is told." 11
" Man that is born of a woman is of few days,
and full of trouble." 12 Of which wrath also
" He that believeth on
the Lord Jesus says:
the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the
wrath of God abideth on him." I3 He does not
say it will come, but it "abideth on him."
For every man is born with it; wherefore the
" We were by nature the children
apostle *says:
of wrath, even as others." I4 Now, as men were
lying under this wrath by reason of their
original sin, and as this original sin was the

8 Ps. xxiii. 6.
IO Matt. vii. 7.
I2 Job. xiv. 1.

These words, attributed by the author to Christ,

were really spoken by John the Baptist.

7 Ps. lix. 10.
9 Matt. v. 44.
11 Ps. xc. 9.
'3 John iii. 36.

*4 Eph. ii. 3.

Chap. XXXVI.]

ENCHIRIDION.

more heavy and deadly in proportion to the
number and magnitude of the actual sins
which were added to it, there was need for a
Mediator, that is, for a reconciler, who, by
the offering of one sacrifice, of which all the
sacrifices of the law and the prophets were
Wheretypes, should take away this wrath.
"
For if, when we were
fore the apostle says:
enemies, we were reconciled to God by the
death of His Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by His life." 1 Now
when God is said to be angry, we do not attribute to Him such a disturbed feeling as exists
in the mind of an angry man; but we call
His just displeasure against sin by the name
"
anger," a word transferred by analogy from
human emotions.
But our being reconciled
to God through a Mediator, and receiving the
Holy Spirit, so that we who were enemies are
made sons (" For as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the sons of God" 2
this is the grace of God through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

):

"

flesh

CHAP. 34.

THE INEFFABLE MYSTERY OF THE
BIRTH OF CHRIST THE MEDIATOR THROUGH
THE VIRGIN MARY.
Now of this Mediator it would occupy too
much space to say anything at all worthy of
Him; and, indeed, to say what is worthy of
Him is not in the power of man.
For who
will explain in consistent words this single
statement, that "the Word was made flesh,
and dwelt among us," 3 so that we may believe
on the only Son of God the Father Almighty,
born of the Floly Ghost and the Virgin Mary ?
The meaning of the Word being made flesh,
is not that the divine nature was changed into
flesh, but that the divine nature assumed our
" we are here to underflesh. And by
stand "man," the part being put for the
whole, as when it is said:
By the deeds of
the law shall no flesh be justified,"
4 that is,
no man.
For we must believe that no part
was wanting in that human nature which He
put on, save that it was a nature wholly free
from every taint of sin,- not such a nature as
is conceived between the two sexes through
carnal lust, which is born in sin, and whose
guilt is washed away in regeneration; but such
as it behoved a virgin to bring forth, when
the mother's faith, not her lust, was the condiAnd if her virginity had
tion of conception.
been marred even in bringing Him forth, He
would not have been born of a virgin; and it
would be false (which God forbid) that He
was born of the Virgin Mary, as is believed
and declared by the whole Church, which, in

"

imitation of His mother, daily brings forth
members of His body, and yet remains a
Read, if you please, my letter on
virgin.
the virginity of the holy Mary which I sent
to that eminent man, whose name I mention
with respect and affection, Volusianus. 5

CHAP. 35.

JESUS CHRIST, BEING THE ONLY SON

OF GOD, IS AT THE SAME TIME MAN.
Wherefore Christ Jesus, the Son of God,
is both God and man; God before all worlds;
man in our world: God, because the Word of
God (for "the Word was God" 6
); and man,
because in His one person the Word was
joined with a body and a rational
soul.
Wherefore, so far as He is God, He and the
Father are one; so far as He is man, the
For when He
Father is greater than He.
was the only Son of God, not by grace, but
by nature, that He might be also full of grace,
He became the Son of man; and He Himself
unites both natures in His own identity, and
both natures constitute one Christ; because,
"being in the form of God, He thought it not
robbery to be," what He was by nature,
"
But He made Himself
of no reputation, and took upon Himself the
form of a servant, not losing or lessening the
And, accordingly, He was
form of God.
both made less and remained equal, being
both in one, as has been said: but He was
one of these as Word, and the other as man.
As Word, He is equal with the Father; as
One Son of God,
man, less than the Father.
and at the same time Son of man; one Son
of man, and at the same time Son of God;
not two Sons of God, God and man, but one
Son of God: God without beginning; man
with a beginning, our Lord Jesus Christ.

equal with God." 7

CHAP. 36.

THE GRACE OF GOD IS CLEARLY AND
REMARKABLY DISPLAYED IN RAISING THE MAN
CHRIST JESUS TO THE DIGNITY OF THE SON
OF GOD.
Now here the grace of God is displayed
with the greatest power and clearness.
For
what merit had the human nature in the man
Christ earned, that it should in this unparalleled way be taken up into the unity of the
person of the only Son of God ? What goodness of will, what goodness of desire and intention, what good works, had gone before,
which made this man worthy to become one
person with God ? Had He been a man previously to this, and had He earned this unbe
precedented
reward,
thought worthy to become God ?

that He should

Assuredly

1 Rom. v. 10.
3 John 1. 14.

2 Rom. viii. 14.
4 Rom. iii. 20.

5 Ep. 137.
7 Phil. ii. 6.

6 John i. 1.

[Chap. XXXVIII.

nay; from the very moment that He began to
be man, He was nothing else than the Son of
God, the only Son of God, the Word who
was made flesh, and therefore He was God;
so that just as each individual man unites in
one person a body and a rational soul, so
Christ in one person unites the Word and
man. Now wherefore was this unheard of
glory conferred on human nature,
a glory
which, as there was no antecedent merit, was
except that here
of course wholly of grace,
those who looked at the matter soberly and
honestly might behold a clear manifestation
of the power of God's free grace, and might
understand that they are justified from their
sins by the same grace which made the man
Christ Jesus free from the possibility of sin ?
And so the angel, when he announced to
Christ's mother the coming birth, saluted her
" ' and
Hail, thou that art full of grace;
thus:
shortly afterwards, "Thou hast found grace
with God." 2 Now she was said to be full of
grace, and to have found grace with God, because she was to be the mother of her Lord,
nay, of the Lord of all flesh.
But, speaking
of Christ Himself, the evangelist John, after
" The Word was made flesh, and
saying,
" and we beheld His
dwelt among us," adds,
glory, the glory as of the only-begotten of
the Father, full of grace and truth." 3 When
" The Word was made flesh," this is
he says,
"full of grace;" when he says, "the glory
of the only-begotten of the Father," this is
"
For the Truth Himself,
who was the only-begotten of the Father, not
by grace, but by nature, by grace took our
humanity upon Him, and so united it with
His own person that He Himself became also
the Son of man.

full of truth."

"

37.

CHAP.

THE SAME GRACE IS FURTHER
CLEARLY MANIFESTED IN THIS, THAT THE
BIRTH OF CHRIST ACCORDING TO THE FLESH
IS OF THE HOLY GHOST.
For the same Jesus Christ who is the onlybegotten, that is, the only Son of God, our
Lord, was born of the Holy Ghost and of the
And we know that the Holy
Virgin Mary.
Spirit is the gift of God, the gift being Himself indeed equal to the Giver. And therefore the Holy Spirit also is God, not inferior
The fact, thereto the Father and the Son.
fore, that the nativity of Christ in His human
nature was by the Holy Spirit,
is another
For when the
clear manifestation of grace.
Virgin asked the angel how this which he had
announced should be, seeing she knew not a

1 Luke i. 28 (" Thou that are highly favored" A. V.).
2 Luke i. 30 (" Thou hast foundfavor with God," A. V.).
3 John i. 14.

" The Holy Ghost
man, the angel answered,
shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also
that holy thing which shall be born of thee
shall be called the Son of God." 4 And when
Joseph was minded to put her away, suspecting her of adultery, as he knew she was not
with child by himself, he was told by the
angel, "Fear not to take unto thee Mary
thy wife; for that which is conceived in her
is of the Holy Ghost:" 5 that is, what thou
suspectest to be begotten of another man is
of the Holy Ghost.

CHAP, 38.

JESUS CHRIST, ACCORDING TO THE
FLESH, WAS NOT BORN OF THE HOLY SPIRIT
IN SUCH A SENSE THAT THE HOLY SPIRIT IS
HIS FATHER.

Hence, as we confess,

Nevertheless, are we on this account to say
that the Holy Ghost is the father of the man
Christ, and that as God the Father begat the
Word, so God the Holy Spirit begat the man,
and that these two natures constitute the one
Christ; and that as the Word He is the Son
of God the Father, and as man the Son of
God the Holy Spirit, because the Holy Spirit
as His father begat Him of the Virgin Mary?
Who will dare to say so? Nor is it necessary
to show by reasoning how many other absurdities flow from this supposition, when it is
itself so absurd that no believer's ears can
" Our
bear to hear it.
Lord Jesus Christ, who of God is God, and
as man was born of the Holy Ghost and of
the Virgin Mary, having both natures, the
divine and the human, is the only Son of God
the Father Almighty, from whom proceedeth
6 Now in what sense do we
the Holy Spirit."
say that Christ was born of the Holy Spirit,
if the Holy Spirit did not beget Him ?
Is it
that He made Him, since our Lord Jesus
Christ, though as God "all things were made
by Him," 7 yet as man was Himself made ; as
" who was made of the seed
the apostle says,
But as
of David according to the flesh?" 8
that created thing which the Virgin conceived
and brought forth, though it was united only
to the person of the Son, was made by the
whole Trinity (for the works of the Trinity
are not separable), why should
the Holy
Spirit alone be mentioned as having made it ?
Or is it that, when one of the Three is mentioned as the author of any work, the whole
understood as working ?
Trinity is
That is true, and can be proved by examBut we need not dwell longer on this
ples.

to be

4 Luke i. 35.
6 A quotation from a form of the Apostles' Creed anciently itt

5 Matt. i. 20.

use in the Latin Church.

7 John i. 3.

8 Rom. i. 3.

Chap. XLL]

ENCHIRIDION.

For the puzzle is, in what sense
solution.
it is said, "born of the Holy Ghost," when
He is in no sense the Son of the Holy Ghost ?
For though God made this world, it would not
be right to say that it is the Son of God, or
that it was born of God; we would say that it
was created, or made, or framed, or ordered
by Him, or whatever form of expression we
Here, then, when we
can properly
make confession that Christ was born of the
Holy Ghost and of the Virgin Mary, it
is
difficult to explain how it is that He is not the
Son of the Holy Ghost and is the Son of the
Virgin Mary, when He was born both of Him
It is clear beyond a doubt that
and of her.
He was not born of the Holy Spirit as His
father, in the same sense that He was born
of the Virgin as His mother.

use.

CHAP. 39.

NOT EVERYTHING THAT IS BORN OF
ANOTHER IS TO BE CALLED A SON OF THAT
OTHER.
We need not therefore take for granted,
that whatever is born of a thing is forthwith
to be declared the son of that thing.
For, to
pass over the fact that a son is born of a man
in a different sense from that in which a hair
or a louse is born of him, neither of these
being a son ; to pass over this, I say> as too
mean an illustration for a subject of so much
it is certain that those who are
importance :
born of water and of the Holy Spirit cannot
with propriety be called sons of the water,
though they are called sons of God the
Father, and of the Church their mother.
In
the same way, then, He who was born of the
Holy Spirit is the Son of God the Father,
For what I have said
not of the Holy Spirit.
of the hair and the other things is sufficient
to show us that not everything which is born
of another can be called the son of that of
which it is born, just as it does not follow that
all who are called a man's sons were born of
him. for some sons are adopted. And some
men are called sons of hell, not as being born
of hell, but as prepared for it, as the sons of
the kingdom are prepared for the kingdom.

chap. 40.

Christ's birth through the holy
spirit manifests to us the grace of god.

And, therefore, as one thing may be born
of another, and yet not in such a way as to
be its son, and as not every one who is called
a son was born of him whose son he is called,
is clear that this arrangement by which
Christ was born of the Holy Spirit, but not
as His son, and of the Virgin Mary as her
son, is intended as a manifestation of the
For it was by this grace that
grace of God.

it

a man, without any antecedent merit, was at
the very commencement of His existence as
man, so united in one person with the Word
of God, that the very person who was Son of
man was at the same time Son of God, and the
very person who was Son of God was at the
same time Son of man ; and in the adoption
of His human nature into the divine, the
grace itself became in a way so natural to the
man, as to leave no room for the entrance of
Wherefore this grace is signified by the
sin.
Holy Spirit ; for He, though in His own nature God, may also be called the gift of God.
And to explain all this sufficiently, if indeed
it could be done at all, would require a very
lengthened discussion.

CHAP. 41.

CHRIST, WHO WAS HIMSELF FREE
FROM SIN, WAS MADE SIN FOR US, THAT WE
MIGHT BE RECONCILED TO GOD.

"

Hence the

Begotten and conceived, then, without any
indulgence of carnal lust, and therefore bringing with Him no original sin, and by the
grace of God joined and united in a wonderful and unspeakable way in one person with
the Word, the Only-begotten of the Father,
a son by nature, not by grace, and therefore
having no sin of His own ; nevertheless, oa
account of the likeness of sinful flesh in which
He came, He was called sin, that He might
For, under
be sacrificed to wash away sin.
sin were
the Old Covenant, sacrifices for
called sins. * And He, of whom all these sacrifices were types and shadows, was Himself
truly made sin.
apostle, after
saying, "We pray you in Christ's stead, be
ye reconciled to God," forthwith adds :
for
He hath made Him to be sin for us who knew
no sin ; that we might be made the righteousness of God in Him." 2 He does not
" He who
say, as some incorrect copies read,
knew no sin did sin for us," as if Christ had
Himself sinned for our sakes ; but he says,
"Him who knew no sin," that is, Christ,
God, to whom we are to be reconciled,
hath
made to be sin for us," that is, hath made
Him a sacrifice for our sins, by which we
might be reconciled to God.
He, then, being
made sin, just as we are made righteousness
(our righteousness being not our own, but
God's, not in ourselves, but in Him) ; He
being made sin, not His own, but ours, not in
Himself, but in us, showed, by the likeness
of sinful flesh in which He was crucified, that
though sin was not in Him, yet that in a certain sense He died to sin, by dying in the
flesh which was the likeness of sin ; and that
although He Himself had never lived the old

"

1 Hos. iv. 8.

Cor. v. 20, 21.

[Chap. XLVI.

life of sin, yet by His resurrection He typified
our new life springing up out of the old death
in sin.

CHAP. 42.

THE SACRAMENT OK BAPTISM INDICATES OUR DEATH WITH CHRIST TO SIN,
AND OUR RESURRECTION WITH HIM TO NEWNESS OF LIFE.
And this is the meaning of the great sacrament of baptism which is solemnized among
us, that all who attain to this grace should
die to sin, as He is said to have died to sin,
because He died in the flesh, which is the
likeness of sin; and rising from the font regenerate, as He arose alive from the grave,
should begin a new life in the Spirit, whatever may be the age of the body ?

CHAP. 43.

BAPTISM AND THE GRACE WHICH IT
TYPIFIES ARE OPEN TO ALL, BOTH INFANTS AND
ADULTS.

For from the infant newly born to the old
man bent with age, as there is none shut out
from baptism, so there is none who in baptism
But infants die only to
does not die to sin.
original sin; those who are older die also to
all the sins which their evil lives have added
to the sin which they brought with them.

CHAP. 44.

IN SPEAKING OF SIN, THE SINGULAR NUMBER IS OFTEN PUT FOR THE PLURAL,
AND THE PLURAL FOR THE SINGULAR.

"

"

But even these latter are frequently said to
die to sin, though undoubtedly they die not to
one sin, but to all the numerous actual sins
they have committed in thought, word, or
deed: for the singular number is often put
for the plural, as when the poet says,
They
fill its belly with the armed soldier," * though
in the case here referred to there were many
soldiers concerned. And we read in our own
Pray to the Lord, that He take
Scriptures:
away the serpent from us." 2 He does not
say serpents, though the people were suffering from many; and so
other cases.
When, on the other hand, the original sin is
expressed in the plural number, as when we
say that infants are baptized for the remission of sins, instead of saying for the remission of sin, this is the converse figure of
speech, by which the plural number is put in
place of the singular; as in the Gospel it is
said of the death of Herod, "for they are
dead which sought the young child's life,"
instead of saying, "he is dead." And in
Exodus: "They have made them," Moses

in

says, "gods of gold," 4 though they had made
" These be
only one calf, of which they said:
thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out
of the land of Egypt," 5
here, too, putting
the plural in place of the singular.

CHAP. 45.

IN ADAM'S FIRST SIN, MANY KINDS
OF SIN WERE INVOLVED.

However, even in that one sin, which "by
one man entered into the world, and so passed
upon all men," 6 and on account of which infants are baptized, a number of distinct sins
may be observed, if it be analyzed as it were
For there is in it
into its separate elements.
pride, because man chose to be under his own
dominion, rather than under the dominion of
God; and blasphemy, because he did not
believe God; and murder, for he brought
death upon himself; and spiritual fornication,
for the purity of the human soul was corrupted by the seducing blandishments of the
serpent; and theft, for man turned to his own
use the food he had been forbidden to touch;
and avarice, for he had a craving for more
than should have been sufficient for him; and
whatever other sin can be discovered on careful reflection to be involved in this one admitted sin.

CHAP. 46.

IT IS PROBABLE THAT CHILDREN ARE
INVOLVED IN THE GUILT NOT ONLY OF THE
FIRST PAIR, BUT OF THEIR OWN IMMEDIATE
PARENTS.
And it

is said, with much appearance of
probability, that infants are involved in the
guilt of the sins not only of the first pair, but
of their own immediate parents.
For that
divine judgment, "I shall visit the iniquities
of the fathers upon the children," 7
certainly
applies to them before they come under the
new covenant by regeneration. And it was
this new covenant that was prophesied of, when
it was said by Ezekiel, that the sons should
not bear the iniquity of the fathers, and that
it should no longer be a proverb in Israel,
" The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the
Here lies
children's teeth are set on edge."
the necessity that each man should be born
again, that he might be freed from the sin in
For the sins committed
which he was born.
afterwards can be cured by penitence, as we
see is the case after baptism. And therefore
the new birth would not have been appointed
only that the. first birth was sinful, so sinful
that even one who was legitimately born in
wedlock says: "I was shapen in iniquities,

1 "
Uterumque armato milite coraplent.".
2 Num. xxi. 7 ("serpents," A. and R. V.).

Virgil, sEn. ii. 20.
3 Matt. ii. 20.

4 Ex. xxxii. 31.
6 Rom. v. 12.
8 Ezek. xviii. 2.

5 Ex. xxxii. 4.
7 Ex. xx. 5 ; Deut. v. 9.

Chap. L.]

ENCHIRIDION.

2 55

and in sins did my mother conceive me.'' *
He did not say in iniquity, or in sin, though
he might have said so correctly; but he preferred to say "iniquities" and "sins," because
in that one sin which passed upon all men,
and which was so great that human nature
was by it made subject to inevitable death,
many sins, as I showed above, may be discriminated; and further, because there are
other sins of the immediate parents, which,
though they have not the same effect in producing a change of nature, yet subject the
children to guilt unless the divine grace and
mercy interpose to rescue them.

CHAP. 47.

IT IS DIFFICULT TO DECIDE WHETHER THE SINS OF A MAN'S OTHER PROGENITORS ARE IMPUTED TO HIM.

But about the sins of the other progenitors
who intervene between Adam and a man's
own parents, a question may very well be
Whether every one who is born is
raised.
involved in all their accumulated evil acts, in
all their multiplied original guilt, so that the
later he is born, so much the worse is his condition; or whether God threatens to visit the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto
the third and fourth generations, because in
His mercy He does not extend His wrath
against the sins of the progenitors further
than that, lest those who do not obtain the
grace of regeneration might be crushed down
under too heavy a burden if they were compelled to bear as original guilt all the sins of
all their progenitors from the very beginning
of the human race, and to pay the penalty due
to them; or whether any other solution of
this great question may or may not be found
in Scripture by a more diligent search and a
more careful interpretation, I dare not rashly
affirm.

CHAP. 48.

THE GUILT OF THE FIRST SIN IS SO
GREAT THAT IT CAN BE WASHED AWAY ONLY
IN THE BLOOD OF THE MEDIATOR, JESUS
CHRIST.

Nevertheless, that one sin, admitted into a
place where such perfect happiness reigned,
was of so heinous a character, that in one
man the whole human race was originally, and
as one may say, radically, condemned; and
it cannot be pardoned and blotted out except
through the one Mediator between God and
men, the man Christ Jesus, who only has had
power to be so born as not to need a second
birth.

1 Ps. Ii. s (The A. V. has the singular,

"

iniquity

" and "sin").

CHAP. 49.

CHRIST WAS NOT REGENERATED IN
THE BAPTISM OF JOHN, BUT SUBMITTED TO
IT TO GIVE US AN EXAMPLE OF HUMILITY,
JUST AS HE SUBMITTED TO DEATH, NOT AS
THE PUNISHMENT OF SIN, BUT TO TAKEAWAY
THE SIN OF THE WORLD.
Now, those who were baptized in the baptism of John, by whom Christ was Himself
2 were not regenerated ; but they were
baptized,
prepared through the ministry of His forerunner, who cried, "Prepare ye the way of
the Lord," 3 for Him in whom only they could
For His baptism is not with
be regenerated.
water only, as was that of John, but with the
+ so that whoever believes in
Holy Ghost also;
Christ is regenerated by that Spirit, of whom
Christ being generated, He did not need reWhence that announcement of
generation.
the Father which was heard after His bap-
" This day have I begotten Thee," 5 retism,
ferred not to that one day of time on which
He was baptized, but to the one day of an
unchangeable eternity, so as to show that this
man was one in person with the Only-beFor when a day neither begins with
gotten.
the close of yesterday, nor ends with the beginning of to-morrow, it is an eternal to-day.
Therefore He asked to be baptized in water
by John, not that any iniquity of His might
be washed away, but that He might manifest
For baptism
the depth of His humility.
found in Him nothing to wash away, as death
found in Him nothing to punish; so that it
was in the strictest justice, and not by the
mere violence of power, that the devil was
crushed and conquered: for, as he had most
unjustly put Christ to death, though there
was no sin in Him to deserve death, it was
most just that through Ciirist he should lose
his hold of those who by sin were justly subject to the bondage in which he held them.
Both of these, then, that is, both baptism and
death, were submitted to by Him, not through
a pitiable necessity, but of His own free pity
for us, and as
part of an arrangement by
which, as one man brought sin into the world,
that is, upon the whole human race, so one
man was to take away the sin of the world.

'

CHAP. 50.

CHRIST TOOK AWAY NOT ONLY THE
ONE ORIGINAL SIN, BUT ALL THE OTHER SINS
THAT HAVE BEEN ADDED TO IT.
With this difference: the first man brought
one sin into the world, but this man took
away not only that one sin, but all that He
Hence the apostle says:
found added to it.

2 Matt. iii. 13-15.
5 Ps. ii. 7; Heb. i.

5, v. 5.

3 Mitt. iii. 3.

4 Matt. iii. 11.
It is by a mistake that Augustin

quotes these words as pronounced at our Lord's baptism.

[Chap. LIU.

gift

" And not as it was by one that sinned, so is
the gift: for the judgment was by one to conis of many
demnation, but the free
For it is evioffenses unto justification."
dent that the one sin which we bring with us
by nature would, even if it stood alone, bring
us under condemnation; but the free gift justifies man from many offenses: for each man,
in addition to the one sin which, in common
with all his kind, he brings with him by nature,
has committed many sins that are strictly his
own.

CHAP. 51.

ALL MEN BORN OF ADAM ARE UNDER
CONDEMNATION, AND ONLY IF NEW BORN IN
CHRIST ARE FREED FROM CONDEMNATION.

"

But what he says a little after,

Therefore,
as by the offense of one judgment came upon
all men to condemnation; even so by the
righteousness of one the free gift came upon
all men unto justification of life/'
2 shows
clearly enough that there is no one born of
Adam but is subject to condemnation, and
that no one, unless he be new born in Christ,
is freed from condemnation.

CHAP. 52.

IN BAPTISM, WHICH IS THE SIMILITUDE OF THE DEATH AND RESURRECTION OF
CHRIST, ALL, BOTH INFANTS AND ADULTS,
DIE TO SIN THAT THEY MAY WALK IN NEWNESS OF LIFE.
And after he has said as much about the
condemnation through one man, and the free
gift through one man, as he deemed sufficient
for that part of his epistle, the apostle goes on
to speak of the great mystery of holy baptism
in the cross of Christ, and to clearly explain
to us that baptism in Christ is nothing else
than a similitude of the death of Christ, and
that the death of Christ on the cross is nothing but a similitude of the pardon of sin: so
that just as real as is His death, so real is the
remission of our sins; and just as real as is
His resurrection, so real is our justification.
He says: "What shall we say, then?
Shall
" 3
we continue in sin, that grace may abound ?
" But where sin
For he had said previously,
abounded, grace did much more abound." 4
And therefore he proposes to
himself the
question, whether it would be right to continue in sin for the sake of the consequent
But he answers, "God
abounding grace.
" How shall we, that are
forbid;
dead to sin, live any longer therein ?
Then,
" Know ye
to show that we are dead to sin,
not," he says, "that so many of us as were
baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into

" and adds,

"

1 Rom. v. 16.
3 Rom. vi. 1.

- Rom. v. 18.
4 Rom. v. 20.

"

His death ?
If, then, the fact that we were
baptized into the death of Christ proves that
we are dead to sin, it follows that even infants who are baptized into Christ die to sin,
being baptized into His death.
For there is
no exception made: " So many of us as were
baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into
His death." And this is said to prove that
we are dead to sin.
Now, to what sin do infants die in their regeneration but that sin
which they bring with them at birth ? And
therefore to these also applies what follows:
"
Therefore we are buried with Him by baptism into death;
that, like as Christ was
raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in newFor if we have been planted toness of life.
gether in the likeness of His death, we shall
be also in the likeness of His resurrection:
knowing this, that our old man is crucified
with Him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve
For he that is dead is freed from sin.
sin.
Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe
that we shall also live with Him: knowing
that Christ, being raised from the dead, dieth
no more; death hath no more dominion over
For in that He died, He died unto
Him.
sin once; but in that He liveth, He liveth
unto God.
Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive
unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord."
Now he had commenced with proving that we
must not continue in sin that grace may
" How shall we that
abound, and had said:
are dead to sin live any longer therein?"
And to show that we are dead to sin, he
added: "Know ye not, that so many of us
as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were bap-
" And so he concludes
tized into His death ?
For
this whole passage just as he began it.
he has brought in the death of Christ in such
a way as to imply that Christ Himself also
died to sin. To what sin did He die if not
to the flesh, in which there was not sin, but
the likeness of sin, and which was therefore
called by the name of sin ? To those who are
and
baptized into the death of Christ, then,
this class includes not adults only, but infants
Likewise reckon ye also
as well,
yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but
alive unto God through Jesus Christ our
Lord." s

he says:

"

chap. 53.

Christ's cross and burial, resurrection, ASCENSION, AND SITTING DOWN
AT THE RIGHT HAND OF GOD, ARE IMAGES OF
THE CHRISTIAN LIFE.

All the events, then, of Christ's crucifixion,

5 Rom. vi. 1-11.

Chap. LVL]

ENCHIRIDION.

2 55

of His burial, of His resurrection the third
day, of His ascension into heaven, of His
sitting down at the right hand of the Father,
were so ordered, that the life which the Christian leads here might be modelled upon them,
not merely in a mystical sense, but in reality.
For in reference to His crucifixion it is said:
"They that are Christ's have crucified the
' ' * And
flesh, with the affections and lusts.
in reference to His burial: "We are buried
with Him by baptism into death." 2
In reference to His resurrection: "That, like as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the
glory of the Father, even so we also should
walk in newness of life." 3 And in reference
to His ascension into heaven and sitting
down at the right hand of the Father:
If ye
then be risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above, where Christ sitteth on the
Set your affection on
right hand of God.
things above, not on things on the earth.
For ye are dead, and your life is hid with
Christ in God." 4

"

chap. 54.

Christ's second coming does not
belong to the past, but will take place
at the end of the world.

But what we believe as to Christ's action in
the future, when He shall come from heaven
to judge the quick and the dead, has no bearing upon the life which we now lead here; for
it forms no part of what He did upon earth,
but is part of what He shall do at the end of
And it is to this that the apostle
the world.
refers in what immediately follows the passage quoted above: "When Christ, who is our
life, shall appear, tljen shall ye also appear
with Him in glory." s

quick

CHAP. 55.

THE EXPRESSION, "CHRIST SHALL
JUDGE THE QUICK AND THE DEAD," MAY BE
UNDERSTOOD IN EITHER OF TWO SENSES.
Now the expression, "to judge the quick
and the dead," may be interpreted in two
either we may understand by the
ways:
"
"
those who at His advent shall not
yet have died, but whom He shall find alive
in the flesh, and by the "dead" those who
have departed from the body, or who shall
have departed before His coming; or we may
understand the "quick" to mean the righteous, and the "dead" the unrighteous; for
the righteous shall be judged as well as others.
Now the judgment of God is sometimes taken
in a bad sense, as, for example,
They that
have done evil unto the resurrection of judgment;" 6 sometimes in a good sense, as,

"

"
Save me, O God, by Thy name, and judge
me by Thy strength." 7
This is easily understood when we consider that it
is the judgment of God which separates the good from
the evil, and sets the good at His right hand,
that they may be delivered from evil, and
not destroyed with the wicked; and it is for
this reason that the Psalmist cried, "Judge
me, O God," and then added, as if in explan-
" and distinguish my cause from that of
ation,
an ungodly nation." 8

CHAP. 56.

THE HOLY SPIRIT AND THE CHURCH.

THE CHURCH IS THE TEMPLE OF GOD.

And now, having spoken of Jesus Christ,
the only Son of God, our Lord, with the brevity suitable to a confession of our faith, we
go on to say that we believe also in the Holy
thus completing the Trinity which
Ghost,
Then we mention
constitutes the Godhead.
the Holy Church. And thus we are made to
understand that the intelligent creation, which
constitutes the free Jerusalem, 9 ought to be
subordinate in the order of speech to the
Creator, the Supreme Trinity: for all that is
said of the man Christ Jesus has reference,
of course, to the unity of the person of the
Therefore the true order of
Only-begotten.
the Creed demanded that the Church should
be made subordinate to the Trinity, as the
house to Him who dwells in it, the temple to
God who occupies it, and the
city to its
builder. And we are here to understand the
whole Church, not that part of it only which
wanders as a stranger on the earth, praising
the name of God from the rising of the sun
to the going down of the same, and singing
a new song of deliverance from its old captivity; but that part also which has always from
its creation remained steadfast to God in
heaven, and has never experienced the misery
This part is made
consequent upon a fall.
up of the holy angels, who enjoy uninterrupted
happiness; and (as it is bound to do) it renders assistance to. the part which is still wandering among strangers: for these two parts
shall be one in the fellowship of eternity, and
now they are one in the bonds of love, the whole
having been ordained for the worship of the
one God.
the whole
Church, nor any part of it, has any desire to
be worshipped instead of God, nor to be God
to any one who belongs to the temple of God
that temple which is built up of the saints
who were created by the uncreated God.
And therefore the Holy Spirit, if a creature,
could not be the Creator, but would be a part

Wherefore,

neither

1 Gal. v. 24.
3 Rom. vi. 5.
5 Col. iii. 4.

2 Rom. vi. 4.
4 Col. iii. 1-3.
6 John v. 29 (damnation, A. V.)

7 Ps. liv. 1.
8 Ps. xliii. 1

A. V.)

(" Plead my cause against an ungodly nation,"
9 Gal. iv. 26.

[Chap. LIX.

" *

of the intelligent creation. He would simply
be the highest creature, and therefore would
not be mentioned in the Creed before the
Church; for He Himself would belong to the
Church, to that part of it which is in the
heavens. And He would not have a temple,
for He Himself would be part of a temple.
Now He has a temple, of which the apostle
" Know ye not that your body is the
says:
temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you,
which ye have of God ?
Of which body he
" Know ye not that
says in another place:
your bodies are the members of Christ?" 2
How, then, is He not God, seeing that He
has a temple ? and how can He be less than
Christ, whose members are His temple ? Nor
has He one temple, and God another, seeing
" Know ye not
that the same apostle says:
" 3 and adds,
that ye are the temple of God ?
" and that the Spirit of God
as proof of this,
God, then, dwells in His
dwelleth in you." 4
not the Holy Spirit only, but the
temple:
Father also, and the Son, who says of His
own body, through which He was made Head
of the Church upon earth (" that in all things
He might have the pre-eminence):
Destroy this temple, and in three days 1 will
6 The temple of God, then, that
raise it up."
is, of the Supreme Trinity as a whole, is the
Holy Church, embracing in its full extent both
heaven and earth.

" 5 "

CHAP. 57.

THE CONDITION OF THE CHURCH IN

HEAVEN.

But of that par*- of the Church which is in
heaven what can we say, except that no wicked
one is found in it, and that no one has fallen
from it, or shall ever fall from it, since the
time that ' God spared not the angels that
sinned," as the Apostle Peter writes, "but
cast them down to hell, and delivered them
into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto
judgment?" 7

CHAP. 58.

WE HAVE NO CERTAIN KNOWLEDGE
OF THE ORGANIZATION OF THE ANGELIC
SOCIETY.

Now, what the organization is of that supremely happy society in heaven: what the
differences of rank are, which explain the fact
that while all are called by the general name
angels, as we read in the Epistle to the Hebut to which of the angels said God
brews,
at any time, Sit on my right hand?" 8
(this
form of expression being evidently designed
to embrace all the angels without exception),

"

1 1 Cor. vi. 19.
3 1 Cor. iii. 16.
5 Col. i. 18.
7 2 Pet. ii. 4.

2 1 Cor. vi. 15.
4 1 Cor. iii. 16.
6 John ii, 19.
SHeb. i. 13.

"

"

we yet find that there are some called archangels; and whether the archangels are the
same as those called hosts, so that the expresPraise ye Him, all His angels: praise
sion,
ye Him, all His hosts," 9 is the same as if it
had been said,
Praise ye Him, all His
angels: praise ye Him, all His archangels;"
and what are the various significations of those
four names under which the apostle seems to
embrace the whole heavenly company without
exception, "whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers:
let
those who are able answer these questions, if
they can also prove their answers to be true;
I am
but as for me, I confess my ignorance.
not even certain upon this point: whether the
sun, and the moon, and all the stars, do not
form part of this same society, though many
consider them merely luminous bodies, without either sensation or intelligence.

" I0

CHAP. 59.

THE BODIES ASSUMED BY ANGELS
RAISE A VERY DIFFICULT, AND NOT VERY
USEFUL, SUBJECT OF DISCUSSION.
Further, who will

tell with what sort of
bodies it was that the angels appeared to
men, making themselves not only visible, but
tangible; and again, how it is that, not through
material bodies, but by spiritual power, they
present visions not to the bodily eyes, but to
the spiritual eyes of the mind, or speak something not into the ear from without, but from
within the soul of the man, they themselves
being stationed there too, as it is written in
the prophet, "And the angel that spake in
me said unto me" 11
(he does not say, "that
"
spake to me," but
that* spake in me"); or
appear to men in sleep, and make communications through dreams, as we read in the
Behold, the angel of the Lord apGospel,
peared unto him in a dream, saying"?
12 For
these methods of communication seem to imply that the angels have not tangible bodies,
and make it a very difficult question to solve
how the patriarchs washed their feet,
13 and
how it was that Jacob wrestled with the angel
in a way so unmistakeably material. 14 To ask
these, and to make such
questions
guesses as we can at the answers, is a useful
exercise for the intellect, if the discussion be
kept within proper bounds, and if we avoid
the error of supposing ourselves to know what
we do not know.
For what is the necessity
for affirming, or denying, or defining with
accuracy on these subjects, and others like
them, when we may without blame be entirely ignorant of them ?

like

"

R. V.]
9 Ps. cxlviii. 2, [" host,
11 Zech. i. 9 (" The angel that talked with me," A. V.)_
12 Matt. i. 20.
13 Gen. xviii. 4, xix. 2.

Col. i. 16.

J 4 Gen. xxxii. 24, 25.

"

Chap. LXIIL]

ENCHIRIDION.

CHAP. 60.

IT IS MORE NECESSARY TO BE ABLE
TO DETECT THE WILES OF SATAN WHEN HE
TRANSFORMS HIMSELF INTO AN ANGEL OF
LIGHT.

It is more necessary to use all our powers
of discrimination and judgment when Satan
transforms himself into an angel of light,
1 lest
by his wiles he should lead us astray into
For, while he only deceives
hurtful courses.
the bodily senses, and does not pervert the
mind from that true and sound judgment
which enables a man to lead a life of faith,
there is no danger to religion; or if, feigning
himself to be good, he does or says the things
that befit good angels, and we believe him to
be good, the error is not one that is hurtful
But when,
or dangerous to Christian faith.
through these means, which are alien to his
nature, he goes on to lead us into courses of
his own, then great watchfulness is necessary
to detect, and refuse to follow, him.
Bat how
many men are fit to evade all his deadly wiles,
unless God restrains and watches over them ?
The very difficulty of the matter, however, is
useful in this respect, that it prevents men
from trusting in themselves or in one another,
and leads all to place their confidence in God
And certainly no pious man can
alone.
doubt that this is most expedient for us.

CHAP. 6l.

THE CHURCH ON EARTH HAS BEEN
REDEEMED FROM SIN BY THE BLOOD OF A
MEDIATOR.

This part of the Church, then, which is
made up of the holy angels and the hosts of
God, shall become known to us in its true
nature, when, at tlie end of the world, we
shall be united with it in the common possesBut the other
sion of everlasting happiness.
part, which, separated from it, wanders as a
stranger on the earth, is better known to us,
both because we belong to it, and because it
is composed of men, and we too are men.
This section of the Church has been redeemed
from all sin by the blood of a Mediator who
had no sin, and its song is: "If God be for
us, who can be against us ? He that spared
not His own Son, but delivered Him up for
us all." 2 Now it was not for the angels that
Yet what was done for the reChrist died.
demption of man through His death was in a
sense done for the angels, because the enmity
which sin had put between men and the holy
angels is removed, and friendship is restored
between them, and by the redemption of man
the gaps which the great apostasy left in the
angelic host are filled up.

CHAP. 62.

BY THE SACRIFICE OF CHRIST ALL
THINGS ARE RESTORED, AND PEACE IS MADE
BETWEEN EARTH AND HEAVEN.

happiness

And, of course, the holy angels, taught by
God, in the eternal contemplation of whose
consists, know how
truth their
great a number of the human race are to supplement their ranks, and fill up the full tale
Wherefore the apostle
of their citizenship.
says, that "all things are gathered together
in one in Christ, both which are in heaven
and which are on earth/' 3 The things which
are in heaven are gathered together when
what was lost therefrom in the fall of the
angels is restored from among men; and the
things which are on earth are gathered together, when those who are predestined to
eternal life are redeemed from their old corruption. And thus, through that single sacrifice in which the Mediator was offered up, the
one sacrifice of which the many victims under
the
heavenly things are
brought into peace with earthly things, and
earthly things with heavenly.
Wherefore, as
the same apostle says:
For it pleased the
Father that in Him should all fullness dwell:
and, having made peace through the blood
of His cross, by Him to reconcile all things
to Himself: by Him, I say, whether they be
things in earth, or things in heaven." 4

law were types,

"

CHAP. 63.

THE PEACE OF GOD, WHICH REIGNETH IN HEAVEN, PASSETH ALL UNDERSTANDING.

"

This peace, as Scripture saith,

passeth
all understanding," 5 and cannot be known by
us until we have come into the full possession
For in what sense are heavenly things
of it.
reconciled, except they be reconciled to us,
For
viz. by coming into harmony with us ?
in heaven there is unbroken peace, both between all the intelligent creatures that exist
there, and between these and their Creator.
And this peace, as is said, passeth all understanding; but this, of course, means our understanding, not that of those who always
behold the face of their Father. We now,
however great may be our human understanding, know but in part, and see through a glass
But when we shall be equal unto
darkly.
the angels of God 7 then we shall see face to
face, as they do; and we shall have as great
peace towards them as they have towards us,
because we shall love them as much as we are
And so their peace shall be
loved by them.
known to us: for our own peace shall be like
to theirs, and as great as theirs, nor shall it

1 2 Cor. xi. 14.

2 Rom. viii. 31,

3 Eph. i. 10.
5 Phil. iv. 7.

4 Col. i. 19, 20. [R. V. " summed up."]
7 Luke xx. 36.
6 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

[Chap. LXVI

But the peace
then pass our understanding.
of God, the peace which He cherisheth towards
us, shall undoubtedly pass not our understanding only, but theirs as well. And this
must be so: for every rational creature which
is happy derives its happiness from Him; He
does not derive His from it. And in this
is better to interpret "all" in the
view it
" The peace of God passeth all unpassage,
derstanding," as admitting of no exception
even in favor of the understanding of the holy
angels: the only exception that can be made
is that of God Himself.
For, of course, His
peace does not pass His own understanding.

CHAP. 64.

PARDON OF SIN EXTENDS OVER THE
WHOLE MORTAL LIFE OF THE SAINTS, WHICH,
THOUGH FREE FROM CRIME, IS NOT FREE FROM
SIN.
But the angels even now are at peace with
us when our sins are pardoned.
Hence, in
the order of the Creed, after the mention of
the Holy Church is placed the remission of
For it is by this that the Church on
sins.
earth stands: it is through this that what had
been lost, and was found, is saved from being
For, setting aside the grace of
lost again.
baptism, which is given as an antidote to
original sin, so that what our birth imposes
upon us, our new birth relieves us from (this
grace, however, takes away all the actual sins
also that have been committed in thought,
word, and deed): setting aside, then, this
great act of favor, whence commences man's
restoration, and in which all our guilt, both
original and actual, is washed away, the rest
of our life from the time that we have the use
of reason provides constant occasion for the
remission of sins, however great may be our
For the sons of
advance in righteousness.
God, as long as they live in this body of death,
are in conflict with death. And although it
is truly said of them, "As many as are led
by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of
yet they are led by the Spirit of God,
God," *
and as the sons of God advance towards God
under this drawback, that they are led also
by their own spirit, weighted as it is by the
2 and that, as the sons of
corruptible body;
men, under the influence of human affections,
they fall back to their old level, and so sin.
For although
There is a difference, however.
every crime is a sin, every sin is not a crime.
And so we say that the life of holy men, as
long as they remain in this mortal body, may
be found without crime; but, as the Apostle
John says, "If we say that we have no sin,
we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not
in us." 3

CHAP. 65.

GOD PARDONS SINS, BUT ON CONDITION OF PENITENCE, CERTAIN TIMES FOR
WHICH HAVE BEEN FIXED BY THE LAW OF
THE CHURCH.

But even crimes themselves, however great,
may be remitted in the Holy Church; and the
mercy of God is never to be despaired of by
men who truly repent, each according to the
measure of his sin. And in the act of repentance, where a crime has been committed
of such a nature as to cut off the sinner from
the body of Christ, we are not to take account
so much of the measure of time as of the
measure of sorrow; for a broken and a contrite heart God doth not despise. 4
But as
the grief of one heart is frequently hid from
another, and is not made known to others by
words or other signs, when it is manifest to
" My groaning is not
Him of whom it is said,
hid from Thee," 5 those who govern the
Church have rightly appointed tunes of penitence, that the Church in which the sins are
remitted may be satisfied; and outside the
Church sins are not remitted.
For the Church
alone has received the pledge of the Holy
Spirit, without which there is no remission of
such, at least, as brings the pardoned
sins
to eternal life.

CHAP. 66.

THE PARDON OF SIN HAS REFER-

to the future judgment.
life

ENCE CHIEFLY TO THE FUTURE JUDGMENT.
Now the pardon of sin has reference chiefly
For, as far as this
is concerned, the saying of Scripture
holds good: "A heavy yoke is upon the sons
of Adam, from the day that they go out of
their mother's womb, till the day that they
return to the mother of all things."
So that
we see even infants, after baptism and regenerations suffering from the infliction of divers
evils: and thus we are given to understand,
that all that is set forth in the sacraments of
salvation refers rather to the hope of future
good, than to the retaining or attaining of
For many sins seem in
present blessings.
this world to be overlooked and visited with
no punishment, whose punishment is reserved
for the future (for it is not in vain that the
day when Christ shall come as Judge of quick
and dead is peculiarly named the day of judgment); just as, on the other hand, many sins
are punished in this life, which nevertheless
are pardoned, and shall bring down no punishment in the future life.
Accordingly, in
reference to certain temporal punishments,
which in this life are visited upon sinners, the
apostle, addressing those whose sins
are

* Rom. viii. 14,

a Wisd. ix. 15.

3 1 John i. 8.

4 Ps. li. 17.

5 Ps. xxxviii. 9.

6 Ecclus. xl. 1.

Chap. LXVIII.]

ENCHIRIDION.

blotted out, and not reserved for the final
"
For if we would judge ourjudgment, says:
But when
selves, we should not be judged.
we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord,
that we should not be condemned with the
world." J

CHAP. 67.

FAITH WITHOUT WORKS IS DEAD,

AND CANNOT SAVE A MAN.
It is believed, moreover, by some, that men
who do not abandon the name of Christ, and
who have been baptized in the Church by His
baptism, and who have never been cut off
from the Church by any schism or heresy,
though they should live in the grossest sin,
and never either wash it away in penitence nor
redeem it by almsgiving, but persevere in it
persistently to the last day of their lives, shall
be saved by fire: that is, that although they
shall suffer a punishment by fire, lasting for a
time proportionate to the magnitude of their
crimes and misdeeds, they shall not be punBut those who
ished with everlasting fire.
believe this, and yet are Catholics, seem to
me to be led astray by a kind of benevolent
For Holy Scriptfeeling natural to humanity.
ure, when consulted, gives a very different
I have written a book on this subanswer.
ject, entitled Of Faith and Works, in which,
to the best of my ability, God assisting me, I
have shown from Scripture, that the faith
which saves us is that which the Apostle Paul
clearly enough describes when he says:
For
in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth
anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith which
worketh by love." 2
But if it worketh evil,
and not good, then without doubt, as the
Apostle James says, "it is dead, being
The same apostle
alone." 3
again,
"What doth it profit, my brethren, though a
man say he hath faith, and have not works ?
Can faith save him?" 4 And further, if a
wicked man shall be saved by fire on account
of his faith alone, and if this is what the
blessed Apostle Paul means when he says,
"
But he himself shall be saved, yet so as by
fire;" s then faith without works can save a
man, and what his fellow-apostle James says
must be false. And that must be false which
" Be not
Paul himself says in another place:
deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters,
nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor
covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God." 6
For if those who persevere in these wicked
courses shall nevertheless be saved on account

says

"

1 1 Cor. xi. 31, 32.
3 Jas. ii. 17. [See R. V.]
5 1 Cor. iii. 15.

2 Gal. v. 6.
4 Jas. ii. 14.
6 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10.

of their faith in Christ, how can it be true that
they shall not inherit the kingdom of God ?

that is,

CHAP. 68.

THE TRUE SENSE OF THE PASSAGE
(i COR. III. II-15) ABOUT THOSE WHO ARE
SAVED, YET SO AS BY FIRE.
But as these most plain and unmistakeable
declarations of the apostles cannot be false,
that obscure saying about those who build
upon the foundation, Christ, not gold, silver,
and precious stones, but wood, hay, and
stubble (for it is these who, it is said, shall
be saved, yet so as by fire, the merit of the
foundation saving them 7
), must be so interpreted as not to conflict with the plain statements quoted above. Now wood, hay, and
stubble may, without incongruity, be understood to signify such an attachment to worldly
things, however lawful these may be in themselves, that they cannot be lost without grief
of mind. And though this grief burns, yet
if Christ hold the place of foundation in the
if nothing be preferred to
heart,
Him, and if the man, though burning with grief,
is yet more willing to lose the things he loves so
much than to lose Christ,
he is saved by fire.
If, however, in time of temptation, he prefer to
hold by temporal and earthly things rather
than by Christ, he has not Christ as his foundation ; for he puts earthly things in the first
place, and in a building nothing comes before
Again, the fire of which the
the foundation.
apostle speaks in this place must be such a
fire as both men are made to pass through,
that is, both the man who builds upon the
foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, and
the man who builds wood, hay, stubble.
For
he immediately adds: "The fire shall try
every man's work, of what sort it is.
If any
man's work abide which he hath built thereIf any man's
upon, he shall receive a reward.
work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss; but
he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire." 8
The fire then shall prove, not the work of one
of them only, but of both. Now the trial of
adversity is a kind of fire which is plainly
spoken of in another place: "The furnace
proveth the potter's vessels : and the furnace
of adversity just men." 9 And this fire does
in the course of this life act exactly in the
If it come into contact
way the apostle says.
with two believers, one "
caring for the things
that belong to the Lord, how he may please
the Lord," 10 that is, building upon Christ the
foundation, gold, silver, precious stones; the
other "caring for the things that are of the

7 1 Cor. iii. 11-15. [The

fire" in ver. 15 is not the purgatorial fire in the state between death and resurrection, but, as in ver.
14, the fire of the day of judgment.

P. S.]

"

8 1 Cor. iii. 13-15.
10 1 Cor. vii. 32.

9 Ecclus. xxvii. 5, ii. 5.

1 Cor. vii. 33.

[See R.V.]

26o

[Chap. LXXII.

world, how he may please his wife,"" that is,
building upon the same foundation wood,
the work of the former is not
hay, stubble,
burned, because he has not given his love to
things whose loss can cause him grief ; but
the work of the latter is burned, because things
that are enjoyed with desire cannot be lost
But since, by our supposition,
without pain.
even the latter prefers to lose these things
rather than to lose Christ, and since he does
not desert Christ out of fear of losing them,
though he is grieved when he does lose them,
he is saved, but it is so as by fire ; because
the grief for what he loved and has lost burns
But it does not subvert nor consume
him.
him ; for he is protected by his immoveable
and incorruptible foundation.

CHAP. 69.

IT IS NOT IMPOSSIBLE THAT SOME
BELIEVERS MAY PASS THROUGH A PURGATORIAL FIRE IN THE FUTURE LIFE.
And it is not impossible that something of
the same kind may take place even after this
It is a matter that may be inquired
life.
into, and either ascertained or left doubtful,
whether some believers shall pass through a
kind of purgatorial fire, and in proportion as
they have loved with more or less devotion
the goods that perish, be less or more quickly
This cannot, however, be
delivered from it.
the case of any of those of whom it is said,
shall not inherit the kingdom of
that they
God," 1 unless after suitable repentance their
sins be forgiven them. When I say
suitable," I mean that they are not to be unfruitful in almsgiving ; for Holy Scripture lays so
much stress on this virtue, that our Lord tells
us beforehand, that He will ascribe no merit
to those on His right hand but that they
abound in it, and no defect to those on His
left hand but their want of it, when He shall
Come, ye blessed of my
say to the former,
Father, inherit the kingdom," and to the latDepart from me, ye cursed, into everter,
lasting fire." 2

"

"

"

"

CHAP. 70.

ALMSGIVING WILL NOT ATONE FOR

SIN UNLESS THE LIFE BE CHANGED.

We must beware, however, lest any one
should suppose that gross sins, such as are
committed by those who shall not inherit the
kingdom of God, may be daily perpetrated, and
daily atoned for by almsgiving. The life must
be changed for the better ; and almsgiving
must be used to propitiate God for past sins,
not to purchase impunity for the commission
of such sins in the future. For He has given no
man license to sin,
3 although in His mercy

He may blot out sins that are already committed, if we do not neglect to make proper
satisfaction.

CHAP. 71.

THE DAILY PRAYER OF THE BELIEVER MAKES SATISFACTION FOR THE TRIVIAL
SINS THAT DAILY STAIN HIS LIFE.

Now the daily prayer of the believer makes
satisfaction for those daily sins of a momentary and trivial kind which are necessary inFor he can say, "Our
cidents of this life.
Father which art in heaven," 4 seeing that to
such a Father he is now born again of water
s And this prayer certainly
and of the Spirit.
takes away the very small sins of daily life.
It takes away also those which at one time
made the life of the believer very wicked, but
which, now that he is changed for the better
by repentance, he has given up, provided that
"
as truly as he says,
Forgive us our debts"
(for there is no want of debts to be forgiven),
"
as we forgive our debtso truly does he say,
6 that is, provided he does what he says
ors;"
he does : for to forgive a man who asks for
pardon, is really to give alms.

CHAP. 72.

THERE ARE MANY KINDS OF ALMS,
THE GIVING OF WHICH ASSISTS TO PROCURE
PARDON FOR OUR SINS.

And on this principle of interpretation, our
"Give alms of such things as
Lord's saying,
ye have, and, behold, all things are clean unto you," 7 applies to every useful act that a
man does in mercy. Not only, then, the man
who gives food to the hungry, drink to the
thirsty, clothing to the naked, hospitality to
the fugitive, who
the stranger, shelter to
visits the sick and the imprisoned, ransoms
the captive, assists the weak, leads the blind,
comforts the sorrowful, heals the sick, puts
the wanderer on the right path, gives advice
to the perplexed, and supplies the wants of
not this man only, but the man
the needy,
who pardons the sinner also gives alms ; and
the man who corrects with blows, or restrains
by any kind of discipline one over whom he
has power, and who at the same time forgives
from the heart the sin by which he was injured, or prays that it may be forgiven, is also a giver of alms, not only in that he forgives, or prays for forgiveness for the sin,
but also in that he rebukes and corrects the
sinner: for in this, too, he shows mercy. Now
much good is bestowed upon unwilling recipients, when their advantage and not their
pleasure is consulted ; and they themselves

1 1 Cor. vi. 10.

2 Matt. xxv. 31-46.

3 Ecclus. xv. 20.

4 Matt. vi. 9.
6 Matt. vi. 12.

5 John iii. 5.
7 I.uke xi. 41.

Chap. LXXV.]

ENCHIRIDION.

frequently prove to be their own enemies,
while their true friends are those whom they
take for their enemies, and to whom in their
blindness
(A
Christian, indeed, is not permitted to return
) And thus there are many
evil even for evil. 1
kinds of alms, by giving of which we assist
to procure the pardon of our sins.

they return

for good.

evil

CHAP. 73.

THE GREATEST OF ALL ALMS IS TO
FORGIVE OUR DEBTORS AND TO LOVE OUR
ENEMIES.

But none of those is greater than to forgive from the heart a sin that has been comFor it is a comparatively
mitted against us.
small "thing to wish well to, or even to do
good to, a man who has done no evil to you.
It is a much higher thing, and is the result of
the most exalted goodness, to love your enemy, and always to wish well to, and when
you have the opportunity, to do good to, the
man who wishes you ill, and, when he can,
This is to obey the comdoes you harm.
mand of God: " Love your enemies, do good
to them that hate you, and pray for them
But seeing that this
which persecute you."
is a frame of mind only reached by the perfect sons of God, and that though every believer ought to strive after it, and by prayer
to God and earnest struggling with himself
endeavor to bring his soul up to this standard,
yet a degree of goodness so high can hardly
belong to so great a multitude as we believe
are heard when they use this petition,
For-
"
give us our debts, as we forgive our debtors ;
in view of all this, it cannot be doubted that
the implied undertaking is fulfilled if a man,
though he has not yet attained to loving his
enemy, yet, when asked by one who has
sinned against him to forgive him his sin,
does forgive him from his heart.
For he certainly desires to be himself forgiven when he
prays, "as we forgive our debtors/' that
is, Forgive us our debts when we beg forgiveness, as we forgive our debtors when they beg
forgiveness from us.

"

CHAP. 74.

GOD DOES NOT PARDON THE SINS OF
THOSE WHO DO NOT FROM THE HEART FORGIVE OTHERS.
Now, he who asks forgiveness of the man
against whom he has sinned, being moved by
his sin to ask forgiveness, cannot be counted
an enemy in such a sense that it should be as
difficult to love him now as it was when he
was engaged in active hostility. And the
man who does not from his heart forgive him
who repents of his sin, and asks forgiveness

1 Rom. xii. 17 ; Matt. v. 44.

2 Matt. v. 44.

"

need not suppose that his own sins are forFor the Truth cannot lie.
given of God.
And what reader or hearer of the Gospel can
have failed to notice, that the same person
I am the Truth," 3 taught us also
who said,
this form of prayer ; and in order to impress
this particular petition deeply upon our minds,
said, "For if ye forgive men their trespasses,
your heavenly Father will also forgive you ;
but if ye forgive not men their trespasses,
neither will your Father forgive your trespasses"? 4 The man whom the thunder of
this warning does not awaken is not asleep,
but dead ; and yet so powerful is that voice,
that it can awaken even the dead.

this

CHAP. 75.

THE WICKED AND THE UNBELIEVING
ARE NOT MADE CLEAN BY THE GIVING OF
ALMS, EXCEPT THEY BE BORN AGAIN.
Assuredly, then, those who live in gross
wickedness, and take no care to reform their
lives and manners, and yet amid all their
crimes and vices do not cease to give frequent alms, in vain take comfort to themselves from the saying of our Lord : "Give
alms of such things as ye have ; and, behold,
For they
all things are clean unto you." 5
do not understand how far
saying
But that they may understand this,
reaches.
let them hear what He says.
For we read in
" And as He spake, a
the Gospel as follows :
certain Pharisee besought Him to dine with
him ; and He went in, and sat down to meat.
And when the Pharisee' saw it, he marvelled
that He had not first washed before dinner.
And the Lord said unto him, Now do ye
Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup
and the platter ; but your inward part is full
of ravening and wickedness. Ye fools, did
not he that made that which is without, make
But rather give
that which i*s within also ?
alms of such things as ye have ; and, behold,
Are we to
all things are clean unto you."
understand this as meaning that to the Pharisees who have not the faith of Christ all things
are clean, if only they give alms in the way
these men count almsgiving, even though
they have never believed in Christ, nor been
born again of water and of the Spirit?
But
the fact is, that all are unclean who are not
made clean by the faith of Christ, according
to the expression,
purifying their hearts by
7 and that the apostle says, "Unto
faith ;"
them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience
is defiled." 8 How, then, could all things be
clean to the Pharisees, even though they gave

"

3 John xiv. 6.
5 Luke xi. 41.
7 Acts xv. 9.

4 Matt. vi. 14, 15.
6 Luke xi. 37-41. [See R. V.]
8 Tit. i. 15.

[Chap. LXXVIII.

alms, if they were not believers ? And how
could they be believers if they were not willing to have faith in Christ, and to be born
again of His grace ? And yet what they heard
' ' Give alms of such things as ye have ;
is true :
and, behold, all things are clean unto you."

CHAP. 76.

TO GIVE ALMS ARIGHT, WE SHOULD
BEGIN WITH OURSELVES, AND HAVE PITY UPON
OUR OWN SOULS.
For the man who wishes to give alms as he
ought, should begin with himself, and give to
For almsgiving is a work of
himself first.
mercy; and most truly is it said, "To have
mercy on thy soul is pleasing to God." * And
for this end are we born again, that we should
be pleasing to God, who is justly displeased
with that which we brought with us when- we
This is our first alms, which we
were born.
give to ourselves when, through the mercy of
a pitying God, we find that we are ourselves
wretched, and confess the justice of His judgment by which we are made wretched, of
" The judgment was
which the apostle says,
by one to condemnation;" 2 and praise the
greatness of His love, of which the same
preacher of grace says, "God commendeth
His love toward us, in that, while we were
yet sinners, Christ died for us:" 3 and thus,
judging truly of our own misery, and loving
God with the love which He has Himself bestowed, we lead a holy and virtuous life.
But
the Pharisees, while they gave as alms the
tithe of all their fruits, even the most insignificant, passed over judgment and the love
of God, and so did not commence their almsgiving at home, and extend their pity to
themselves in the first instance. And it is in
reference to this order of love that it is said,
"Love thy neighbor as thyself."
4 When,
then, our Lord had rebuked them because
they made themselves clean on the outside,
but within were full of ravening and wickedness, He advised them, in the exercise of that
charity which each man owes to himself in the
first instance, to make clean the inward parts.
" But rather/' He says, "give alms of such
things as ye have; and, behold, all things are
Then, to show what it
clean unto you." 5
was that He advised, and what they took no
pains to do, and to show that He did not
overlook or forget their almsgiving, "But
woe unto you, Pharisees!" 5 He says; as if
He meant to say: I indeed advise you to give
alms which shall make all things clean unto
but woe unto you ! for ye tithe mint,
you;
" as if He
and rue, and all manner of herbs;
meant to say: I know these alms of yours,

"

1 Ecclus. xxx. 24.
4 Luke x. 27.

2 Rom. v.
5 Luke xi.

[6.

42.

3 Rom. v. 8.

and ye need not think that I am now admonishing you in respect of such things; "and
pass over judgment and the love of God," an
alms by which ye might have been made clean
from all inward impurity, so that even the
bodies which ye are now washing would have
been clean to you.
For this is the import of
"
all things," both inward and outward things,
as we read in another place: "Cleanse first
that which is within, that the outside may be
But lest He might appear to
clean also." 6
despise the alms which they were giving out
of the fruits of the earth, He says: "These
ought ye to have done," referring to judgment and the love of God,
and not to leave
the other undone," referring to the giving of
the tithes.

"

CHAP. 77.

IF WE WOULD GIVE ALMS TO OURSELVES, WE MUST FLEE INIQUITY; FOR HE
WHO LOVETH INIQUITY HATETH HIS SOUL.

Those, then, who think that they can by
giving alms, however profuse, whether in
money or in kind, purchase for themselves
the privilege of persisting with impunity in
their monstrous crimes and hideous vices,,
need not thus deceive themselves.
For not
only do they commit these sins, but they love
them so much that they would like to go on
forever committing them, if only they could
do so with impunity.
Now, he who loveth
iniquity hateth his own soul; 7 and he who^
hateth his own soul is not merciful but cruel
For in loving it according to the
towards it.
world, he hateth it according to God.
But if
he desired to give alms to it which should
make all things clean unto him, he would
hate it according to the world, and love it acNow no one gives alms
cording to God.
unless he receive what he gives from one who
is not in want of it.
is said,
" His mercy shall meet me." 8

Therefore it

CHAP. 78. WHAT SINS ARE TRIVIAL AND WHAT
HEINOUS IS A MATTER FOR GOD'S JUDGMENT.
Now, what sins are trivial and what heinous
is not a matter to be decided by man's judgment, but by the judgment of God.
For it is
plain that the apostles themselves have given
an indulgence in the case of certain sins:
take, for example, what the Apostle Paul says
to those who are married: "Defraud ye not
one the other, except it be with consent for a
time, that ye may give yourselves to fasting
and prayer: and come together again, that

6 Matt, xxiii. 26.
7 Ps. xi. 5 (" Him that loveth violence, His (God's) soul hat-

eth," A. V.).

8 Ps. lix. 10.

Chap. LXXX.]

ENCHIRIDION.

'

not

and

unjust,

before

is a sin, when confessedly it

Satan tempt you not for your incontinency."
Now it is possible that it might not have been
considered a sin to have intercourse with a
spouse, not with a view to the procreation of
children, which is the great blessing of marriage, but for the sake of carnal pleasure, and
to save the incontinent from being led by their
weakness into the deadly sin of fornication,
or adultery, or another form of uncleanness
which it is shameful even to name, and into
which it is possible that they might be drawn
by lust under the temptation of Satan.
It is
possible, I say, that this might not have been
considered a sin, had the apostle not added:
"But I speak this by permission, and not of
commandment." -
Who, then, can deny that
is only by
it
apostolic authority that permission is granted
to those who do it ? Another case of the same
kind is where he says: "Dare any of you,
having a matter against another, go to law
the
before
the
" 3 And shortly afterwards: ' ' If then
saints ?
ye have judgments of things pertaining to
this life, set them to judge who are least
esteemed in the Church.
I speak to your
Is it so, that there is not a wise man
shame.
among you ? no, not one that shall be able to
But brother
judge between his brethren?
goeth to law with brother, and that before the
unbelievers." 4 Now it might have been supposed in this case that it is not a sin to have
a quarrel with another, that the only sin is in
wishing to have it adjudicated upon outside
the Church, had not the apostle immediately
added: "Now therefore there is utterly a
fault among you, because ye go to law with
" s And lest any one should
one another.
excuse himself by saying that he had a just
cause, and was suffering wrong, and that he
only wished the sentence of the judges to remove his wrong, the apostle immediately anticipates such thoughts and excuses, and says:
" Why do ye not rather take wrong? Why
do ye not rather suffer yourselves to be deThus bringing us back to our
frauded?"
If any man will sue thee at
Lord's saying,
the law, and take away thy coat, let him have
thy cloak also;" 6 and again, "Of him that
taketh away thy goods, ask them not again." 7
Therefore our Lord has forbidden His followers to go to law with other men about
worldly affairs. And carrying out this principle, the apostle here declares that to do so is
But when, notwith-
"altogether a fault."
standing, he grants his permission to have
such cases between brethren decided in the

"

Church, other brethren adjudicating, and only
sternly forbids them to be carried outside the
Church, it is manifest that here again an indulgence is extended to the infirmities of the
It is in view, then, of these sins, and
weak.
others of the same sort, and of others again
more trifling still, which consist of offenses in
words and thought (as the Apostle James confesses, "In many things we offend all" 8
that we need to pray every day and often to
the Lord, saying, "Forgive us our debts,"
and to add in truth and sincerity, "as we
forgive our debtors.

),

"

CHAP. 79.

SINS WHICH APPEAR VERY TRIFLING,

ARE SOMETIMES IN REALITY VERY SERIOUS.

Again, there are some sins which would be
considered very trifling, if the Scriptures did
not show that they are really very serious.
For who would suppose that the man who says
to his brother, "Thou fool," is in danger of
hell-fire, did not He who is the Truth say so?
To the wound, however, He immediately
applies the cure, giving a rule for reconciliation with one's offended brother: "Therefore, if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and
there rememberest that thy brother hath
ought against thee; leave there thy gift before
the altar, and go thy way: first be reconciled
to thy brother, and then come and offer thy
Again, who would suppose that it
gift."
to observe days, and
was so great a sin
months, and times, and years, as those do
who are anxious or unwilling to begin anything on certain days, or in certain months
or years, because the vain doctrines of men
lead them to think such times lucky or unlucky, had we not the means of estimating
the greatness of the evil from the fear expressed by the apostle, who says to such men,
"I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed
"
upon you labor in vain

?

CHAP. 80.

SINS, HOWEVER GREAT AND DETESTABLE, SEEM TRIVIAL WHEN WE ARE ACCUSTOMED TO THEM.
Add to this, that sins, however great and
detestable they may be, are looked upon as
trivial, or as not sins at all, when men get
accustomed to them; and so far does this go,
that such sins are not only not concealed, but
are boasted of, and published far and wide;
" The wicked boastand thus, as it is written,
eth of his heart's desire, and blesseth the
covetous, whom the Lord abhorreth.
Iniquity of this kind is in Scripture called a cry.
You have an instance in the prophet Isaiah,
" He looked
in the case of the evil vineyard:

" "

1 1 Cor. vii. 5.
3 1 Cor. vi. 1.
6 Matt. v. 40.

2 1 Cor. vii. 6. [" Concession," R. V.]
4 1 Cor. vi. 4-6.
5 1 Cor. vi. 7.
7 Luke vi. 30.

8 Jas. iii. 2.
10 Gal. iv. 10, 11.

[See R. V.]

9 Matt. v. 22, 23.
" Ps. x. 3.

[Chap. LXXXIV.

for judgment, but behold oppression;
for
1 Whence
righteousness, but behold a cry."
" The cry of
also the expression in Genesis:
Sodom and Gomorrah is great,"
2 because in
these cities crimes were not only not punished,
but were openly committed, as if under the proAnd so in our own times:
tection of the law.
many forms of sin, though not just the same
as those of Sodom and Gomorrah, are now so
openly and habitually practised, that not only
dare we not excommunicate a layman, we
dare not even degrade a clergyman, for the
So that when, a few
commission of them.
years ago, I was expounding the Epistle to
the Galatians, in commenting on that very
I am afraid of
place where the apostle says,
you, lest I have bestowed labor upon you in
vain," I was compelled to exclaim, "Woe to
the sins of men !
for it is only when we are
not accustomed to them that we shrink from
them: when once we are accustomed to them,
though the blood of the Son of God was
poured out to wash them away, though they
are so great that the kingdom of God is
wholly shut against them, constant familiarity
leads to the toleration of them all, and habitual
toleration leads to the practice of many of
them. And grant, O Lord, that we may not
come to practise all that we have not the
But I shall see whether
power to hinder."
the extravagance of grief did not betray me
into rashness of speech.

"

CHAP. 8l.

THERE ARE TWO CAUSES OF SIN,
IGNORANCE AND WEAKNESS ; AND WE NEED
DIVINE HELP TO OVERCOME BOTH.

I shall now say this, which I have often
said before in other places of my works.
There are two causes that lead to sin: either
we do not yet know our duty, or we do not
The former
perform the duty that we know.
is the sin of ignorance, the latter of weakness.
Now against these it is our duty to struggle;
but we shall certainly be beaten in the fight,
unless we are helped by God, not only to see
our duty, but also, when we clearly see it, to
make the love of righteousness stronger in us
than the love of earthly things, the eager
longing after which, or the fear of losing
which, leads us with our eyes open into known
In the latter case we are not only sinsin.
ners, for we are so even when we err through
ignorance, but we are also transgressors of the
law; for we leave undone what we know we
ought to do, and we do what we know we
Wherefore not only ought
ought not to do.
we to pray for pardon when we have sinned,

"

"

" and lead us not into temptation.

Forgive us our debts, as we forgive
saying,
but we ought to pray for guidour debtors;
ance, that we may be kept from sinning, say-
" And
ing,
we are to pray to Him of whom the Psalmist
says, "The Lord is my light and my salvation:" 3 my light, for He removes my ignorance; my salvation, for He takes away my

infirmity.

CHAP. 82.

THE MERCY OF GOD IS NECESSARY
TO TRUE REPENTANCE.

Now even penance itself, when by the law
of the Church there is sufficient reason for its
being gone through, is frequently evaded
for shame is the fear of
through infirmity;
losing pleasure when the good opinion of men
gives more pleasure than the righteousness
which leads a man to humble himself in peniWherefore the mercy of God is necestence.
sary not only when a man repents, but even
to lead him to repent. How else explain what
if God
the apostle says of certain persons:
"
peradventure will give them repentance
And before Peter wept bitterly, we are told
by the evangelist, "The Lord turned, and
looked upon him." s

"

?

CHAP. 83.

THE MAN WHO DESPISES THE MERCY
OF GOD IS GUILTY OF THE SIN AGAINST THE
HOLY GHOST.
Now the man who, not believing that sins
are remitted in the Church, despises this great
gift of God's mercy, and persists to the last
day of his life in his obstinacy of heart, is
guilty of the unpardonable sin "against the
Holy Ghost, in whom Christ forgives sins. 6
But this difficult question I have discussed as
clearly as I could in a book devoted exclusively to this one point.

CHAP. 84.

THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY

GIVES RISE TO NUMEROUS QUESTIONS.

Now, as to the resurrection of the body,
not a resurrection such as some have had,
who came back to life for a time and died
again, but a resurrection to eternal life, as the
I do not
body of Christ Himself rose again,
see how I can discuss the matter brief!)', and
at the same time give a satisfactory answer to
all the questions that are ordinarily raised
about it.
both those who have been born and those who
shall be born, both those who have died and
those who shall die
shall be raised again, no
Christian ought to have the shadow of a doubt.

Yet that the bodies of all men

* Isa. v. 7.

2 Gen. xviii. 20.

3 Ps. xxvii. 1.
5 Luke xxii. 61.

4 2 Tim. ii. 25.
6 Matt. xii. 32.

Chap. LXXXIX.]

ENCHIRIDION.

CHAP. S5.

THE CASE OF ABORTIVE CONCEP-

TIONS.
Hence in the first place arises a question
about abortive conceptions, which have indeed been born in the mother's womb, but
not so born that they could be born again.
For if we shall decide that these are to rise
again, we cannot object to any conclusion that
may be drawn in regard to those which are
fully formed. Now who is there that is not
rather disposed to think that unformed abortions perish, like seeds that have never frucBut who will dare to deny, though he
tified ?
may not dare to affirm, that at the resurrection every defect in the form shall be supplied, and that thus the perfection which time
would have brought shall not be wanting, any
more than the blemishes which time did bring
so that the nature shall
shall be present:
neither want anything suitable and in harmony with it that length of days would have
added, nor be debased by the presence of
anything of an opposite kind that length of
days has added; but that what is not yet complete shall be completed, just as what has
been injured shall be renewed.

CHAP. 86.

IF THEY HAVE EVER LIVED, THEY
MUST OF COURSE HAVE DIED, AND THEREFORE
SHALL HAVE A SHARE IN THE RESURRECTION
OF THE DEAD.
And therefore the following question may
be very carefully inquired into and discussed
by learned men, though I do not know whether
it is in man's power to resolve it: At what
time the infant begins to live in the womb:
whether life exists in a latent form before it
manifests itself in the motions of the living
being. To deny that the young who are cut
out limb by limb from the womb, lest if they
were left there dead the mother should die
too, have never been alive, seems too audaNow, from the time that a man becious.
gins to live, from that time it is possible for
And if he die, wheresoever death
him to die.
may overtake him, I cannot discover on what
principle he can be denied an interest in the
resurrection of the dead.

CHAP. 87.

THE CASE OF MONSTROUS BIRTHS.

We are not justified

in affirming even of
monstrosities, which are born and live, however quickly they may die, that they shall not
rise again, nor that they shall rise again in
deformity, and not rather with an
their
amended and perfected body. God forbid
that the double -limbed man who was lately
born in the East, of whom an account was

brought by most trustworthy brethren who
an account which the presbyhad seen him,
ter Jerome, of blessed memory, left in writing; 'God forbid, I say, that we should think
that at the resurrection there shall be one
man with double limbs, and not two distinct
men, as would have been the case had twins
And so other births, which, bebeen born.
cause they have either a superfluity or a defect, or because they are very much deformed,
are called monstrosities, shall at the resurrection be restored to the normal shape of man;
and so each single soul shall possess its own
body; and no bodies shall cohere together
even though they were born in cohesion, but
each separately shall possess all the members
which constitute a complete human body.

CHAP. 88.

THE MATERIAL OF THE BODY NEVER

PERISHES.

Nor does the earthly material out of which
men's mortal bodies are created ever perish;
but though it may crumble into dust and
ashes, or be dissolved into vapors and exhalations, though it maybe transformed into the
substance of other bodies, or dispersed into
the elements, though it should become food
for beasts or men, and be changed into their
flesh, it returns in a moment of time to that
human soul which animated it at the first,
and which caused it to become man, and to
live and grow.

CHAP. 89.

BUT THIS MATERIAL MAY BE DIFFERENTLY ARRANGED IN THE RESURRECTION
BODY.
And this earthly material, which when the
soul leaves it becomes a corpse, shall not at
the resurrection be so restored as that the
parts into which it is separated, and which
under various forms and appearances become
parts of other things (though they shall all
return to the same body from which they were
separated), must necessarily return to the
same parts of the body in which they were
For otherwise, to suporiginally situated.
pose that the hair recovers all that our frequent clippings and shavings have taken away
from it, and the nails all that we have so often
pared off, presents to the imagination such a
picture of ugliness and deformity, as to make
the resurrection of the body all but incredBut just as if a statue of some soluble
ible.
met'al were either melted by fire, or broken
into dust, or reduced to a shapeless mass,

1 lerorae, mh\s EfiistZe to Vitalis : "Or because in our times
a man was born at Lvdda with two heads, four hands, one belly,
and two feet, does it necessarily follow that all men are so born ?

[Chap. XCII.

the

and a sculptor wished to restore it from
the same quantity of metal, it would make
no difference to
completeness of the
work what part of the statue any given particle of the material was put into, as long
as the restored statue contained all the material of the original one; so God, the Artificer
of marvellous and unspeakable power, shall
with marvellous and unspeakable rapidity restore our body, using up the whole material
Nor will it
of which it originally consisted.
affect the completeness of
its restoration
whether hairs return to hairs, and nails to
nails, or whether the part of these that had
perished be changed into flesh, and called to
take its place in another part of the body, the
great Artist taking careful heed that nothing
shall be unbecoming or out of place.

CHAP. 90.

IF THERE BE DIFFERENCES AND INEQUALITIES AMONG THE BODIES OF THOSE
WHO RISE AGAIN, THERE SHALL BE NOTHING
OFFENSIVE OR DISPROPORTIONATE IN ANY.

Nor does it necessarily follow that there
shall be differences of stature among those
who rise again, because they were of different
statures during life; nor is it certain that the
lean shall rise again in their former leanness,
But if it
and the fat in their former fatness.
is part of the Creator's design that each should
preserve his own peculiarities of feature, and
retain a recognizable likeness to his former
self, while in regard to other bodily advantages all should be equal, then the material
of which each is composed may be so modified
that none of it shall be lost, and that any defect may be supplied by Him who can create
But if in the
at His will out of nothing.
bodies of those who rise again there shall be
a well-ordered inequality, such as there is in
the voices that make up a full harmony, then
the material of each man's body shall be so
dealt with that it shall form a man fit for the
assemblies of the angels, and one who shall
bring nothing among them to jar upon their
And assuredly nothing that is
sensibilities.
unseemly shall be there; but whatever shall
be there shall be graceful and becoming: for
if anything is not seemly, neither shall it be.

CHAP. 91.

THE BODIES OF THE SAINTS SHALL

AT THE RESURRECTION BE SPIRITUAL BODIES.

The bodies of the saints, then, shall rise
again free from every defect, from every blemish, as from all corruption, weight, and imFor their ease of movement shall
pediment.
Whence
be as complete as their happiness.
their bodies have been called spiritual, though

undoubtedly they shall be bodies and not
For just as now the body is called
spirits.
is a body, and not a soul
animate, though it
[anima], so then the body shall be called
spiritual, though it shall be a body, not a
Hence, as far as regards the corrupspirit.
tion which now weighs down the soul, and the
vices which urge the flesh to lust against the
it shall not then be flesh, but body;
spirit,
for there are bodies which are called celestial.
"
Wherefore it is said,
Flesh and blood can-
"
not inherit the kingdom of God;
and, as if
in explanation of this, "neither doth corrup-
" 3 What the apostle
tion inherit incorruption.
"
flesh and blood," he afterwards
first called
calls "corruption;" and what he first called
"the kingdom of God," he afterwards calls
But as far as regards the
For
substance, even then it shall be flesh.
even after the resurrection the body of Christ
flesh. 4 The a postle, however,
was called
It is sown a natural body; it is raised
says:
a spiritual body;" 5 because so perfect shall
then be the harmony between flesh and spirit,
the spirit keeping alive the subjugated flesh
without the need of any nourishment, that no
part of our nature shall be in discord with another; but as we shall be free from enemies
without, so we shall not have ourselves for
enemies within.

incorruption."

"

'

CHAP. 92.

THE RESURRECTION OF THE LOST.

But as for those who, out of the mass of
perdition caused by the first man's sin, are
not redeemed through the one Mediator between God and man, they too shall rise again,
each with his own body, but only to be punished with the devil and his angels.
Now,
whether they shall rise again with all their diseases and deformities of body, bringing with
them the diseased and deformed limbs which
they possessed here, it would be labor lost to
For we need not weary ourselves
inquire.
speculating about their health or their beauty,
which are matters uncertain, when their eterNor
nal damnation is a matter of certainty.
need we inquire in what sense their body shall
be incorruptible, if it be susceptible of pain;
or in what sense corruptible, if it be free from
For there is no true
the possibility of death.
life except where there is happiness in life,
and no true incorruption except where health
is unbroken by any pain.
When, however,
the unhappy are not permitted to die, then,
if I may so speak, death itself dies not; and
where pain without intermission afflicts the

1 1 Cor. xv. 44. [See R. V.]
3 1 Cor. xv. 50.
S 1 Cor. xv. 44.

2 Wisd. ix. 15 ; Gal. v. 17.
4 Luke xxiv. 39.

Chap. XCVIL]

ENCHIRIDION.

;67

soul, and never comes to an end, corruption
itself is not completed. This is called in Holy
Scripture "the second death." 1

CHAP. 93.

BOTH THE FIRST AND THE SECOND
DEATHS ARE THE CONSEQUENCE OF SIN.
PUNISHMENT IS PROPORTIONED TO GUILT.
And neither the first death, which takes
place when the soul is compelled to leave the
body, nor the second death, which takes place
when the soul is not permitted to leave the
suffering body, would have been inflicted on
man had no one sinned.
And, of course, the
mildest punishment of all will fall upon those
who have added no actual sin, to the original
sin they brought with them; and as for the
rest who have added such actual sins, the punishment of each will be the more tolerable in
the next world, according as his iniquity has
been less in this world.

long ago in sackcloth and ashes." 3 And assuredly there was no injustice in God's not
willing that they should be saved, though they
could have been saved had He so willed it.
Then shall be seen in the clearest light of wisdom what with the pious is now a faith, though
it is not yet a matter of certain knowledge,
how sure, how unchangeable, and how effectual is the will of God; how many things He
can do which He does not will to do, though
willing nothing which He cannot perform; and
how true is the song of the psalmist, "But
our God is in the heavens; He hath done
whatsoever He hath pleased." 4 And this
certainly is not true, if God has ever willed
anything that He has not performed; and,
still worse, if it was the will of man that hindered the Omnipotent from doing whac He
Nothing, therefore, happens but by
pleased.
the will of the Omnipotent, He either permitting it to be done, or Himself doing it.

CHAP. 94.

THE SAINTS SHALL KNOW MORE
FULLY IN THE NEXT WORLD THE BENEFITS
THEY HAVE RECEIVED BY GRACE.
Thus, when reprobate angels and men are
left to endure everlasting punishment, the
saints shall know more fully the benefits they
Then, in contemhave received by grace.
plation of the actual facts, they shall see more
clearly the meaning of the expression in the
" 2
psalms,
for it is only of unmerited mercy that any is
redeemed, and only in well-merited judgment
that any is condemned.

I will sing of mercy and judgment;

"

CHAP. 95.

GOD'S JUDGMENTS SHALL THEN BE

EXPLAINED.

Then shall be made clear much that is now
For example, when of two infants,
dark.
whose cases seem in all respects alike, one is
by the mercy of God chosen to Himself, and
the other is by His justice abandoned (wherein the one who is chosen may recognize what
was of justice due to himself, had not mercy
intervened); why, of these two, the one should
have been chosen rather than the other, is to
And again, why
us an insoluble problem.
miracles were not wrought in the presence of
men who would have repented at the working
of the miracles, while they were wrought in
the presence of others who, it was known,
For our Lord says most
would not repent.
" Woe unto thee, Chorazin ! woe
distinctly:
unto thee, Bethsaida ! for if the mighty works,
which were done in you, had been done in
Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented

CHAP. 96.

THE OMNIPOTENT GOD DOES WELL

EVEN IN THE PERMISSION OF EVIL.

Nor can we doubt that God does well even
For He
in the permission of what is evil.
permits it only in the justice of His judgment.
And surely all that is just is good.
Although,
therefore, evil, in so far as it is evil, is not a
good ; yet the fact that evil as well as good exFor if it were not a good that
ists, is a good.
evil should exist, its existence would not be
permitted by the omnipotent Good, who without doubt can as easily refuse to permit what
He does not wish, as bring about what He
And if we do not believe this, the
does wish.
very first sentence of our creed is endangered,
wherein we profess to believe in God the
For He is not truly called
Father Almighty.
Almighty if He cannot do whatsoever He
pleases, or if the power of His almighty will
is hindered by the will of any creature whatsoever.

CHAP. 97.

IN WHAT SENSE DOES THE APOSTLE
SAY THAT " GOD WILL HAVE ALL MEN TO BE
SAVED," WHEN, AS A MATTER OF FACT, ALL
ARE NOT SAVED ?
Hence we must inquire in what sense is said
of God what the apostle has mostly truly said:
" Who will have all men to be saved." 5 For,
as a matter of fact, not all, nor even a majority, are saved: so that it would seem that
what God wills is not done, man's will interfering with, and hindering the will of God.
When we ask the reason why all men are not
" Because men
saved, the ordinary answer is:

1 Rev. ii. 2.

2 Ps. ci. 1.

3 Matt. xi. 21.

4 Ps. cxv. 3.

Si Tim. ii. 4. [See R. V.]

[Chap. XCIX.

themselves are not willing."
This, indeed,
cannot be said of infants, for it is not in their
But if we
power either to will or not to will.
could attribute to their will the childish movements they make at baptism, when they make
all the resistance they can, we should say that
Our
even they are not willing to be saved.
Lord says plainly, however, in the Gospel,
when upbraiding the impious city: "How
often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens
" * as if
under her wings, and ye would not !
the will of God had been overcome by the
will of men, and when the weakest stood in
the way with their want of will, the will of the
And
strongest could not be carried out.
where is that omnipotence which hath done
all that it pleased on earth and in heaven, if
God willed to gather together the children of
Jerusalem, and did not accomplish it ?
or
rather, Jerusalem was not willing that her chilBut even
dren should be gathered together ?
though she was unwilling, He gathered together as many of her children as He wished:
for He does not will some things and do them,
and will others and do them not; but "He
hath done all that He pleased in heaven and
in earth."

HAP. 98.

PREDESTINATION TO ETERNAL LIFE

IS WHOLLY OF GOD'S FREE GRACE.
And, moreover, who will be so foolish and
blasphemous as to say that God cannot change
the evil wills of men, whichever, whenever,
and wheresoever He chooses, and direct them
But when He does this,
to what is good ?
He does it of mercy; when He does it
is of justice that He does it not;
not, it
" He hath mercy on whom He will have
for
mercy, and whom He will He hardeneth." 2
And when the apostle said this, he was illustrating the grace of God, in connection with
which he had just spoken of the twins in the
" who being not yet born,
womb of Rebecca,
neither having done any good or evil, that the
purpose of God according to election might
stand, not of works, but of Him that calleth,
it was said unto her, The elder shall serve the
younger." 3 And in reference to this matter
he
prophetic testimony:
"
Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated." 4
But perceiving how what he had said might
affect those who could not penetrate by their
understanding
grace:
"What shall we say then?" he says: "Is
there unrighteousness with God? God forFor it seems unjust that, in the abbid." 5

another

quotes

depth

this

the

of

"

"

"

sence of any merit or demerit, from good or
evil works, God should love the one and hate
Now, if the apostle had wished us
the other.
to understand that there were future good
works of the one, and evil works of the other,
which of course God foreknew, he would never
have said,
not of works," but,
of future
works," and in that way would have solved
the difficulty, or rather there would then have
As it is, however,
been no difficulty to solve.
after answering, "God forbid;" that is, God
forbid that there should be unrighteousness
with God; he goes on to prove that there is
no unrighteousness in God's doing this, and
says: "For He saith to Moses, I will have
mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will
have compassion on whom I will have comNow, who but a fool would think
passion."
that God was unrighteous, either in inflicting
penal justice on those who had earned it, or
in extending mercy to the unworthy ? Then
So then it is not of
he draws his conclusion:
him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but
Thus both
of God that showeth mercy." 7
the twins were born children of wrath, not on
account of any works of their own, but because they were bound in the fetters of that
original condemnation which came through
Adam.
I will have mercy
on whom I will have mercy," loved Jacob of
His undeserved grace, and hated Esau of His
And as this judgment
deserved judgment.
was due to both, the former learnt from the
case of the latter that the fact of the same
punishment not falling upon himself gave him
no room to glory in any merit of his own,
but only in the riches of the divine grace;
because "it is not of him that willeth, nor of
him that runneth, but of God that showeth
mercy." And indeeed the whole face, and,
if I may use the expression, every lineament of the countenance of Scripture conveys
by a very profound analogy this wholesome
warning to every one who looks carefully into
it, that he who glories should glory in the
Lord. 8

But He who said,

"

"

CHAP. 99.

AS GOD'S MERCY IS FREE,

- SO HIS
JUDGMENTS ARE JUST, AND CANNOT BE GAINSAID.
Now after commending the mercy of God,
So it is not of him that willeth, nor
saying,
of him that runneth, but of God that showeth
mercy," that he might commend His justice
also (for the man who does not obtain mercy
finds, not iniquity, but justice, there being
no iniquity with God), he immediately adds:

1 Matt, xxiii. 37.
4 Rom. ix. 13 ; Mai.

2 Rom. ix. 18.

3.

5 Rom. ix.

3 Rom. ix. 12

14.

Rom. ix. 15 ; Ex. xxxiii. 19.

S Comp. 1 Cor. i. 31.

7 Rom. ix. 16. [See R. V.]

ENCHIRIDION.

is

"

"

For it

Chap. CI.]
" For the scripture saith unto Pharoah, Even
for this same purpose have I raised thee up,
that I might show my power in thee, and that
my name might be declared throughout all
the earth." ' And then he draws a conclusion
that applies to both, that is, both to His
Therefore hath He
mercy and His justice:
mercy on whom He will have mercy, and
" He hath
whom He will He hardeneth." 2
" He hardenmercy" of His great goodness,
without any injustice; so that neither
eth
can he that is pardoned glory in any merit of
his own, nor he that is condemned complain
of anything but his own demerit.
grace alone that separates the redeemed from
the lost, all having been involved in one common perdition through their common origin.
Now if any one, on hearing this, should say,
"Why doth He yet find fault? for who hath
" 3 as if a man ought not to
resisted His will ?
be blamed for being bad, because God hath
mercy on whom He will have mercy, and
whom He will He hardeneth, God forbid that
we should be ashamed to answer as we see the
apostle answered: "Nay, but, O man, who
art thou that repliest against God ?
Shall the
thing formed say to Him that formed it, Why
hast Thou made me thus ?
Hath not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to
make one vessel unto honor, and another
" 4 Now some foolish people
unto dishonor ?
think that in this place the apostle had no
answer to give; and for want of a reason to
render, rebuked the presumption of his interBut there is great weight in this
rogator.
"
Nay, but, O man, who art thou?
saying:
and in such a matter as this it suggests to a
man in a single word the limits of his capacity, and at the same time does in reality conFor if a man does
vey an important reason.
not understand these matters, who is he that
he should reply against God ? And if he does
understand them, he finds no further room
For then he perceives that the
for reply.
whole human race was condemned in its rebellious head by a divine judgment so just,
that if not a single member of the race had
been redeemed, no one could justly have questioned the justice of God; and that it was
right that those who are redeemed should be
redeemed in such a way as to show, by the
greater number who are unredeemed and left
in theirj ust condemnation, what the whole race
deserved, and whither the deserved judgment
of God would lead even the redeemed, did not
His undeserved mercy interpose, so that every
mouth might be stopped of those who wish to

"

glory in their own merits, and that he that
glorieth might glory in the Lord. 5

CHAP. IOO.

THE WILL OF GOD IS NEVER DEFEATED, THOUGH MUCH IS DONE THAT IS
CONTRARY TO HIS WILL.

These are the great works of the -Lord,
sought out according to all His pleasure,
6 and
so wisely sought out, that when the intelligent
creation, both angelic and human, sinned,
doing not His will but their own, He used the
very will of the creature which was working
in opposition to the Creator's will as an instrument for carrying out His will, the supremely
Good thus turning to good account even what
is evil, to the condemnation of those whom
in His justice He has predestined to punishment, and to the salvation of those whom in
His mercy He has predestined to grace.
For,
as far as relates to their own consciousness,
these creatures did what God wished not to be
done: but in view of God's omnipotence, they
could in no wise effect their purpose.
For in
the very fact that they acted in opposition to
His will, His will concerning them was fulfilled. And hence it is that "the works of
the Lord are great, sought out according to
all His pleasure," because in a way unspeakably strange and wonderful, even what is done
in opposition to His will does not defeat His
For it would not be done did He not
will.
permit it (and of course His permission is not
unwilling, but willing); nor would a Good
Being permit evil to be done only that in His
omnipotence He can turn evil into good.

CHAP. IOI.

THE WILL OF GOD, WHICH IS
FULFILLED

ALWAYS GOOD, IS SOMETIMES
THROUGH THE EVIL WILL OF MAN.
Sometimes, however, a man in the goodness of his will desires something that God
does not desire, even though God's will is
also good, nay, much more fully and more
surely good (for His will never can be evil) :
for example, if a good son is anxious that his
father should live, when it is God's good will
that he should die.
Again, it is possible for
a man with evil will to desire what God wills
in His goodness : for example, if a bad son
wishes his father to die, when this is also the
is plain that the former
will of God.
wishes what God does not wish, and that the
latter wishes what God does wish; and yet the
filial love of the former is more in harmony
with the good will of God, though its desire
is different from God's, than the want of filial

It

1 Rom. ix. 17 ; Ex. ix. 16.
3 Rom. ix. 19.

2 Rom. ix. 18
4 Rom. ix. 20, 21.

5 Rom. iii. 19 ;
6 Ps. cxi. 2 (LXX.) :

1 Cor. i. 31.

" The works of the Lord are great, sought

out of all them that have pleasure therein. 1 '

(A. V.)

<0

[Chap. CIII.

affection of the latter, though its desire is the
same as God's.
So necessary is it, in determining whether a man's desire is one to be approved or disapproved, to consider what it is
proper for man, and what it is proper for God,
to desire, and what is in each case the real
For God accomplishes
motive of the will.
some of His purposes, which of course are
all good, through the evil desires of wicked
men: for example, it was through the wicked
designs of the Jews, working out the good
purpose of the Father, that Christ was slain ;
and this event was so truly good, that when
the Apostle Peter expressed his unwillingness
that it should take place, he was designated
Satan by Him who had come to be slain. '
How good seemed the intentions of the pious
believers who were unwilling that Paul should
go up to Jerusalem lest the evils which Agabus had foretold should there befall him !
And yet it was God's purpose that he should
suffer these evils for preaching the faith of
Christ, and thereby become a witness for
And this purpose of His, which was
Christ.
good, God did not fulfill through the good
counsels of the Christians, but through the
evil counsels of the Jews ; so that those who
opposed His purpose were more truly His
servants than those who were the willing instruments of its accomplishment.

CHAP. 1 02.

THE WILL OF THE OMNIPOTENT
GOD IS NEVER DEFEATED, AND IS NEVER EVIL.
But however strong may be the purposes
either of angels or of men, whether of good
or bad, whether these purposes fall in with
the will of God or run counter to it, the
will of the Omnipotent is never defeated; and
His will never can be evil; because even when
is just, and what is just is
it inflicts evil it
The omnipotent God,
certainly not evil.
then, whether in mercy He pitieth whom He
will, or in judgment hardeneth whom He will,
is never unjust in what He does, never does
anything except of His own free-will, and
never wills anything that He does not perform.

CHAP. 103.

INTERPRETATION OF THE EXPRES-
" WHO WILL HAVE ALL

SION IN I TIM. II. 4:
MEN TO BE SAVED."
Accordingly, when we hear and read in
Scripture that He "
will have all men to be
saved," 3 although we know well that all men
are not saved, we are not on that account to
the omnipotence of God, but are
restrict
rather to understand the Scripture, "Who

"

will have all men to be saved," as meaning
that no man is saved unless God wills his salvation : not that there is no man whose salvation He does not will, but that no man is
saved apart from His will; and that, therefore,
we should pray Him to will our salvation,
because if He will it, it must necessarily be
accomplished. And it- was of prayer to God
that the apostle was speaking when he used
this expression. And on the same principle
we interpret the expression in the Gospel :
"The true light which lighteth every man
that cometh into the world :" 4 not that there
is no man who is not enlightened, but that no
man is enlightened except by Him.
Or, it
"
is said, "Who will have all men to be saved;
not that there is no man whose salvation He
does net will (for how, then, explain the fact
that He was unwilling to work miracles in the
presence of some who, He said, would have
repented if He had worked them?), but that
we are to understand by
all men," the human race in all its varieties of rank and circumstances,
kings, subjects; noble, plebeian, high, low, learned, and unlearned ; the
sound in body, the feeble, the clever, the dull,
the foolish, the rich, the poor, and those of
middling circumstances ; males, females, infants, boys, youths ; young, middle-aged, and
old men ; of every tongue, of every fashion, of
all arts, of all professions, with all the innumerable differences of will and conscience, and
whatever else there is that makes a distinction
among men.
For which of all these classes
is there out of which God does not will that
men should be saved in all nations through
His only-begotten Son, our Lord, and therefore does save them ; for the Omnipotent cannot will in vain, whatsoever He may will ? Now
the apostle had enjoined that prayers should
be made for all men, and had especially ad-
" For kings, and for all that are in auded,
thority," who might be supposed, in the
pride and pomp of worldly station, to shrink
from the humility of
the Christian faith.
" For this is good and acceptThen saying,
able in the sight of God our Saviour," that
is, that prayers should be made for such as
these, he immediately adds, as if to remove
any ground of despair, "Who will have all
men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth." 5 God, then, in His great
condescension has judged it good to grant to
the prayers of the humble the salvation of the
exalted ; and assuredly we have many examOur Lord, too, makes use of
ples of this.
the same mode of speech in the Gospel, when
" Ye tithe mint,
He says to the Pharisees:

1 Matt. xvi. 21-23.
3 1 Tim. ii. 4.

2 Acts xxi. 10-12.

4 John i. 9.

5 1 Tim. ii. 1-4.

Chap. CVIL]

ENCHIRIDION.

For the Phariand rue, and every herb." 1
sees did not tithe what belonged to others,
nor all the herbs of all the inhabitants of
As, then, in this place we must
other lands.
understand by "every herb," every kind of
herbs, so in the former passage we may understand by "all men," every sort of men.
And we may interpret it in any other way we
please, so long as we are not compelled to
believe that the omnipotent God has willed
anything to be done which was not done : for,
setting aside all ambiguities, if "He hath
done all that He pleased in heaven and in
2 as the psalmist sings of Him, He
earth,"
certainly did not will to do anything that He
hath not done.

CHAP. 104.

GOD, FOREKNOWING THE SIN OF
THE FIRST MAN, ORDERED HIS OWN PURPOSES
ACCORDINGLY.
Wherefore, God would have been willing to
preserve even the first man in that state of
salvation in which he was created, and after
he had begotten sons to remove him at a fit
time, without the intervention of death, to a
better place, where he should have been not
only free from sin, but free even from the desire of sinning, if He had foreseen that man
would have the steadfast will to persist in the
state of innocence in which he was created.
But as He foresaw that man would make a
bad use of his free-will, that is, would sin,
God arranged His own designs rather with a
view to do good to man even in his sinfulness, that thus the good will of the Omnipotent might not be made void by the evil will
of man, but might be fulfilled in spite of it.

CHAP. 105. MAN WAS SO CREATED AS TO BE
ABLE TO CHOOSE EITHER GOOD OR EVIL: IN
THE FUTURE LIFE, THE CHOICE OF EVIL WILL
BE IMPOSSIBLE.
Now it was expedient that man should be
at first so created, as to have it in his power
both to will what was right and to will what
was wrong ; not without reward if he willed
the former, and not without punishment if he
willed the latter.
shall not be in his power to will evil; and yet
this will constitute no restriction on the freedom of his will. On the contrary, his will
shall be much freer when it shall be wholly
impossible for him to be the slave of sin.
We should never think of blaming the will, or
saying that it was no will, or that it was not to
be called free, when we so desire happiness,
that not only do we shrink from misery, but

But in the future life

it

1 Luke xi. 42.
2 Ps. cxv. 3.

[" All manner of herbs.''

A. V.]

[" Our God is in the heavens : He hath done

whatsoever He hath pleased."

A. V.]

find it utterly impossible to do otherwise.
As, then, the soul even now finds it impossible to desire unhappiness, so in future it
shall be wholly impossible for it to desire sin.
But God's arrangement was not to be broken,
according to which He willed to show how
good is a rational being who is able even to
refrain from sin, and yet how much better is
one who cannot sin at all; just as that was an
inferior sort of immortality, and yet it was
immortality, when it was possible for man to
avoid death, although there is reserved for
the future a more perfect immortality, when
it shall be impossible for man to die.

CHAP. 106.

THE GRACE OF GOD WAS NECESSARY TO MAN'S SALVATION BEFORE THE FALL
AS WELL AS AFTER IT.
The former immortality man lost through
the exercise of his free-will ; the latter he
shall obtain through grace, whereas, if he
had not sinned, he should have obtained it by
Even in that case, however, there
desert.
could have been no merit without grace; because, although the mere exercise of man's
free-will was sufficient to bring in sin, his freewill would not have sufficed for his maintenance in righteousness, unless God had assisted it by imparting a portion of His unJust as it is in man's
changeable goodness.
power to die whenever he will (for, not to
speak of other means, any one can put an
end to himself by simple abstinence from
food), but the mere will cannot preserve life
in the absence of food and the other means
of life ; so man in paradise was able of his
mere will, simply by abandoning righteousness, to destroy himself ; but to have maintained a life of righteousness would have been
too much for his will, unless it had been susAfter the
tained by the
fall, however, a more abundant exercise of
God's mercy was required, because the will
itself had to be freed from the bondage in
which it was held by sin and death. And the
will owes its freedom in no degree to itself,
but solely to the grace of God which comes
by faith in Jesus Christ; so that the very will,
through which we accept all the other gifts
of God which lead us on to His eternal gift,
is itself prepared of the Lord, as the Scripture
says.

Creator's power.

CHAP. 107.

ETERNAL LIFE, THOUGH THE REWARD OF GOOD WORKS, IS ITSELF THE GIFT
OF GOD.
Wherefore, even eternal life itself, which

3 Prov xvi. 1.

is from the Lord."

[' The preparation 01 the heart in man
A. V.]

[Chap. CX-

is surely the reward of good works, the apos-
" For the wages of
tle calls the gift of God.
sin," he says, "is death; but the gift of
God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our
Lord." ' Wages (stipendium) is paid as a recompense for military service; it is not a gift:
wherefore he says, "the wages of
sin is
death," to show that death was not inflicted
undeservedly, but as the due recompense of
But a gift, unless it is wholly unearned,
sin.
2 We are to understand,
is not a gift at all.
then, that man's good deserts are themselves
the gift of God, so that when these obtain the
recompense of eternal life, it is simply grace
Man, therefore, was thus
given for grace.
made upright that, though unable to remain
in his uprightness without divine help, he
could of his own mere will depart from it.
And whichever of
courses he had
chosen, God's will would have been done,
Thereeither by him, or concerning him.
fore, as he chose to do his own will rather
than God's, the will of God is fulfilled concerning him ; for God, out of one and the
same heap of perdition which constitutes the
race of man, makes one vessel to honor,
another to dishonor ; to honor in mercy, to
dishonor in judgment; 3 that no one may glory
in man, and consequently not in himself.

these

CHAP. 1 08.

A MEDIATOR WAS NECESSARY TO
RECONCILE US TO GOD; AND UNLESS THIS
MEDIATOR HAD BEEN GOD, HE COULD NOT
HAVE BEEN OUR REDEEMER.

be

not

For we could

redeemed, even
through the one Mediator between God and
men, the man Christ Jesus, if He were not
also God. Now when Adam was created, he,
being a righteous man, had no need of a
But when sin had placed a wide
mediator.
gulf between God and the human race, it was
expedient that a Mediator, who alone of the
human race was born, lived, and died without
sin, should reconcile us to God, and procure
even for our bodies a resurrection to eternal
life, in order that the pride of man might be
exposed and cured through the humility of
God ; that man might be shown how far he
had departed from God, when God became
incarnate to bring him back ; that an example
might be set to disobedient man in the life
of obedience of the God-Man ; that the fountain of grace might be opened by the Onlybegotten taking upon Himself the form of a
servant, a form which had no antecedent
merit ; that an earnest of that resurrection of
the body which is promised to the redeemed
might be given in the resurrection of the Re-

deemer; that the devil might be subdued by
the same nature which it was his boast to
have deceived, and yet man not glorified, lest
pride should again spring up ; and, in fine,
with a view to all the advantages which the
thoughtful can perceive and describe, or perceive without being able to describe, as flowing from the transcendent mystery of the
person of the Mediator.

CHAP. 109.

THE STATE OF THE SOUL DURING
THE INTERVAL BETWEEN DEATH AND THE
RESURRECTION.

During the time, moreover, which intervenes between a man's death and the final
resurrection, the soul dwells in a hidden retreat, where it enjoys rest or suffers affliction
just in proportion to the merit it has earned
by the life which it led on earth.

CHAP. IIO.

THE BENEFIT TO THE SOULS OF
THE DEAD FROM THE SACRAMENTS AND ALMS
OF THEIR LIVING FRIENDS.

Therefore, it

Nor can it be denied that the souls of the
dead are benefited by the piety of their living
friends, who offer the sacrifice of the Mediator, or give alms in the church on their beBut these services are of advantage
half.
only to those who during their lives have
earned such merit, that services of this kind
can help them. For there is a manner of life
which is neither so good as not to require
these services after death, nor so bad that
such services are of no avail after death ;
there is, on the other hand, a kind of life so
good as not to require them ; and again, one
so bad that when life is over they render no
is in this life that all
help.
the merit or demerit is acquired, which can
either relieve or aggravate a man's sufferings
after this life. No one, then, need hope that
after he is dead he shall obtain merit with
God which he has neglected to secure here.
And accordingly it is plain that the services
which the church celebrates for the dead are
in no way opposed to the apostle's words :
"
For we must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ ; that every one may receive the things done in his body, according
to that he hath done, whether it be good or
bad ;"
4 for the merit which renders such services as I speak of profitable to a man, is
earned while he lives in* the body.
It is not
to every one that these services are profitable.
And why are they not profitable to all, except
because of the different kinds of lives that
men lead in the body ? When, then, sacri-

1 Rom. vi. 23

2 Comp. Rom. xi. 6.

3 Rom. ix. 21.

4 2 Cor. v. 10 ; comp. Rom. xiv. 10.

Chap. CXIV.J

ENCHIRIDION.

fices either of the altar or of alms are offered
on behalf of all the baptized dead, they are
thank-offerings for the very good, they are
propitiatory offerings for the not very bad, and
in the case of the very bad, even though they
do not assist the dead, they are a species of
consolation to the living. And where they
are profitable, their benefit consists either in
obtaining a full remission of sins, or at least
in making the condemnation more tolerable.

CHAP. III.

AFTER THE RESURRECTION THERE
SHALL BE TWO DISTINCT KINGDOMS, ONE OF
ETERNAL HAPPINESS, THE OTHER OF ETERNAL
MISERY.

After the resurrection, however, when the
final, universal judgment has been completed,
there shall be two kingdoms, each with its
own distinct boundaries, the one Christ's, the
other the devil's ; the one consisting of the
good, the other of the bad,
both, however,
The former
consisting of angels and men.
shall have no will, the latter no power, to sin,
and neither shall have any power to choose
death ; but the former shall live truly and
happily in eternal life, the latter shall drag a
miserable existence in eternal death without
the power of dying; for the life and the death
But among the
shall both be without end.
former there shall be degrees of happiness,
one being more pre-eminently happy than
another ; and among the latter there shall be
degrees of misery, one being more endurably miserable than another.

CHAP. 112.

THERE IS NO GROUND IN SCRIPTURE FOR THE OPINION OF THOSE WHO DENY
THE ETERNITY OF FUTURE PUNISHMENTS.

It is in vain, then, that some, indeed very
many, make moan over the eternal punishment, and perpetual, unintermitted torments
of the lost, and say they do not believe it
shall be so ; not, indeed, that they directly
oppose themselves to Holy Scripture, but, at
the suggestion of their own feelings, they
soften down everything that seems hard, and
give a milder turn to statements which they
think are rather designed to terrify than to be
For "Hath God,"
received as literally true.
they say, "forgotten to be gracious? hath He
in anger shut up His tender mercies?" 1
in one of the holy
Now, they read this
But without doubt we are to underpsalms.
stand it as spoken of those who are elsewhere
2 because even
called "vessels of mercy,"
they are freed from misery not on account of
any merit of their own, but solely through the

"

"

Or, if the men we speak of inpity of God.
sist that this passage applies to all mankind,
there is no reason why they should therefore
suppose that there will be an end to the punishment of those of whom it is said,
These
shall go away into everlasting punishment;"
for this shall end in the same manner and
at the same time as the happiness of those of
whom it is said,
but the righteous unto life
eternal. 3 But let them suppose, if the thought
gives them pleasure, that the pains of the
damned are, at certain intervals, in some deFor even in this case the
gree assuaged.
wrath of God, that is, their condemnation (for
it is this, and not any disturbed feeling in the
mind of God that is called His wrath), abideth upon them; 4 that is, His wrath, though
it still remains, does not shut up His tender
mercies; though His tender mercies are exhibited, not in putting an end to their eternal
punishment, but in mitigating, or in granting
them a respite from, their torments; for the
psalm does not say, "to put an end to His
anger/' or, "when His anger is passed by,"
but "in His anger." 3 Now, if this anger
it existed in the smallest
stood alone, or if
conceivable degree, yet to be lost out of the
kingdom of God, to be an exile from the city
of God, to be alienated from the life of God,
to have no share in that great goodness which
God hath laid up for them that fear Him, and
hath wrought out for them that trust in Him, 6
would be a punishment so great, that, supposing it to be eternal, no torments that we know
of, continued through as many ages as man's
imagination can conceive, could be compared
with it.

CHAP. 113.

THE DEATH OF THE WICKED SHALL
BE ETERNAL IN THE SAME SENSE AS THE LIFE
OF THE SAINTS.
This perpetual death of the wicked, then,
that is, their alienation from the life of God,
shall abide for ever, and shall be common to
them all, whatever men, prompted by their
human affections, may conjecture as to a variety of punishments, or as to a mitigation or
intermission of their woes; just as the eternal
shall abide for ever, and
life of the saints
shall be common to them all, whatever grades
of rank and honor there may be among those
who shine with an harmonious effulgence.

CHAP. 114.

HAVING DEALT WITH FAITH, WE
EVERYTHING
NOW COME TO SPEAK OF HOPE.
THAT PERTAINS TO HOPE IS EMBRACED IN
THE LORD'S PRAYER.
Out of this confession of faith, which is

1 Ps. lxxvii. 9.

2 Rom. ix. 23.

3 Matt. xxv. 46.
5 Ps. lxxviii.

4 John iii. 36.
6 Ps. xxxi. 19.

2/4

[Chap. CXVII.

briefly comprehended in the Creed, and which,
carnally understood, is milk for babes, but,
spiritually apprehended and studied, is meat
for strong men, springs the good hope of believers; and this is accompanied by a holy
But of these matters, all of which are
love.
true objects of faith, those only pertain to
hope which are embraced in the
Lord's
the man that
For, "Cursed is
Prayer.
trusteth in man " x
is the testimony of holy
writ ; and, consequently, this curse attaches
also to the man who trusteth in himself.
Therefore, except from God the Lord we
ought to ask for nothing either that we hope
to do well, or hope to obtain as a reward of
our good works.

CHAP. 115.

THE SEVEN PETITIONS OF THE

LORD'S PRAYER, ACCORDING TO MATTHEW.

"

"

is in heaven " -

For when we say,

Accordingly, in the Gospel according to
Matthew the Lord's Prayer seems to embrace seven petitions, three of which ask for
eternal blessings, and the remaining four for
temporal ; these latter, however, being necessary antecedents to the attainment of the
Hallowed be
eternal.
Thy name : Thy kingdom come: Thy will be
done in earth, as it
(which
some have interpreted, not unfairly, in body
as well as in spirit), we ask for blessings that
are to be enjoyed for ever ; which are indeed
begun in this world, and grow in us as we
grow in grace, but in their perfect state,
which is to be looked for in another life, shall
be a possession for evermore.
But when we
Give us this day our daily bread : and
say,
forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors : and lead us not into temptation, but
3 who does not see that
deliver us from evil,"
we ask for blessings that have reference to the
wants of this present life ?
In that eternal
life, where we hope to live for ever, the hallowing of God's name, and His kingdom,
and His will in our spirit and body, shall be
brought to perfection, and shall endure to
But our daily bread is so called
everlasting.
because there is here constant need for as
much nourishment as the spirit and the flesh
demand, whether we understand the expression spiritually, or carnally, or in both senIt is here too that we need the forgiveses.
ness that we ask,
is here that we
for
commit the sins ; here are the temptations
which allure or drive us into sin ; here, in a
word, is the evil from which we desire deliverance : but in that other world there shall
be none of these things.

it

1 Jer. xvii. 5.

2 Matt. vi. 9, 10.

3 Matt. vi. 11-13.

CH'AP. Il6.

LUKE EXPRESSES THE SUBSTANCE
OF THESE SEVEN PETITIONS MORE BRIEFLY IN
FIVE.

But the Evangelist Luke in his version of
the Lord's prayer embraces not seven, but
five petitions : not, of course, that there is
any discrepancy between the two evangelists,
but that Luke indicates by his very brevity
the mode in which the seven petitions of Matthew are to be understood.
For God's name
is hallowed in the spirit ; and God's kingdom
shall come in the resurrection of the body.
Luke, therefore, intending to show that the
third petition is a sort of repetition of the first
two, has chosen to indicate that by omitting
the third altogether. 4 Then he adds three
others : one for daily bread, another for pardon of sin, another for immunity from temptation. And what Matthew puts as the last
petition, "but deliver us from evil," Luke
has omitted, 4 to show us that it is embraced
in the previous petition about temptation.
Matthew, indeed, himself says, "<W deliver,"
not "and deliver," as if to show that the petitions are virtually one : do not this, but this;
so that every man is to understand that he
is delivered from evil in the very fact of his
not being led into temptation.

CHAP. 117.

LOVE, WHICH IS GREATER THAN
FAITH AND HOPE, IS SHED ABROAD IN OUR
HEARTS BY THE HOLY GHOST.
And now as to love, which the apostle declares to be greater than the other two graces,
that is, than faith and hope, s the greater the
measure in which it dwells in a man, the better is the man in whom it dwells.
For when
there is a question as to whether a man is
good, one does not ask what he believes, or
what he hopes, but what he loves.
For the
man who loves aright no doubt believes and
hopes aright ; whereas the man who has not
love believes in vain, even though his beliefs
are true ; and hopes in vain, even though the
objects of his hope are a real part of true
happiness ; unless, indeed, he believes and
hopes for this, that he may obtain by prayer
the blessing of love.
For, although it is not
possible to hope without love, it may yet
happen that a man does not love that which is
necessary to the attainment of his hope ; as,
for example, if he hopes for eternal life (and
who is there that does not desire this ?) and
yet does
righteousness, without
which no one can attain to eternal life. Now
this is the true faith of Christ which the apos-

love

not

4 [These petitions are retained in the A. V., but omitted in the

R. V., according to the oldest authorities.

P. S.]

5 1 Cor. xiii. 13.

Chap. CXXL]

ENCHIRIDION.

" '

tie speaks of, "which worketh by love ;
and if there is anything that it does not yet
embrace in its love, asks that it may receive,
seeks that it may find, and knocks that it may
2 For faith obtains through
be opened unto it.
For
prayer that which the law commands.
without the gift of God, that is, without the
Holy Spirit, through whom love
shed
abroad in our hearts, 3 the law can command,
but it cannot assist ; and, moreover, it makes
a man a transgressor, for he can no longer
excuse himself on the plea
of ignorance.
Now carnal lust reigns where there is not the
love of God.

is

CHAP. Il8.

THE FOUR STAGES OF THE CHRISTAIN'S LIFE, AND THE FOUR CORRESPONDING
STAGES OF THE CHURCH'S HISTORY.

When, sunk in

darkest depths of
the
ignorance, man lives according to the flesh,
undisturbed by any struggle of reason or conscience, this is his first state.
Afterwards,
when through the law has come the knowledge of sin, and the Spirit of God has not
yet interposed His aid, man, striving to live
according to the law, is thwarted in his efforts
and falls into conscious sin, and so, being
overcome of sin, becomes its slave (" for of
whom a man is overcome, of the same is he
" 4
) ; and thus the effect
brought in bondage
produced by the knowledge of the commandment is this, that sin worketh in man all manner of concupiscence, and he is involved in
the additional guilt of willful transgression,
and that is fulfilled which is written: "The
law entered that the offense might abound." 5
But if God has
This is man's second state.
regard to him, and inspires him with faith in
God's help, and the Spirit of God begins to
work in him, then the mightier power of love
strives against the power of the flesh ; and although there is still in the man's own nature a
power that fights against him (for his disease
is not completely cured), yet he lives the life
of the just by faith, and lives in righteousness so far as he does not yield to evil lust,
This
but conquers it by the love of holiness.
is the third state of a man of good hope ; and
he who by steadfast piety advances in this
at last to peace, that
course, shall attain
peace which, after this life is over, shall be
perfected in the repose of the spirit, and fiOf
nally in the resurrection of the body.
these four different stages the first is before
the law, the second is under the law, the
third is under grace, and the fourth is in full
and perfect peace.
Thus, too, has the history

of God's people been ordered according to
His pleasure who disposeth all things in number, and measure, and weight.
For the
church existed at first before the law; then
under the law, which was given by Moses ;
then under grace, v/hich was first made manifest in the coming of the Mediator.
Not,
indeed, that this grace was absent previously,
but, in harmony with the arrangements of the
For none,
time, it was veiled and hidden.
even of the just men of old, could find salvation apart from the faith of Christ ; nor unless He had been known to them could their
ministry have been used to convey prophecies
concerning Him to us, some more plain, and
some more obscure.

CHAP. 119.

THE GRACE OF REGENERATION
WASHES AWAY ALL PAST SIN AND ALL ORIGINAL GUILT.
Now in whichever of these four stages (as we
may call them) the grace of regeneration finds
any particular man, all his past sins are there
and then pardoned, and the guilt which he contracted in his birth is removed in his new
birth ; and so true is it that
the wind bloweth
where it listeth," 7 that some have never
known the second stage, that of slavery under
the law, but have received the divine assistance as soon as they received the commandment.

"

CHAP. I20.

DEATH CANNOT INJURE THOSE
WHO HAVE RECEIVED THE GRACE OF REGENERATION.
But before a man can receive the commandment, it is necessary that he should live
But if once he has
according to the flesh.
received the grace of regeneration, death shall
not injure him, even if he should forthwith
"
for to this end Christ
depart from this life ;
both died, and rose, and revived, that He
might be Lord both of the dead and the liv8 nor shall death retain dominion over
ing ;"
him for whom Christ freely died.

CHAP. 121.

LOVE IS THE END OF ALL THE COM-

MANDMENTS, AND GOD HIMSELF IS LOVE.
All the commandments of God, then, are
embraced in love, of which the apostle says :
" Now the end of the commandment is charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned." 9 Thus the
end of every commandment is charity, that
is, every commandment has love for its aim.
But whatever is done either through fear of

1 Gal. v. 6.
4 2 Pet. ii. 19.

= Matt. vii. 7.
5 Rom. v. 20.

3 Rom. v. 5.

6 Comp. Wisd. xi. 20.
8 Rom. xiv. 9.

7 John iii. 8.
9 1 Tim. i. 5.

[Conclusion.

love. 2

punishment or from some other carnal motive, and has not for its principle that love
which the Spirit of God sheds abroad in the
heart, is not done as it ought to be done,
For this
however it may appear to men.
love embraces both the love of God and the
love of our neighbor, and "on these two
commandments hang all the law and the
x we may add the Gospel and the
prophets,"
is from these that we hear
For it
apostles.
The end of the commandment is
this voice :
charity, and God is
Wherefore, all
God's commandments, one of which
" Thou shalt not commit adultery," 3 and all
those precepts which are not commandments
but special counsels, one of which is,
It is
good for a man not to touch a woman," 4 are
rightly carried out only when the motive principle of action is the love of God, and the
love of our neighbor in God. And this applies both to the present and the future life.
We love God now by faith, then we shall love
Him through sight. Now we love even our
neighbor by faith ; for we who are ourselves
mortal know not the hearts of mortal men.
But in the future life, the Lord "both will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness,
and will make manifest the counsels of the

"

is,

hearts, and then shall every man have praise
of God;" 5 for every man shall love and praise
in his neighbor the virtue which, that it may
not be hid, the Lord Himself shall bring to
Moreover, lust diminishes
love
light.
grows, till the latter grows to such a height
For
that
"greater love hath no man than this, that a
man lay down his life for his friends." 6 Who
then can tell how great love shall be in the
future world, when there shall be no lust for
it to restrain and conquer ? for that will be
the perfection of health when there shall be
no struggle with death.

it can grow no higher

here.

as

CHAP. 122. -CONCLUSION.

But now there must be an end at last to
this volume. And it is for yourself to judge
whether you should call it a hand-book, or
should use it as such.
I, however, thinking
that your zeal in Christ ought not to be despised, and believing and hoping all good of
you in dependence on our Redeemer's help,
and loving you very much as one of the members of His body, have, to the best of my
ability, written this book for you on Faith,
Hope, and Love. May its value be equal to
its length.

1 Matt. xxii. 40; comp. Rom. v. 5.
2 1 Tim. i. 5; 1 John iv. 16.
3 Comp. Matt. v. 27 and Rom. xiii. 9.

4 1 Cor. vii. 1.

5 1 Cor. iv. 5.

6 John xv. 13.

ST. AUGUSTIN:

ON

THE CATECHISING OF THE UNINSTRUCTED.

TRANSLATED BY

REV. S. D. F. SALMOND, D.D.,

PROFESSOR OF SYSTEMATIC THEOLOGY, FREE CHURCH COLLEGE, ABERDEEN.

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

In the fourteenth chapter of the second book of his Retractations, Augustin makes
" There is also a book of ours on the subject of the Catechising of
the following statement:
the Uuinstructed, [or, for Instructing the Unlearned, De Catechizandis Rudibus\ that being,
indeed, the express title by which it
In this book, where I have said,
is designated.
' Neither did the angel, who, in company with other spirits who were his satellites, forsook in
pride the obedience of God, and became the devil, do any hurt to God, but to himself; for God
knoweth how to dispose of souls that leave Him: '
spirits
This book commences in these
that leave Him,' inasmuch as the question dealt with angels.
terms :

it would be more appropriate to say,

' You have requested me, brother Deogr alias.

' '

'

'

The composition so described in the passage cited is reviewed by Augustin in connection with other works which he had in hand about the year 400 a.d., and may therefore be
It has been conjectured that the person to whom it is addressed
taken to belong to that date.
may perhaps be the same with the presbyter Deogratias, to whom, as we read in the epistle
which now ranks as the hundred and second, Augustin wrote about the year 406, in reply
to some questions of the pagans which were forwarded to him from Carthage.

The Benedictine editors introduce the treatise in the following terms: "At the request
of a deacon of Carthage, Augustin undertakes the task of teaching the art of catechising;
and in the first place, he gives certain injunctions, to the effect that this kind of duty may
be discharged not only in a settled method and an apt order, but also without tediousness,
and in a spirit of cheerfulness.
Thereafter reducing his injunctions to practical use, he gives
an example of what he means by delivering two set discourses, presenting parallels to each
other, the one being somewhat lengthened and the other very brief, but both suitable for
the instruction of any individual whose desire is to be a Christian."

needful instruction in religion.
vol.

of the Benedictine edition, and in the handy ed. of C. Marriott :

[This treatise shows what was thought in the age of Saint Augustin to be the most
The Latin text: De Catechizandis Rudibus, is in the sixth
S. Augustini
Opuscula qucedam, Oxford and London (Parker & Co.) 4th ed.
1885. An earlier and
closer English Version by Rev. C. L. Cornish, M. A., of Exeter College, Oxford, appeared
in the Oxford "
(1847, pp. 187 sqq.,) under the title On InstructH. de Romestin reproduces the Oxford translation in the English
ing the Unlearned.
version of Marriott's ed. of five treatises of St. Augustin, Oxford and London, 1885, pp.
1-71.-P. S.]

Library of the Fathers

"

CONTENTS OF CATECHISING OF THE UNINSTRUCTED.

Chap. I. How Augustin writes in answer to a favor asked by a deacon of Carthage,
Chap. II. How it often happens that a discourse which gives pleasure to the hearer is distasteful to the

speaker; and what explanation is to be offered of that fact,

Chap. III.
Chap. IV.
Chap. V.

Of the full narration to be employed in catechising,
That the great reason for the advent of Christ was the commendation of love
That the person who comes for catechetical instruction is to be examined with respect to his

views, on desiring to become a Christian,

Chap. VI.

Of the way to commence the catechetical instruction, and of the narration of facts from the his-

tory of the world's creation on to the present times of the Church,

Chap. VII.

Of the exposition of the Resurrection, the Judgment, and other subjects, which should follow

this narration,

PAGE

Of the method to be pursued in catechising those who have had a liberal education,

.

.

. 290

Of the method in which grammarians and professional speakers are to be dealt with,
Of the attainment of cheerfulness in the duty of catechising, and of various causes producing

.

.

.

Chap. VIII.
Chap. IX.
Chap. X.

weariness in the catechumen,

Of the remedy for the second source of weariness,
Chap. XI.
Of the remedy for the third source of weariness,
Chap. XII.
Of the remedy for the fourth source of weariness,
Chap. XIII.
Chap. XIV.
Of the remedy against the fifth and sixth sources of weariness,
Chap. XV.
Of the method in which our address should be adapted to different classes of hearers,
. 298
Chap. XVI. A specimen of a catechetical address; and first, the case of a catechumen with worthy views, 299
Chap. XVII.

The specimen of a catechetical discourse continued, in reference specially to the reproval of

.

.

false aims on the catechumen's part,

Of what is to be believed on the subject of the creation of man and other objects,

Of the co-existence of good and evil in the Church, and their final separation,

Chap. XVIII.
Chap. XIX.
Chap. XX. Of Israel's bondage in Egypt, their deliverance, and their passage through the Red Sea,
Chap. XXI.
Of the Babylonish captivity, and the things signified thereby,
Chap. XXII.
Of the six ages of the world,
Chap. XXIII.
Of the mission of the Holy Ghost fifty days after Christ's Resurrection
Chap. XXIV. Of the Church in its likeness to a vine sprouting and suffering pruning
Chap. XXV. Of constancy in the faith of the Resurrection,
Chap. XXVI. Of the formal admission of the catechumen, and of the signs therein made use of,
Chap. XXVII.

Of the prophecies of the Old Testament in their visible fulfillment in the Church, .

.

.

. 302

. 304

.

.

.

.

. 312

. 313

ON
THE CATECHISING OF THE UNINSTRUCTED.*
IN ONE BOOK.

CHAP. I. HOW AUGUSTIN WRITES IN ANSWER
TO A FAVOR ASKED BY A DEACON OF CARTHAGE.
i. You have requested me, brother Deogratias, to send you in writing something
which might be of service to you in the matFor you
ter of catechising the uninstructed.
have informed me that in Carthage, where
you hold the position of a deacon, persons, who
have to be taught the Christian faith from its
very rudiments, are frequently brought to you
by reason of your enjoying the reputation of
possessing a rich gift in catechising, due at
once to an intimate acquaintance with the
faith, and to an attractive method of discourse; 2 but that you almost
find
yourself in a difficulty as to the manner in
which a suitable declaration is to be made of
the precise doctrine, the belief of which constitutes us Christians : regarding the point at
which our statement of the same ought to
commence, and the limit to which it should
be allowed to proceed : and with respect to
the question whether, when our narration is
concluded, we ought to make use of any kind
of exhortation, or simply specify those precepts
in the observance of which the person to whom
we are discoursing may know the Christian life
and profession to be maintained. 3
At the
same time, you have made the confession and
complaint that it has often befallen you that
in the course of a lengthened and languid address you have become profitless and dis-

always

1 [The Oxford Library and H. de Romestin translate the title :

On Instructing the Unlearned.

P. S.]

2 Reading et doctrina fidei et saavitate sermom's, instead of
which, however, et doctrinam .
. suavitatem, etc. also occurs,
= possessing at once a rich gift in catechising, and an intimate
acquaintance with the faith, and an attractive method of discourse,
[or, sweetness of language].
= know how to maintain the Christian life and profession.

3 Reading retineri as in the mss. Some editions give retinere

.

tasteful even to yourself, not to speak of the
learner whom you have been endeavoring to
instruct by your utterance, and the other parties who have been present as hearers ; and
that you have been constrained by these
straits to put upon me the constraint of that
love which I owe to you, so that I may not
feel it a burdensome thing among all my engagements to write you something on this
subject.

2. As for myself then, if, in the exercise
of those capacities which through the bounty
of our Lord I am enabled to present, the
same Lord requires me to offer any manner of
aid to those whom He has made brethren to
me, I feel constrained not only by that love
and service which is due from me to you on
the terms of familiar friendship, but also by
that which I owe universally to my mother
the Church, by no means to refuse the task,
but rather to take it up with a prompt and
For the more extendevoted willingness.
sively I desire to see the treasure of the
Lord 4 distributed, the more does it become
my duty, if I ascertain that the stewards, who
are my fellow-servants, find any difficulty in
laying it out, to do all that lies in my power
to the end that they may be able to accomplish easily and expeditiously what they sedulously and earnestly aim at.

CHAP. 2. HOW IT OFTEN HAPPENS THAT A
DISCOURSE WHICH GIVES PLEASURE TO THE
HEARER IS DISTASTEFUL TO THE SPEAKER ;
AND WHAT EXPLANATION IS TO BE OFFERED
OF THAT FACT.
3. But as regards the idea thus privately
such efforts, I

entertained by yourself in

4 Pecuniam Do7iiinicatn.

2 84

[Chap. II.

would not have you to be disturbed by the
consideration that you have often appeared
to yourself to be delivering a poor and wearisome discourse.
For it may very well be the
case that the matter has not so presented itself to the person whom you were trying to
instruct, but that what you were uttering
seemed to you to be unworthy of the ears of
others, simply because it was your own earnest desire that there should be something
Indeed with me, too, it
better to listen to.
is almost always the fact that my speech disFor I am covetous of somepleases myself.
thing better, the possession of which I frequently enjoy within me before I commence
* and
to body it forth in intelligible words :
then when my capacities of expression prove
inferior to my inner apprehensions, I grieve
over the inability which my tongue has beFor it is my
trayed in answering to my heart.
wish that he who hears me should have the
same complete understanding of the subject
which I have myself ; and I perceive that I
fail to speak in a manner calculated to effect
that, and that this arises mainly from the
circumstance that the intellectual apprehenitself through the mind with
sion diffuses
something like a rapid flash, whereas the utterance is slow, and occupies time, and is of
a vastly different nature, so that, while this
latter is moving on, the intellectual apprehension has already withdrawn itself within its
secret abodes.
Yet, in consequence of its
having stamped certain impressions of itself
in a marvellous manner upon the memory,
these prints endure with the brief pauses of
2 and as the outcome of these
the syllables ;
same impressions we form intelligible signs,
which get the name of a certain language,
either the Latin, or the Greek, or the Hebrew,
or some other. And these signs may be objects of thought, or they may also be actually
On the other hand,
uttered by the voice.
themselves
however, the
are
neither Latin, nor Greek, nor Hebrew, nor
peculiar to any other race whatsoever, but
are made good in the mind just as looks are
For anger is designated by one
in the body.
word in Latin, by another in Greek, and by
different terms in other languages, according
But the look of
to their several diversities.
the angry man is neither (peculiarly) Latin
Thus it is that when
nor (peculiarly) Greek.
a person says Iratus sum, * he is not understood by every nation, but only by the Latins ;
whereas, if the mood of his mind when it is
kindling to wrath comes forth upon the face

impressions

stamps

For those

and affects the look, all who have the individual within their view understand that he
But, again, it is not in our power
is angry.
to bring out those impressions which the intellectual apprehension
upon the
memory, and to hold them forth, as it were,
to the perception of the hearers by means of
the sound of the voice, in any manner parallel to the clear and evident form in which
the look appears.
former are
within in the mind, while this latter is withWherefore we have to surout in the body.
mise how far the sound of our mouth must be
from representing that stroke of the intelligence, seeing that it does not correspond
even with the impression produced upon the
Now, it is a common occurrence
memory.
with us that, in the ardent desire to effect
what is of profit to our hearer, our aim is to
express ourselves to him exactly as our intellectual apprehension is at the time, when,
in the very effort, we are failing in the ability to speak; and then, because this does not
succeed with us, we are vexed, and we pine
in weariness as if we were applying ourselves
to vain labors ; and, as the result of this very
weariness, our discourse becomes itself more
languid and pointless even than it was when
it first induced such a sense of tediousness.

From the delight,

4. But ofttimes the earnestness of those
who are desirous of hearing me shows me
that my utterance is not so frigid as it seems
to myself to be.
too,
which they exhibit, I gather that they derive
some profit from it. And I occupy myself
sedulously with the endeavor not to fail in
putting before them a service in which I perceive them to take in such good part what is
Even, so, on your side
put before them.
also, the very fact that persons who require
to be instructed in the faith are brought so
frequently to you, ought to help you to understand that your discourse is not displeasing to others as it is displeasing to yourself ;
and you ought not to consider yourself unfruitful, simply because you do not succeed
in setting forth in such a manner as you desire the things which you discern ; for, perchance, you may be just as little able to disFor in this
cern them in the way you wish.
life who sees except as " in an enigma and
Neither is love itself of
through a glass" ? 5
might sufficient to rend the darkness of the
flesh, and penetrate into that eternal calm
from which even things which pass away deBut inasrive the light in which they shine.
much as day by day the good are making
advances towards the vision of that day, in-

1 Verbis sonantibus, sounding words.
2 Perdurant illacuin syllabarum moru/is.
3 Sonantiu sign a,

vocal signs.

4 I am angry.

S 1 Cor. xni. 12.

Chap. III.]

ON THE CATECHISING OF THE UNINSTRUCTED.

2S^

' and without
dependent of the rolling sky,
fi which eye hath
the invasion of the night,
not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man," 2 there is no
greater reason why our discourse should become valueless in our own estimate, when we
are engaged in teaching the uninstructed,
namely, that it is a delight to us
than this,
to discern in an extraordinary fashion, and
a weariness to speak in an ordinary. And in
reality we are listened to with much greater
satisfaction, indeed, when we ourselves also
have pleasure in the same work ;
for the
thread of our address is affected by the very
joy of which we ourselves are sensible, and
it proceeds from us with greater ease and
with more acceptance.
Consequently, as regards those matters which are recommended
as articles of belief, the task is not a difficult
one to lay down injunctions, with respect to
the points at which the narration should be
commenced and ended, or with respect to the
method in which the narration is to be varied,
so that at one time it may be briefer, at another more lengthened, and yet at all times
full and perfect ; and, again, with respect to
the particular occasions on which it may be
right to use the shorter form, and those on
which it will be proper to employ the longer.
But as to the means by which all is to be
done, so that every one may have pleasure in
his work when he catechises (for the better
he succeeds in this the more attractive will
that is what requires the greatest
he be),
consideration. And yet we have not far to
seek for the precept which will rule in this
For if, in the matter of carnal means,
sphere.
3 how much more
God loves a cheerful giver,
But our security
so in that of the spiritual ?
that this cheerfulness may be with us at the
seasonable hour, is something dependent upon
the mercy of Him who has given us such preaccordance with my
cepts.
understanding of what your own wish is, we
shall discuss in the first place the subject of
the method of narration, then that of the duty
of delivering injunction and exhortation, and
afterwards that of the attainment of the said
cheerfulness, so far as God may furnish us
with the ideas.

Therefore, in

CHAP. 3.

OF THE FULL NARRATION TO BE EMPLOYED IN CATECHISING.
5. The narration is full when each person
is catechised in the first instance from what
" In the beginning God
is written in the text,
created the heaven and the earth," 4 on to the

1 Sine volumine cceli.
3 2 Cor. ix. 7.

2 1 Cor. ii. 9.
4Gen. i.

1.

present times of the Church.
This does not
imply, however, either that we ought to repeat by memory the entire Pentateuch, and
the entire Books of Judges, and Kings, and
Esdras, 5 and the entire Gospel and Acts of
the Apostles, if we have learned all these
word for word ; or that we should put all the
matters which are contained in these volumes
into our own words, and in that manner unfold and expound them as a whole.
For
neither does the time admit of that, nor does
any necessity demand it.
But what we ought
to do is, to give a comprehensive statement
of all things, summarily and generally, so
that certain of the more wonderful facts may
be selected which are listened to with superior
gratification, and which have been ranked so
remarkably among the exact turning-points
(of the history);
that, instead of exhibiting
them to view only in their wrappings, if we
may so speak, and then instantly snatching
them from our sight, we ought to dwell on
them for a certain space, and thus, as it were,
unfold them and open them out to vision, and
present them to the minds of the hearers as
things to be examined and admired.
But as
for all other details, these should be passed
over rapidly, and thus far introduced and
The effect of purwoven into the narrative.
suing this plan is, that the particular facts
which we wish to see specially commended to
attention obtain greater prominence in consequence of the others being made to yield to
them; while, at the same time, neither does
the learner, whose interest we are anxious to
stimulate by our statement, come to these
subjects with a mind already exhausted, nor
is confusion induced upon the memory of the
person whom we ought to be instructing by
our teaching.

"

6. In all things, indeed, not only ought
our own eye to be kept fixed upon the end of
the commandment, which is
charity, out of
a pure heart, and a good conscience, and faith
unfeigned," 7 to which we should make all
that we utter refer ; but in like manner ought
the gaze of the person whom we are instructing by our utterance to be moved 8 toward the
same, and guided in that direction.
And,
in truth, for no other reason were all those
things which we read in the Holy Scriptures
written, previous to the Lord's advent, but
namely, that His advent might be
for this,
pressed upon the attention, and that the

5 In the mss. we also find the reading Ezm = Ezra.
6 In ipsis artzcniis = " among the very articles," or " conReference is made to certain great epochs or

necting links."
articles of time in sections 6 and 39.

7 i Tim. i. 5.
8 Reading movendus, for which monendus = to be admon-

ished, also occurs in the editions.

[Chap. IV.

it

Church which was to be, should be intimated
beforehand, that is to say, the people of God
throughout all nations ; which Church is His
body, wherewith also are united and numbered all the saints who lived in this world,
even before His advent, and who believed
then in His future coming, just as we believe
in His past coming.
For (to use an illustration) Jacob, at the time when he was being
born, first put forth from the womb a hand*
with which also he held the foot of the brother
who was taking priority of him in the act of
birth ; and next indeed the head followed,
and thereafter, at last, and as matter of course!
the rest of the members: 1
while, nevertheless
the head in point of dignity and power has
precedence, not only of those members which
followed it then, but also of the very hand
which anticipated
in the process of the
birth, and is really the first, although not in
the matter of the time of appearing, at least
in the order of nature. And in an analogous
manner, the Lord Jesus Christ, previous to
His appearing in the flesh, and coming forth
in a certain manner out of the womb of His
secrecy, before the eyes of men as Alan
the Mediator between God and men 2 " who
is over all, God blessed for ever," 3 sent before Him, in the person of the holy patriarchs
and prophets, a certain portion of His body
wherewith, as by a hand, He gave token beforetime of His own approaching birth, and
also supplanted* the people who were prior to
Him in their pride, using for that purpose the
bonds of the law, as if they were His five finFor through five epochs of times there
gers.
was no cessation in the foretelling and prophesying of His own destined coming; and in a
manner consonant with this, he through whom
the law was given wrote five books ; and proud
men, who were
carnally minded, and sought
to
' ' 6 were
not filled with blessing by the open hand of
Christ, but were debarred from such good by
the hand compressed and closed; and therefore their feet were tied, and "
they fell, while
we are risen, and stand upright." 1
But although, as I have said, the Lord Christ did
thus send before Him a certain portion of His
body, in the person of those holy men who
came before Him as regards the time of birth
nevertheless He is Himself the Head of the
body, the Church, 8 and all these have been
attached to that same body of which He is the
head, in virtue of their believing in Him whom
they announced prophetically.
For they were

establish their own righteousness,

'

gen xxv. 26.

2 , Tim. ii.
wherewith also He might supplant, etc.

* Reading sutfilantavit.

3 Rom ix
Some mss. give suiilantaret'-
Pflantaret -

5.

6 Rom. x. 3.

7 Ps. xx. 8.

8 SuT articulos-

fulfilling

not sundered (from that body) m consequence
of
their course before Him but
rather were they made one with the same bv
reason of their obedience.
For although the
hand may be put forward away before the
lead, still it has its connection beneath the
Head.
Wherefore all things which were written aforetime were written in order that we
might be taught thereby, * and were our figures, and happened in a figure in the case l(
these men.
Moreover they were written for
our sakes, upon whom the end of the a^es
has come. 10

CHAP. 4.

THAT THE GREAT REASON FOR THE
ADVENT OF CHRIST WAS THE COMMENDATION
OF LOVE.

?

&

,-r

is "the end of

7- Moreover, what greater reason is apparent for the advent of the Lord than that God
might show His love in us, commending it
powerfully, inasmuch as "while we were
vet
sinners, Christ died for us "
" And further
more this is with the intent "that, inasmuch
as. charity
the command-
- and " the fulfilling of the law '
ment,
' '3 we
also may love one another and lay down our
the brethren > even as He laid down
iHis life for us. m A nd with regard to God
Himself, its object is that, even if it were an
irksome task to love Him, it may now at least
cease to be irksome for us to return His love
seeing that "He first loved us,"* and "spared
not His own only Son, but delivered Him up
for us all."*
For their is no mightier invitation to love than to anticipate in loving
and that soul is over hard which, supposing
it unwilling indeed to give love, is unwilling
also to give the return of love.
But if, even
in the case of criminal and sordid loves, we
see how those who desire to be loved in return make it their special and absorbing business, by such proofs as are within their power
to render the strength of the love which they
themselves bear plain and patent ;
if we also
perceive how they affect to put forward an
appearance of justice in what they thus offer,
such as may qualify them in some sort to demand that a response be made in all fairness
to them on the part of those souls which thev
are laboring to beguile ; if, further, their own
passion burns more vehemently when they
observe that the minds which they are eager
to possess are also moved now by the same
if thus, I say, it happens at once that
the soul which before was torpid is excited
so soon as it feels itself to be loved, and that

fire :

9 Rom. xv. 4.
11 Rom. v. 8, 10.
J3 Rom. xiii. 10.
r5 1 John iv. io, 19.

10 1 Cor. x. 11.
12 1 Tim. i. 5.
x 4 1 John iii. 16.
16 Rom. viii. 32.

Chap. IV.]

ON THE CATECHISING OE THE UNINSTRUCTED.

the soul which was enkindled already becomes
the more inflamed so soon as it is made cognizant of the return of its own love, it is evident that no greater reason is to 'be found
why love should be either originated or enlarged, than what appears in the occasion
when one who as yet loves not at all comes
to know himself to be the object of love, or
when one who is already a lover either hopes
that he may yet be loved in turn, or has by
this time the evidence of a response to his affection. And if this holds good even in the
case of base loves, how much more ' in (true)
For what else have we carefully
friendship?
to attend to in this question touching the injuring of friendship than to this, namely, not
to give our friend cause to suppose either that
we do not love him at all, or that we love him
If, indeed, he is led
less than he loves us ?
to entertain this belief, he will be cooler in
that love in which men enjoy the interchange
of intimacies one with another; and if he is
not of that weak type of character to which
such an offense to affection will serve as a
cause of freezing off from love altogether, he
yet confines himself to that kind of affection in
which he loves, not with the view of enjoyment
to himself, but with the idea of studying the
But again it is worth our while
good of others.
although superiors also have
to notice how,
the wish to be loved by their inferiors, and are
gratified with the zealous attention2
paid to
them by such, and themselves cherish greater
affection towards these inferiors the more they
become cognizant of that,
with what might
of love, nevertheless, the inferior kindles so
soon as he learns that he is beloved by his suFor there have we love in its more
perior.
grateful aspect, where it does not consume
itself 3 in the drought of want, but flows forth
For
in the plenteousness of beneficence.
the former type of love is of misery, the latter of mercy. 4 And furthermore, if the inferior was despairing even of the possibility
of his being loved by his superior, he will now
be inexpressibly moved to love if the superior has of his own will condescended to show
how much he loves this person who could
by no means be bold enough to promise himBut what is there suself so great a good.
perior to God in the character of Judge ? and
what more desperate than man in the charthan man, I ask, who had
acter of sinner?
given himself all the more unreservedly up

1 Reading quanta plus, for which some mss. give plurius,
while in a large number we find purius = with how much greater
purity should it hold good, etc.
. obsequio, for which studiose, etc., also
occurs in the editions = are earnestly gratified with the attention,

2 Reading studioso .

.

etc.

3 JEstuat = burn, heave.
4 Ex miseria .

.

. ex misericordia.

to the wardship and domination of proud
powers which are unable to make him blessed,
as he had come more absolutely to despair
of the possibility of his being an object of interest to that power which wills not to be exalted in wickedness, but is exalted in goodness.

8.

If, therefore, it was mainly for this purpose that Christ came, to wit, that man might
learn how much God loves him; and that he
might learn this, to the intent that he might
be kindled to the love of Him by whom he
was first loved, and might also love his neighbor at the command and showing of Him
who became our neighbor, in that He loved
man when, instead of being a neighbor to
Him, he was sojourning far apart :
if, again,
all divine Scripture, which was written aforetime, was written with the view of presignifying the Lord's advent ; and if whatever has
been committed to writing in times subsequent to these, and established by divine authority, is a record of Christ, and admonishes
is manifest that on those two
us of love, it
commandments of love to God and love to
our neighbor 3 hang not only all the law and
the prophets, which at the time when the
Lord spoke to that effect were as yet the only
Holy Scripture, but also all those books of
the divine literature which have been written 6
at a later period for our health, and consigned
Wherefore, in the Old
to remembrance.
Testament there is a veiling of the New, and
in the New Testament there is a revealing of
the Old.
According to that veiling, carnal
men, understanding things in a carnal fashion,
have been under the dominion, both then and
now, of a penal fear.
According to this revealing, on the other hand, spiritual men,
among whom we reckon at once those then
who knocked in piety and found even hidden
things opened to them, and others now who
seek in no spirit of pride, lest even things uncovered should be closed to them,
understanding in a spiritual fashion, have been
made free through the love wherewith they
have been gifted.
Consequently, inasmuch
as there is nothing more adverse to love than
envy, and as pride is the mother of envy, the
same Lord Jesus Christ, God-man, is both a
manifestation of divine love towards, us, and
an example of human humility with us, to the
end that our great swelling might be cured by
For here is
a greater counteracting remedy.
is
great
greater mercy, a humble God !
Take this
love, therefore, as the end that is set before

misery , proud man !

But there

5 Matt. xxii. 40.
6 Reading conscripta, for which some mss. have consecuta =

have followed, and many give coiisecrata, dedicated.

[Chap. VI.

you, to which you are to refer all that you
say, and, whatever you narrate, narrate it in
such a manner that he to whom you are discoursing on hearing may believe, on believing may hope, on hoping may love.

CHAP. 5.

THAT THE PERSON WHO COMES FOR
CATECHETICAL INSTRUCTION IS TO BE EXAMINED WITH RESPECT TO HIS VIEWS, ON DESIRING TO BECOME A CHRISTIAN.

9. Moreover, it

is on the gound of that
very severity of God, J by which the hearts of
mortals are agitated with a most wholesome
terror, that love is to be built up; so that, rejoicing that he is loved by Him whom he fears,
man may have boldness to love Him in return,
and yet at the same time be afraid to displease
His love toward himself, even should he be
For certainly
able to do so with impunity.
it very rarely happens, nay, I should rather
say, never, that any one approaches us with
the wish to become a Christian who has not
been smitten with some sort of fear of God.
For if it is in the expectation of some advantage from men whom he deems himself unlikely
to please in any other way, or with the idea
of escaping any disadvantage at the hands of
men of whose displeasure or hostility he is
seriously afraid, that a man wishes to become
a Christian, then his wish to become one is
not so earnest as his desire to feign one. 2
For faith is not a matter of the body which
does obeisance, 3 but of the mind which beis often the
lieves.
case that the mercy of God comes to be present through the ministry of the catechiser, so
that, affected by the discourse, the man now
wishes to become in reality that which he had
And so
made up his mind only to feign.
soon as he begins to have this manner of desire, we may judge him then to have made a
genuine approach to us.
It is true, indeed,
that the precise time when a man, whom we
perceive to be present with us already in the
body, comes to us in reality with his mind, 4
is a thing hidden from us.
But, notwithstanding that, we ought to deal with him in
such a manner that this wish may be made to
arise within him, even should it not be there
For no such labor is lost, inasat present.
much as, if there is any wish at all, it is assuredly strengthened by such action on our
part, although we may be ignorant of the time

But unmistakeably it

. caritas adificcinda est.

1 De ipsa etiant severitate Dei .
2 Non fieri vult potius quani fingere.
3 Or = "

.

signifying assent by its motions," adopting the readSome editions give

ing of the best mss., viz. salutantis corporis.
salvandi, while certain mss. have salutis, and others saltantis.

4 Reading quando veniat animo, for which quo vcniat

aniitw also occurs=the mind in which a man comes .
is a matter hidden from us.

.

or the hour at which it began.
It is useful
certainly, if it can be done, to get from those
who know the man some idea beforehand of
the state of mind in which he is, or of the
causes which have induced him to come with
But if there
the view of embracing religion.
is no other person available from whom we
may gather such information, then, indeed,
the man himself is to be interrogated, so that
from what he says in reply we may draw the
beginning of our discourse. Now if he has
come with a false heart, desirous only of
human advantages or thinking to escape disadvantages, he will certainly speak what is
Nevertheless, the very untruth which
untrue.
he utters should be made the point from
which we start.
This should not be done,
however, with the (open) intention of confuting his falsehood, as if that were a settled matter with you; but, taking it for granted that
he has professed to have come with a purpose
which is really worthy of approbation (whether
that profession be true or false), it should
rather be our aim to commend and praise
such a purpose as that with which, in
his
reply, he has declared himself to have come ;
so that we may make him feel it a pleasure
to be the kind of man actually that he wishes
to seem to be. On the other hand, supposing him to have given a declaration of his
views other than what ought to be before the
mind of one who is to be instructed in the
Christian faith, then by reproving him with
more than usual kindness and gentleness,
as a person uninstructed and ignorant, by
pointing out and commending, concisely and
in a grave spirit the end of Christian doctrine
in its genuine reality, and by doing all this
in such a manner as neither to anticipate the
times of a narration, which should be given
subsequently, nor to venture to impose that
kind of statement upon a mind not
previously set for it, you may bring him to desire that which, either in mistake or in dissimulation, he has not been desiring up to
this stage.

CHAP. 6.

OF THE WAY TO COMMENCE THE
CATECHETICAL INSTRUCTION, AND OF THE
NARRATION OF FACTS FROM THE HISTORY OF
THE WORLD'S CREATION ON TO THE PRESENT
TIMES OF THE CHURCH.

10. But if it happens that his answer is to
the effect that he has met with some divine
warning, or with some divine terror, prompting him to become a Christian, this opens up
the way most satisfactorily for a commencement to our discourse, by suggesting the greatHis thoughts,
ness of God's interest in us.

Chap. VII.]

ON THE CATECHISING OF THE UNINSTRUCTED.

however, ought certainly to be turned away
from this line of things, whether miracles or
dreams, and directed to the more solid path
and the surer oracles of the Scriptures ; so
that he may also come to understand how
mercifully that warning was administered to
previous to his giving himhim in advance, 1
self to the Holy Scriptures. And assuredly
it ought to be pointed out to him, that the
Lord Himself would neither thus have admonished him and urged him on to become a
Christian, and to be incorporated into the
Church, nor have taught him by such signs
or revelations, had it not been His will that,
for his greater safety and security, he should
enter upon a pathway already prepared in the
Holy Scriptures, in which he should not seek
after visible miracles, but learn the habit of
hoping for things invisible, and in which also
he should receive monitions not in sleep but
At this point the narration
in wakefulness.
ought now to be commenced, which should start
with the fact that God made all things very
2 and which should be continued, as we
good,
have said, on to the present times of the
This should be done in such a
Church.
manner as to give, for each of the affairs and
events which we relate, causes and reasons
by which we may refer them severally to that
end of love from which neither the eye of the
man who is occupied in doing anything, nor
that of the man who is engaged in speaking,
For if, even in
ought to be turned away.
handling the fables of the poets, which are
but fictitious creations and things devised
for the pleasure 3 of minds whose food is
found in trifles, those grammarians who have
the reputation and the name of being good
do nevertheless endeavor to bring them to
bear upon some kind of (assumed) use, although that use itself may be only something
vain and grossly bent upon the coarse nutri4 how much more careful
ment of this world :
does it become us to be, not to let those
genuine verities which we narrate, in consequence of any want of a well-considered account of their causes, be accepted either with
a gratification which issues in no practical
good, or, still less, with a cupidity which may
At the same time, we are
prove hurtful !
not to set forth these causes in such a manner as to leave the proper course of our narration, and let our heart and our tongue indulge in digressions into the knotty questions
But the simple
of more intricate discussion.
truth of the explanation which we adduce 5

ought to be like the gold which binds together
a row of gems, and yet does not interfere with
the choice symmetry of the ornament by any
undue intrusion of itself.

CHAP. 7.

OF THE EXPOSITION OF THE RESURRECTION, THE JUDGMENT, AND OTHER SUBJECTS, WHICH SHOULD FOLLOW THIS NARRATION.
11. On the completion of this narration,
the hope of the resurrection should be set
forth, and, so far as the capacity and strength
of the hearer will bear it, and so far also as
the measure of time at our disposal will alour arguments
low, we ought to handle
against the vain scoffings of unbelievers on
the subject of the resurrection of the body,
as well as on that of the future judgment,
with its goodness in relation to the good, its
severity in relation to the evil, its truth in
relation to all. And after the penalties of
the impious have thus been declared with detestation and horror, then the kingdom of
the righteous and faithful, and that supernal
city and its joy, should form the next themes
At this point, moreover,
for our discourse.
we ought to equip and animate the weakness
of man in withstanding temptations and offenses, whether these emerge without or rise
within the church itself; without, as in opposition to Gentiles, or Jews, or heretics;
within, on the other hand, as
in opposition
It
to the chaff of the Lord's threshing-floor.
is not meant, however, that we are to dispute
against each several type of perverse men,
and that all their wrong opinions are to be
refuted by set arrays of argumentations: but,
in a manner suitable to a limited allowance
of time, we ought to show how all this was
foretold, and to point out of what service
temptations are in the training of the faithful, and what relief 7 there is in the example
of the patience of God, who has resolved to
permit them even to the end.
But, again,
while he is being furnished against these
(adversaries), whose perverse multitudes fill
the churches so far as bodily presence is concerned, the precepts of a Christian and honorable manner of life should also be briefly
and befittingly detailed at the same time, to
the intent that he may neither allow himself
to be easily led astray in this way, by any
who are drunkards,
fraudulent,
gamesters, adulterers, fornicators, lovers of
public spectacles, wearers of unholy charms,
sorcerers, astrologers, or diviners practising

covetous,

tateni = according to the inclination, etc.

1 Pmrogata sit.
3 Reading ad voluptatem. . But many MSS. give ad volttn
4 Avidam saginer scecularis.
4 Avidam sagmtp scecularis.
5 Reading Veritas adhibitce rationis, for which we also find I turbans.

- Gen. i. 31.

adhibita rationis = the applied truth,
rationi = the truth applied to our explanation.

etc. ; and adhibita

6 Nontamen or?iamenti seriem ulla immodcratione pe-r-

iviw */

*

7 Medicina

[Chap. VIII.

any sort of vain and wicked arts, and all
other parties of a similar character; nor to
let himself fancy that any such course may
be followed with impunity on his part, simply
because he sees many who are called Christians loving these things, and engaging themselves with them, and defending them, and
recommending them, and actually persuading
For as to the end which
others to their use.
is appointed for those who persist in such a
mode of life, and as to the method in which
they are to be borne with in the church itself,
out of which they are destined to be separated
these are subjects in which the
in the end,
learner ought to be instructed by means of
He
the testimonies of the divine books.
should also, however, be informed beforehand
that he will find in the church many good
Christians, most genuine citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, if he sets about being such
And, finally, he must be sedulously
himself.
warned against letting his hope rest on man.
is not a matter that can be easily
For it
judged by man, what man is righteous. And
even were this a matter which could be easily
done, still the object with which the examples
of righteous men are set before us is not that
we may be justified by them, but that, as we
imitate them, we may understand how we
ourselves also are justified by their Justifier.
For the issue of this will be something which
must merit the highest approval,
namely
this, that when the person who is hearing us,
or rather, who is hearing God by us, has
begun to make some progress in moral qualities and in knowledge, and to enter upon the
way of Christ with ardor, he will not be so
bold as to ascribe the change either to us or
to himself; but he will love both himself and
us, and whatever other persons he loves as
friends, in Him, and for His sake who loved
him when he was an enemy, in order that He
might justify him and make him a friend.
And now that we have advanced thus far, I
do not think that you need any preceptor to
tell you how you should discuss matters
briefly, when either your own time or that of
those who are hearing you is occupied; and
how, on the other hand, you should discourse
at greater length when there is more time at
For the very necessity of
your command.
the case recommends this, apart from the
counsel of any adviser.

CHAP. 8.

OF THE METHOD TO BE PURSUED IN
CATECHISING THOSE WHO HAVE HAD A LIBERAL EDUCATION.

12. But there is another case which eviI mean the

dently must not be overlooked.

to

case of one coming to you to receive catchetical instruction who has cultivated the field of
liberal studies, who has already made up his
mind to be a Christian, and who has betaken
himself to you for the express purpose of beIt can scarcely fail to be the
coming one.
fact that a person of this character has already
acquired a considerable knowledge of our
Scriptures and literature; and, furnished with
this, he may have come now simply with the
view of being made a partaker in the sacraFor it is customary with men of this
ments.
inquire carefully into all things,
class
not at the very time when they are made
Christians, but previous to that, and thus
early also to communicate and reason, with any
whom they can reach, on the subject of the
feelings of their own minds.
Consequently
brief method of procedure should be
a
adopted with these, so as not to inculcate on
things which
them, in an odious fashion,
they know already, but to pass over these
Thus we
with a light and modest touch.
should say how we believe that they are already familiar with this and the other subject,
and that we therefore simply reckon up in a
cursory manner all those facts which require
to be formally urged upon the attention of
And we
the uninstructed and unlearned.
should endeavor so to proceed, that, supposing this man of culture to have been previously acquainted with any one of our
themes, he may not hear it now as from a
teacher; and that, in the event of his being
still ignorant of any of them, he may yet
learn the same while we are going over the
things with which we understand him to be
is certainly
already familiar.
not without advantage to interrogate the man
himself as to the means by which he was induced to desire to be a Christian; so that, if
you discover him to have been moved to that
decision by books, whether they be the canonical writings or the compositions of literary
men worth the studying,
2 you may say something about these at the outset, expressing
your approbation of them in a manner which
may suit the distinct merits which they severally possess, in respect of canonical authority and of skillfully applied diligence on the
part of these expounders; 3 and, in the case of
the canonical Scriptures, commending above
all the most salutary modesty (of language)
displayed alongside their wonderful loftiness
(of subject); while, in those other producin accordance with the
tions you notice,

Moreover, it

1 Reading odiose, for which several mss. give otiose = idly.
2 Vtilium tractatorum.
3 Reading exponentium.
in expounding.

Various codices give ad exponen-

dum

Chap. IX.]

ON THE CATECHISING OF THE UNINSTRUCTED.

as

conversant,

characteristic faculty of each several writer,
a style of a more sonorous and, as it were,
more rounded eloquence adapted to minds
that are prouder, and, by reason thereof,
weaker. We should certainly also elicit from
him some account of himself, so that he may
give us to understand what writer he chiefly
perused, and with what books he was more
these were the
familiarly
means of moving him to wish to be associated
with the church. And when he has given us
this information, then if the said books are
known to us, or if we have at least ecclesiastical report as our warrant for taking them
to have been written by some catholic man
of note, we should joyfully express our apBut if, on the other hand, he has
probation.
fallen upon the productions of some heretic,
and in ignorance, it may be, has retained in
his mind anything which ' the true faith condemns, and yet supposes it to be catholic
doctrine, then we must set ourselves sedulously to teach him, bringing before him (in
its rightful superiority) the authority of the
Church universal, and of other most learned
men reputed both for their disputations and
for their writings in (the cause of) its truth. 2
At the same time, it
is to be admitted that
even those who have departed this life as
genuine catholics, and have left to posterity
some Christian writings, in certain passages
of their small works, either in consequence
of their failing to be understood, or (as the
way is with human infirmity) because they
lack ability to pierce into the deeper mysteries
with the eye of the mind, and in (pursuing)
the semblance of what is true, wander from
the truth itself, have proved an occasion
for
to
constructing and generating some heresy.
This, however, is not to be wondered at,
when, even in the instance of the canonical
writings themselves, where all things have
been expressed in the soundest manner, we
see how it has happened,
not indeed through
merely taking certain passages in a sense
different from that which the writer had in
view or which is consistent with the truth
(for if this were all, who would not
gladly pardon human infirmity, when it exhibits a readiness to accept correction?), but
by persistently defending, with the bitterest
vehemence and
arrogance,

presumptuous and audacious

impudent

itself,

the

in

* Reading quod, with Marriott.

But if we accept quod with
the Benedictine editors, the sense will = and in ignorance it
may be that the true faith condemns them, has retained them in
his mind.
2 Aliorumque doctissimoram hominum et disputatiombus
It may also be
et scriptionibus in ejus veritate florentium.
= bringing before him the authority of the Church universal, as
well as both the disputations and the writings of other most
learned men well reputed in (the cause of) its truth.

these

discuss

opinions which they have taken up in permany have given birth to
versity and error,
many pernicious dogmas at the cost of rending the unity of the (Christian) communion.
subjects we should
All
in
modest conference with the individual who
makes his approach to the society of the
Christian people, not in the character of an uneducated man, 3 as they say, but in that of one
who has passed through a finished culture and
training in the books of the learned. And in
enjoining him to guard against the errors of
presumption, we should assume only so much
authority as that humility of his, which induced him to come to us, is now felt to
As to other things, moreover, in
admit of.
accordance with the rules of saving doctrine,
which require to be narrated or discussed,
whether they be matters relating to the faith,
or questions bearing on the moral life, or
others dealing with temptations, all these
should be gone through in the manner which
I have indicated, and ought therein to be referred to the more excellent way (already
noticed).

CHAP. 9.

OF THE METHOD IN WHICH GRAMMARIANS AND PROFESSIONAL SPEAKERS ARE
TO BE DEALT WITH.
13. There are also some who come from
the commonest schools of the grammarians
and professional speakers, whom you may not
venture to reckon either among the uneducated or among those very learned classes
whose minds have been exercised in questions of real magnitude. When such persons, therefore, who appear to be superior
to the rest of mankind, so far as the art of
speaking is concerned, approach you with
the view of becoming Christians, it will be
your duty in your communications with them,
in a higher degree than in your dealings with
those other illiterate hearers, to make it plain
that they are to be diligently admonished to
clothe themselves with Christian humility,
and learn not to despise individuals whom
they may discover keeping themselves free
from vices of conduct more carefully than
and also that they
from faults of language ;
ought not to presume so much as to compare
with a pure heart the practised tongue which
they were accustomed e^en to put in prefBut above all, such persons should
erence.
be taught to listen to the divine Scriptures,
so that they may neither deem solid
eloquence to be mean, merely because it is not
inflated, nor suppose that the words or deeds

3 Idiota.
4 1 Cor. xii. 31.

See also above,

9.

[Chap. X.

of men, of which we read the accounts in
those books, involved and covered as they
1 are not to be drawn
are in carnal wrappings,
forth and unfolded with a view to an (adequate) understanding of them, but are to be
taken merely according to the sound of the
And as to this same matter of the
letter.
utility of the hidden meaning, the existence
of which is the reason why they are called
also mysteries, the power wielded by these
intricacies of enigmatical utterances in the
way of sharpening our love for the truth, and
shaking off the torpor of weariness, is a thing
which the persons in question must have
made good to them by actual experience,
to move
when some subject which failed
them when it was placed baldly before them,
has its significance elicited by the detailed
For it
working out of an allegorical sense.
is in the highest degree useful to such men
to come to know how ideas are to be preferred to words, just as the soul is preferred
to the body. And from this, too, it follows
that they ought to have the desire to listen to
discourses remarkable for their truth, rather
than to those which are notable for their eloquence; just as they ought to be anxious to
have friends distinguished for their wisdom,
rather than those whose chief merit is their
They should also understand that
beauty.
there is no voice for the ears of God save the
For thus they will not
affection of the soul.
act the mocker if they happen to observe any
of the prelates and ministers of the Church
either calling upon God in language marked
by barbarisms and solecisms, or failing in
understanding correctly the very words which
they are pronouncing, and making confused
is not meant, of course, that
pauses.
such faults are not to be corrected, so that
the people may say "Amen" to something
which they plainly understand; but what is
intended
that such things should be
piously borne with by those who have come
to understand how, as in the forum it is in
the sound, so in the church it is in the desire
Therefore
that the grace of speech resides. 3
that of the forum may sometimes be called
good speech, but never gracious speech. 4
Moreover, with respect to the sacrament
which they are about to receive, it is enough
for the more intelligent simply to hear what
But with those of slower
the thing signifies.
intellect, it will be necessary to adopt a somewhat more detailed explanation, together with

It

is,

1 Carnalibus integumentis inzwluta atqtie operta.
2 Or = confusing the sense by false pauses : perturbateque

distingtiere.

3 Ut sono in for 0, sic voto in ecclesia benedici
4 Bona dictio, nunquam tamen benedictio.

the use of similitudes, to prevent them from
despising what they see.

CHAP. IO.

OF THE ATTAINMENT OF CHEERFULNESS IN THE DUTY OF CATECHISING, AND OF
VARIOUS CAUSES PRODUCING WEARINESS IN
THE CATECHUMEN.

14. At this point you perhaps desiderate
some example of the kind of discourse intended, so that I may show you by an actual
instance how the things which I have recommended are to be done.
This indeed I shall
do, so far as by God's help I shall be able.
But before proceeding to that, it is my duty,
in consistency with what I have promised, to
speak of the acquisition of the cheerfulness
For as regards
(to which I have alluded).
the matter of the rules in accordance with
which your discourse should be set forth, in
the case of the catechetical instruction of a
person who comes with the express view of
being made a Christian, I have already made
good, as far as has appeared sufficient, the
promise which I made. And surely I am
under no obligation at the same time to do
myself in this volume that which I enjoin as
the right thing to be done.
Consequently,
if I do that, it will have the value of an overBut how can the overplus be superplus.
added by me before I have filled up the
measure of what is due?
Besides, one thing
which I have heard you make the subject of
your complaint above all others, is the fact
that your discourse seemed to yourself to be
poor and spiritless when you were instructing
any one in the Christian name. Now this, I
know, results not so much from want of
matter to say, with which I am well aware
you are sufficiently provided and furnished, or
from poverty of speech itself, as rather from
weariness of mind. And that may spring either
from the cause of which I have already spoken,
namely, the fact that our intelligence is better
pleased and more thoroughly arrested by that
which we perceive in silence in the mind, and
that we have no inclination to have our attention called off from it to a noise of words
coming far short of representing it; or from
the circumstance that even when discourse is
pleasant, we have more delight in hearing or
reading things which have been expressed in
a superior manner, and which are set forth
without any care or anxiety on our part, than
in putting together, with a view to the comprehension of others, words suddenly conceived, and leaving it an uncertain issue, on
the one hand, whether such terms occur to
us as adequately represent the sense, and on
the other, whether they be accepted in such

Chap. X.]

ON THE CATECHISING OF THE UNINSTRUCTED.

a manner as to profit; or yet again, from the
consideration that, in consequence of their
being now thoroughly familiar to ourselves,
and no longer necessary to our own advancement, it becomes irksome to us to be recurring very frequently to those matters which
are urged upon the uninstructed, and our
mind, as being by this time pretty well
matured, moves with no manner of pleasure
in the circle of subjects so well-worn, and, as
it were, so childish. A sense of weariness is
also induced upon the speaker when he has
a hearer who remains unmoved, either in that
he is actually not stirred by any feeling, or in
that he does not indicate by any motion of
the body that he understands or that he is
Not that it is a
pleased with what is said. 1
becoming disposition in us to be greedy of
the praises of men, but that the things which
we minister are of God; and the more we love
those to whom we discourse, the more desirous are we that they should be pleased with
the matters which are held forth for their
salvation; so that if we do not succeed in
this, we are pained, and we are weakened,
and become broken-spirited in the midst of our
course, as if we were wasting our efforts to
Sometimes, too, when we are
no purpose.
drawn off from some matter which we are
desirous to go on with, and the transaction
of which was a pleasure to us, or appeared to
be more than usually needful, and when we
are compelled, either by the command of a
person whom we are unwilling to offend, or
by the importunity of some parties that we
find it impossible to get rid of, to instruct
any one catechetically, in such circumstances
we approach a duty for which great calmness
is indispensable with minds already perturbed,
and grieving at once that we are not permitted
to keep that order which we desire to observe
in our actions, and that we cannot possibly be
competent for all things; and thus out of
very heaviness our discourse as it advances is
less of an attraction, because, starting from
soil of dejection, it goes on less
the arid
Sometimes, too, sadness has taken
flowingly.
possession of our heart in consequence of
some offense or other, and at that very time
we are addressed thus; "Come, speak with
this person; he desires to become a ChrisFor they who thus address us do it
tian."
in ignorance of the hidden trouble which is
So it happens that, if
consuming us within.
they are not the persons to whom it befits us
to open up our feelings, we undertake with
no sense of pleasure what they desire; and

1 The sentence,

" either in that he is actually not stirred

by what is said," is omitted in many mss.

then, certainly, the discourse will be languid
and unenjoyable which is transmitted through
the agitated and fuming channel of a heart in
that condition.
Consequently, seeing there
are so many causes serving to cloud the calm
serenity of our minds, in accordance with
God's will we must seek remedies for them,
such as may bring us relief from these feelings of heaviness, and help us to rejoice in
fervor of spirit, and to be jocund in the tran-
" For God loveth a
quility of a good work.
cheerful giver."

15. Now if the cause of our sadness lies in
the circumstance that our hearer does not
apprehend what we mean, so that we have to
come down in a certain fashion from the elevation of our own conceptions, and are under
the necessity of dwelling long in the tedious
processes of syllables which come far beneath
the standard of our ideas, and have anxiously
to consider how that which we ourselves take
in with a most rapid draught of mental apprehension is to be given forth by the moutn of
flesh in the long and perplexed intricacies of
its method of enunciation; and if the great
dissimilarity thus felt (between our utterance
and our thought) makes it distasteful to us to
speak, and a pleasure to us to keep silence,
then let us ponder what has been set before
us by Him who has " showed us an example
that we should follow His steps." 3
For however much our articulate speech may differ
from the vivacity of our intelligence, much
greater is the difference of the flesh of mortality from the equality of God.
And, neverless, "although He was in the same form,
He emptied Himself, taking the form of a
and so on down to the words " the
servant,"
death of the cross." 4 What is the explanation of this but that He made Himself " weak
to the weak, in order that He might gain the
weak?" 3
Listen to His follower as he expresses himself also in another place to this
" For whether we be beside ourselves,
effect:
it is to God; or whether we be sober, it is for
For the love of Christ constrainyour cause.
eth us, because we thus judge that He died
for all." 6 And how, indeed, should one be
ready to be spent for their souls, 7 if he should
find it irksome to him to bend himself to their
For this reason, therefore, He became
ears ?
a little child in the midst of us, (and) like a

3 1 Pet. ii. 21.

2 2 Cor. ix. 7.
4 Phil. ii. 17. The form in which the quotation is given above,
with the omission of the intermediate clauses, is due probably to
the copyist, and not to Augustin himself. The words left out
are given thus in the Serm. xlvii. on Ezekiel xxxiv. :
Being
made in the likeness of men, and being found in the fashion of a
man : He humbled Himself, being made obedient unto death,
even the death of the cross."

"

[See R. V.]

5 Cf. 1 Cor. ix. 22.
6 2 Cor. v. 13, 14.

7 Cf. 2 Cor. xii. 15.

[Chap. XI.

For is

it a
nurse cherishing her children. 1
pleasure to lisp shortened and broken words,
unless love invites us ? And yet men desire
to have infants to whom they have to do that
kind of service; and it is a sweeter thing to
a mother to put small morsels of masticated
food into her little son's mouth, than to eat
In like
up and devour larger pieces herself.
manner, accordingly, let not the thought of
the hen 2 recede from your heart, who covers
her tender brood with her drooping feathers,
and with broken voice
calls her chirping
young ones to her, while they that turn away
from her fostering wings in their pride become a prey to birds.
For if intelligence
brings delights in its purest recesses, it should
also be a delight to us to have an intelligent
understanding of the manner in which charity,
the more complaisantly it descends to the
lowest objects, finds its way back, with all the
greater vigor to those that are most secret,
along the course of a good conscience which
witnesses that it has sought nothing from
those to whom it has descended except their
everlasting salvation.

CHAP. II.

OF THE REMEDY FOR THE SECOND
SOURCE OF WEARINESS.

1 6.

If, however, it

is rather our desire to
read or hear such things as are already prepared for our use and expressed in a superior
style, and if the consequence is that we feel it
irksome to put together, at the time and with
an uncertain issue, the terms of discourse on
our own side, then, provided only that our
mind does not wander off from the truth of
the facts themselves, it is an easy matter for
the hearer, if he is offended by anything in
our language, to come to see in that very
circumstance how little value should be set,
supposing the subject itself to be rightly understood, upon the mere fact that there may
have been some imperfection or some inaccuracy in the literal expressions, which were
employed . indeed simply with the view of
securing a correct apprehension of the subjectBut if the bent of human infirmity
matter.
has wandered off from the truth of the facts
although in the catechetical inthemselves,
struction of the unlearned, where we have to
keep by the most beaten track, that cannot
occur very readily,
still, lest haply it should
turn out that our hearer finds cause of offence
even in this direction, we ought not to deem
this to have come upon us in any other way
than as the issue of God's own wish to put us to
the test with respect to our readiness to re-

ceive correction in calmness of mind, so as
not to rush headlong, in the course of a still
greater error, into the defense of our error.
But if, again, no one has told us of it, and if
the thing has altogether escaped our own
notice, as well as the observation of our
hearers, then there is nothing to grieve over,
provided only the same thing does not occur
For the most part, however,
a second time.
when we recall what we have said, we ourselves discover something to find fault with,
and are ignorant of the manner in which it
was received when it was uttered; and so
when charity is fervent within us, we are the
more vexed if the thing, while really false,
has been received with unquestioning acceptThis being the case, then, whenever
ance.
an opportunity occurs, as we have been finding fault with ourselves in silence, we ought
in like manner to see to it that those persons
be also set right on the subject in a considerate method, who have fallen into some
sort of error, not by the words of God, but
If, on the other
plainly by those used by us.
hand, there are any who, blinded by insensate
spite, rejoice that we have committed a mistake, whisperers as they are, and slanderers,
and "hateful to God," 3 such characters
should afford us matter for the exercise of
patience with pity, inasmuch as
also the
"
patience of God leadeth them to repentFor what is more detestable, and
ance." 4
what more likely to " treasure up wrath in
the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God," 5 than to rejoice,
after the evil likeness and pattern of the devil,
At times, too, even
in the evil of another ?
when all is correctly and truly spoken, either
something which has not been understood,
or something which, as being opposed to the
idea and wont of an old error, seems harsh
in its very novelty, offends and disturbs the
But if this becomes apparent, and if
hearer.
the person shows himself capable of being set
right, he should be set right without any
delay by the use of abundance of authorities
On the other hand, if the
and reasons.
offense is tacit and hidden, the medicine of
God is the effective remedy for it. And if,
again, the person starts back and declines to
be cured, we should comfort ourselves with
that example of our Lord, who, when men
were offended at His word, and shrank from
it as a hard saying, addressed Himself at the
same time to those who had remained, in these
For it
terms, "Will ye also go away?" 6
" fixed
ought to be retained as a thoroughly
and immovable "
position in our heart, that

1 Cf. i. Thess. ii. 7.
2 Iltius gai/inoi,

in reference to Matt, xxiii. 37.

3 Cf. Rom. i.
5 Rom. ii. 5.

4 Rom. ii. 4.
6 John vi. 67.

[See R. VJ

Chap. XII.]

ON THE CATECHISING OF THE UNINSTRUCTED.

x

Jerusalem which is in captivity is
set free
from the Babylon of this world when the
times have run their course, and that none
belonging to her shall perish : for whoever
may perish was not of her. "For the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal,
The Lord knoweth them that are His ; and,
let every one that nameth the name of Christ
If we ponder these
depart from iniquity."
things, and call upon the Lord to come into
our heart, we shall be less apprehensive of
the uncertain issues of our discourse, consequent on the uncertain feelings of our hearers ; and the very endurance of vexations in
the cause of a work of mercy will also be
something pleasant to us, if we seek not our
own glory in the same.
For then is a work
truly good, when the aim of the doer gets its
impetus from charity,
and, as if returning
to its own place,
rests
charity.
Moreover, the reading which delights us, or
any listening to an eloquence superior to our
own, the effect of which is to make us inclined to set a greater value upon it than
upon the discourse which we ourselves have
to deliver, and so to lead us to speak with a
reluctant or tedious utterance, will come upon
us in a happier spirit, and will be found to
be more enjoyable after labor.
Then, too,
with a stronger confidence shall we pray to
God to speak to us as we wish, if we cheerfully submit to let Him speak by us as we
Thus is it brought about that all
are able.
things come together for good to them that
love God. 3

again in

CHAP. 12.

OF THE REMEDY FOR THE THIRD

SOURCE OF WEARINESS.

17. Once more, however, we often feel it
very wearisome to go over repeatedly matters
which are thoroughly familiar, and adapted
If this is the case with
(rather) to children.
us, then we should endeavor to meet them
with a brother's, a father's, and a mother's
love; and, if we are once united with them
thus in heart, to us no less than to them will
For so great is the
these things seem new.
power of a sympathetic disposition of mind,
that, as they are affected while we are speaking, and we are affected while they are learning, we have our dwelling in each other; and
thus, at one and the same time, they as it
were in us speak what they hear, and we in
them learn after a certain fashion what we
Is it not a common occurrence with
teach.

us, that when we show to persons, who have
never seen them, certain spacious and beautiful tracts, either in cities or in fields, which
we have been in the habit of passing by without any sense of pleasure, simply because we
have become so accustomed to the sight of
them, we find our own enjoyment renewed
in their enjoyment of the novelty of the
scene ? And this is so much the more our
experience in proportion to the intimacy of
our friendship with them; because, just as
we are in them in virtue of the bond of love,
in the same degree do things become new to
But if we ourus which previously were old.
selves have made any considerable progress
in the contemplative study of things, it
is
not our wish that those whom we love should
simply be gratified and astonished as they
gaze upon the works of men's hands; but it
becomes our wish to lift them to (the contemplation of) the very skill 4 or wisdom of
their author, and from this to (see them) rise
to the admiration and praise of the all-creating
God, with whom 5 is the most fruitful end of
love. How much more, then, ought we to
be delighted when men come to us with the
purpose already formed of obtaining the
knowledge of God Himself, with a view to
(the knowledge of) whom all things should
be learned which are to be learned ! And
how ought we to feel ourselves renewed in
their newness (of experience), so that if our
ordinary preaching is somewhat frigid, it may
rise to fresh warmth under (the stimulus of)
There is also
their extraordinary hearing !
this additional consideration to help us in the
attainment of gladness, namely, that we ponder and bear in mind out of what death of
error the man is passing over into the life of
faith. And if we walk through streets which
are most familiar to us, with a beneficent
cheerfulness, when we happen to be pointing
out the way to some individual who had been
distress in consequence of missing his
in
direction, how much more should be the alacrity of spirit, and how much greater the joy
with which, in the matter of saving doctrine,
we ought to traverse again and again even
those tracks which, so far as we are ourselves
concerned, there is no need to open up any
more; seeing that we are leading a miserable
soul, .and one worn out with the devious
courses of this world, through the paths of
peace, at the command of Him who made
that peace

6 good to us !

1 2 Tim. ii. 19.
3 Concurrant in bonum. Rom. viii. 28.

a A caritate jaculatur.

4 Some editions read arcem = stronghold, instead of artem.
5 Or = wherein : ubi.
6 Instead of earn, the reading ea

those things, also occurs.

CHAP. 13.

[Chap. XIII.

OF THE REMEDY FOR THE FOURTH
SOURCE OF WEARINESS.

18. But in good truth it

is a serious demand to make upon us, to continue discoursing on to the set limit when we fail to see
our hearer in any degree moved; whether it
be that, under the restraints of the awe of religion, he has not the boldness to signify his
approval by voice or by any movement of his
body, or that he is kept back by the modesty
proper to man, 1 or that he does not understand our sayings, or that he counts them of
no value.
Since, then, this must be a matter
of uncertainty to us, as we cannot discern his
mind, it becomes our duty in our discourse
to make trial of all things which may be of
any avail in stirring him up and drawing him
forth as it were from his place of concealFor that sort of fear which is exment.
cessive, and which obstructs the declaration
of his judgment, ought to be dispelled by the
force of kindly exhortation; and by bringing
before him the consideration of our brotherly
affinity, we should temper his reverence for
us; and by questioning him, we should ascertain whether he understands what is addressed
to him; and we should impart to him a sense
of confidence, so that he may give free expression to any objection which suggests
itself to him. We should at the same time ask
him whether he has already listened to such
themes on some previous
occasion, and
whether perchance they fail to move him
now in consequence of their being to him like
things well known and commonplace. And
we ought to shape our course in accordance
with his answer, so as either to speak in a
simpler style and with greater detail of exto refute some antagonistic
planation,
opinion, or, instead of attempting any more
diffuse exposition of the subjects which are
known to him, to give a brief summary of
these, and to select some of those matters
which are handled in a mystical manner in
the holy books, and especially in the historical narrative, the unfolding and setting forth
of which may make our addresses more atBut if the man is of a very sluggish
tractive.
disposition, and if he is senseless, and without anything in common with all such sources
of pleasure, then we must simply bear with
him in a compassionate spirit;
and, after
briefly going over other points, we ought to
impress upon him, in a manner calculated to
inspire him with awe, the truths which are
most indispensable on the subject of the unity
of the Catholic Church, 2 on that of tempta1 Or = by the reverence which he feels for the man: humana
2 The text gives simply Catholics. One MS. has Catholics:

vereciindia.

or

tion, on that of a Christian conversation in
view of the future judgment; and we ought
rather to address ourselves to God for him
than address much to him concerning God.
19. It is likewise a frequent occurrence that
one who at first listened to us with all readiness, becomes exhausted either by the effort
of hearing or by standing, and now no longer
commends what is said, but gapes and yawns,
and even unwillingly exhibits a disposition to
depart. When we observe that, it becomes
our duty to refresh his mind by saying something seasoned with an honest cheerfulness
and adapted to the matter which is being discussed, or something of a very wonderful and
amazing order, or even, it may be, something
of a painful and mournful nature.
Whatever
we thus say may be all the better if it affects
himself more immediately, so that the quick
sense of self-concern may keep his attention
on the alert.
At the same time, however, it
should not be of the kind to offend his spirit
of reverence by any harshness attaching to
it; but it should be of a nature fitted rather
to conciliate him by the friendliness which it
Or else, we should relieve him by
breathes.
accommodating him with a seat, although unquestionably matters will be better ordered if
from the outset, whenever that can be done
with propriety, he sits and listens.
And
indeed in certain of the churches beyond the
sea, with a far more considerate regard to the
fitness of things, not only do the prelates sit
when they address the people, but they also
themselves put down seats for the people,
lest any person of enfeebled strength should
become exhausted by standing, and thus have
his mind diverted from the most wholesome
purport (of the
discourse), or even be under
the necessity of departing.
And yet it is one
thing if it be simply some one out of a great
multitude who withdraws in order to recruit
his_ strength, he being also already under the
obligations which result from participation in
the sacraments; and it is quite another thing
if the person withdrawing is one (inasmuch
as it is usually the case in these circumstances
that the man is unavoidably urged to that
course by the fear that he should even fall,
overcome by internal weakness) who has to
be initiated in the first sacraments; for a person
in this position is at once restrained by the
sense of shame from stating the reason of his
going, and not permitted to stand through the
force of his weakness.
This I speak from
For this was the case with a cerexperience.
tain individual, a man from the country, when
I was instructing him catechetically: and from
fidei = the Catholic faith.
Ecclesice.

is most natural to supply

But it

Chap. XIV.]

ON THE CATECHISING OF THE UNINSTRUCTED.

OF THE REMEDY AGAINST THE FIFTH

CHAP. 14.

his instance I have learned that this kind of
For
thing is carefully to be guarded against.
who can endure our arrogance when we fail
1 or even
to make men who are our brethren,
those who are not yet in that relation to us
(for our solicitude then should be all the
greater to get them to become our brethren),
to be seated in our presence, seeing that even
a woman sat as she listened to our Lord
Himself, in whose service the angels stand
alert? 2 Of course if the address is to be but
short, or if the place is not well adapted for
But that
sitting, they should listen standing.
should be the case only when there are many
hearers, and when they are not to be formally
admitted 3 at the time. For when the audience
consists only of one or two, or a few, who
have come with the express purpose of being
made Christians, there is a risk in speaking to
Nevertheless, supposing that
them standing.
we have once begun in that manner, we ought
at least, whenever we observe signs of weariness on the part of the hearer, to offer him
the liberty of being seated; nay more, we
should urge him by all means to sit down, and
we ought to drop some remark calculated at
once to refresh him and to banish from his
mind any anxiety which may have chanced
to break in upon him and draw off his attenFor inasmuch as the reasons why he
tion.
remains silent and declines to listen cannot
be certainly known to us, now that he is
seated we may speak to some extent against
of thoughts about worldly
the
the
cheerful spirit to which I have already adverted, or in a serious vein; so that, if these
are the particular anxieties which have occupied his mind, they may be made to give
way as if indicted by name: while, on the
other hand, supposing them not to be the
special causes (of the loss of interest), and
supposing him to be simply worn out with listening, his attention will be relieved of the
pressure of weariness when we address to
him some unexpected and
extraordinary
strain of remark on these subjects, in the
mode of which I have spoken, as if they were
for indeed we are
the particular anxieties,
But
simply ignorant (of the true causes).
let the remark thus made be short, especially
considering that it is thrown in out of order,
the
the very medicine even increase
lest
malady of weariness which we desire to relieve; and, at the same time, we should go
on rapidly with what remains, and promise
and present the prospect of a conclusion nearer
than was looked for.

delivering

incidence

ourselves

AND SIXTH SOURCES OF WEARINESS.
20. If, again, your spirit has been broken
by the necessity of giving up some other employment, on which, as the more requisite,
you were now bent; and if the sadness caused
by that constraint makes you catechise in no
pleasant mood, you ought to ponder the fact
that, excepting that we know it to be our
duty, in all our dealings with men, to act in
a merciful manner, and in the exercise of the
with this one exception, I
sincerest charity,
say, it is quite uncertain to us what is the
more profitable thing for us to do, and what
the more opportune thing for us either to pass
For inby for a time or altogether to omit.
asmuch as we know not how the merits of
men, on whose behalf we are acting, stand
with God, the question as to what is expedient
for them at a certain time is something which,
instead of being able to comprehend, we can
rather only surmise, without the aid of any
(clear) inferences, or (at best) with the slenTherefore
derest and the most uncertain.
we ought certainly to dispose the matters
with which we have to deal according to our
intelligence; and then, if we prove able to
carry them out in the manner upon which we
have resolved, we should rejoice, not indeed
that it was our will, but that it was God's
will, that they should thus be accomplished.
But if anything unavoidable happens, by
which the disposition thus proposed by us is
interfered with, we should bend ourselves to
it readily, lest we be broken; so that the very
disposition of affairs which God has preferred
For it is
to ours may also be made our own.
more in accordance with propriety that we
should follow His will than that He should
Besides, as regards this order
follow ours.
in the doing of things, which we wish to keep
in accordance with our own judgment, surely
that course is to be approved of in which
objects that are superior have the precedence.
Why then are we aggrieved that the precedence over men should be held by the Ford
God in His vast superiority to us men, so
that in the said love which we entertain for
our own order, we should thus (exhibit the
For ' no one
disposition to) despise order?
orders for the better" what he has to do,
except the man who is rather ready to leave
undone what he is prohibited from doing by
the divine power, than desirous of doing that
which he meditates in his own human cogitaFor "there are many devices in a
tions.
man's heart; nevertheless, the counsel of the
Lord stands for ever." 4

affairs,

either

in

1 Instead of vivos fvatves, some MSS. read vevos fvatves - our
3 Initiandi = initiated.

' Luke x. 39.

genuine brethren.

4 Prov. xix. 21.

[Chap. XV.

losses.

21. But if our mind is agitated by some
cause of offense, so as not to be capable of
delivering a discourse of a calm and enjoyable
strain, our charity towards those for whom
Christ died, desiring to redeem them by the
price of His own blood from the death of the
errors of this world, ought to be so great, that
the very circumstance of intelligence being
brought us in our sadness, regarding the advent of some person who longs to become a
Christian, ought to be enough to cheer us
and dissipate that heaviness of spirit, just as
the delights of gain are wont to soften the
For we are not (fairly)
pain of
oppressed by the offense of any individual,
unless it be that of the man whom we either
perceive or believe to be perishing himself,
or to be the occasion of the undoing of some
Accordingly, one who comes to
weak one.
us with the view of being formally admitted,
in that we cherish the hope of his ability to
go forward, should wipe away the sorrow
caused by one who fails us.
For even if the
dread that our proselyte may become the
child of hell x comes into our thoughts, as,
there are many such before our eyes, from
whom those offenses arise by which we are
distressed, this ought to operate, not in the
way of keeping us back, but rather in the way
And
of stimulating us and spurring us on.
in the same measure we ought to admonish
him whom we are instructing to be on his
guard against imitating those who are Christians only in name and not in very truth, and
to take care not to suffer himself to be so
moved by their numbers as either to be desirous of following them, or to be reluctant to
follow Christ on their account, and either to
be unwilling to be in the Church of God,
where they are, or to wish to be there in such
And somehow or
a character as they bear.
other, in admonitions of this sort, that address is the more glowing to which a present
sense of grief supplies the fuel; so that instead
of being duller, we utter with greater fire and
vehemence under such feelings things which,
in times of greater ease, we would give forth
And
in a colder and less energetic manner.
this should make us rejoice that an opportunity is afforded us under which the emotions
of our mind pass not away without yielding
some fruit.

22. If, however, grief has taken possession
of us on account of something in which we
ourselves have erred or sinned, we should
bear in mind not only that a "broken spirit
is a sacrifice to God," 2 but also the saying,
"
" 3
Like as water quencheth fire, so alms sin;

and again, "I will have mercy," saith He,
"rather than sacrifice." 4
Therefore, as in
the event of our being in peril from fire we
would certainly run to the water in order to
get the fire extinguished, and we would be
grateful if any person were to offer it in the
immediate vicinity; so, if some flame of sin
has risen from our own stack,
5 and if we are
troubled on that account, when an opportunity has been given for a most merciful
work, we should rejoice in it, as if a fountain
were offered us in order that by it the conflagration which had burst forth might be exUnless haply we are foolish
tinguished.
enough to think that we ought to be readier
in running with bread, wherewith we may fill
the belly of a hungry man, than with the
word of God, wherewith we may instruct the
mind of the man who feeds on it.
There is
this also to consider, namely, that if it would
only be of advantage to us to do this thing,
and entail no disadvantage to leave it undone,
we might despise a remedy offered in an unhappy fashion in the time of peril with a view
to the safety, not now of a neighbor, but of
But when from the mouth of the
ourselves.
Lord this so threatening sentence is heard,
"Thou wicked and slothful
servant, thou
give my money to the exoughtest
changers," 7 what madness, I pray thee, is it
thus, seeing that our sin pains us, to be
minded to sin again, by refusing to give the
Lord's money to one who desires it and asks
it ! When these and such like considerations and reflections have succeeded in dispelling the darkness of weary feelings, the
bent of mind is rendered apt for the duty of
catechising, so that that is received in a pleasant manner which breaks forth vigorously and
For
cheerfully from the rich vein of charity.
these things indeed which are uttered here
are spoken, not so much by me to you, as
rather to us all by that very "love which is
shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit
that is given to us." 8

to

CHAP. 15.

OF THE METHOD IN WHICH OUR ADDRESS SHOULD BE ADAPTED TO DIFFERENT
CLASSES OF HEARERS.
23. But now, perhaps, you also demand of
me as a debt that which, previous to the promise which I made, I was under no obligation
to give, namely, that I should not count it
burdensome to unfold some sort of example
of the discourse intended, and to set it before you for your study, just as if I were my-

4 Hos. vi. 6.
6 Reading istud edentis ;
studentis = of one who studies it.

S Fteno = hay.
for which some editions

give

1 Matt, xxiii. 15.

zPs. li. 17.

3 Ecclus. iii. 30.

7 Matt. xxv. 26, 27.

8 Rom. v. 5.

Chap. XVI.]

ON THE CATECHISING OF THE UNINSTRUCTED.

self engaged in catechising some individual.
Before I do that, however, I wish you to keep
in mind the fact that the mental effort is of
one kind in the case of a person who dictates,
with a future reader in his view, and that it
is of quite another kind in the case of a person who speaks with a present hearer to whom
to direct his attention. And further, it is to
be remembered that, in this latter instance in
particular, the effort is of one kind when one
is admonishing in private, and when there is
no other person at hand to pronounce judgment on us; whereas it is of a different order
when one is conveying any instruction in public, and when there stands around him an
audience of persons holding dissimilar opinions ; and again, that in this exercise of teaching, the effort will be of one sort when only a
single individual is being instructed, while all
the rest listen, like persons judging or attesting things well known to them, and that it
will be different when all those who are
present wait for what we have to deliver to
them; and once more, that, in this same instance, the effort will be one thing when all
are seated, as it were, in private conference
with a view to engaging in some discussion,
and that it will be quite another thing when
the people sit silent and intent on giving their
attention to some single speaker who is to
address them from a higher position.
It will
likewise make a considerable difference, even
when we are discoursing in that style, whether
there are few present or many, whether they
are learned or unlearned, or made up of both
classes combined; whether they are city-bred
or rustics, or both the one and the other together; or whether, again, they are a people
composed of all orders of men in due proporis impossible but that they will
tion.
affect in different ways the person who has to
speak to them and discourse with them, and
that the address which is delivered will both
bear certain features, as it were, expressive
of the feelings of the mind from which it proceeds, and also influence the hearers in different ways, in accordance with that same difference (in the speaker's disposition), while at
the same time the hearers themselves will
influence one another in different ways by
the simple force of their presence with each
But as we are dealing at present with
other.
the matter of the instruction of the unlearned,
I am a witness to you, as regards my own experience, that I find myself variously moved,
according as I see before me, for the purinstruction, a highly
poses of catechetical
educated man, a dull fellow, a citizen, a foreigner, a rich man, a poor man, a private
individual, a man of honors, a person occupy-

For it

ing some position of authority, an individual
of this or the other nation, of this or the other
age or sex, one proceeding from this or the
other sect, from this or the other common
and ever in accordance with the diferror,
ference of my feelings does my discourse
itself at once set out, go on, and reach its
end. And inasmuch as, although the same
charity is due to all, yet the same medicine is
not to be administered to all, in like manner
charity itself travails with some, is made weak
together with others;
is at pains to edify
some, tremblingly apprehends being an offense to others; bends to some, lifts
itself
erect to others; is gentle to some, severe to
others; to none an enemy, to all a mother.
And when one, who has not gone through the
kind of experience to which I refer in the
same spirit of charity, sees us attaining, in
virtue of some gift which has been conferred
upon us, and which carries the power of
pleasing, a certain repute of an eulogistic
nature in the mouth of the multitude, he
counts us happy on that account.
But may
God, into whose cognizance the "groaning
of them that are bound enters,"
1 look upon
our humility, and our labor, and forgive usWherefore, if anything in us
all our sins. 2
has so far pleased you as to make you desirous of hearing from us some remarks on
the subject of the form of discourse which
you should acquire a
you ought to follow,
more thorough understanding of the matter
by contemplating us, and listening to us when
we are actually engaged with these topics,
than by a perusal when we are only dictating
them.

CHAP. 16.

A SPECIMEN OF A CATECHETICAL ADDRESS ; AND FIRST, THE CASE OF A CATECHUMEN WITH WORTHY VIEWS.

24. Nevertheless, however that may be, let
us here suppose that some one has come to
us who desires to be made a Christian, and
who belongs indeed to the order of private
persons, 4 and yet not to the class of rustics,
but to that of the city-bred, such as those
whom you cannot fail to come across in numLet us also suppose that,
bers in Carthage.
on being asked whether the inducement leading him to desire to be a Christian is any advantage looked for in the present life, or the
rest which is hoped for after this life, he has
answered that his inducement has been the
Then perchance
rest that is yet to come.
such a person might be instructed by us in
some such strain of address as the following:

1 Ps. lxxix. 11.
3 Ut aliquant observationem sermonis tui a nobis audire

2 Cf. Ps. xxv. 18.

4 Idiotarum.

qiuereres.

;oo

[Chap. XVI.

For if

"Thanks be to God, my brother; cordially
do I wish you joy, and I am glad on your account that, amid all the storms of this world,
which are at once so great and so dangerous,
you have bethought yourself of some true and
For even in this life men
certain security.
go in quest of rest and security at the cost
of heavy labors, but they fail to find such in
For their
consequence of their wicked lusts.
thought is to find rest in things which are
And these
unquiet, and which endure not.
objects, inasmuch as they are withdrawn from
them and pass away in the course of time,
agitate them by fears and griefs, and suffer
them not to enjoy tranquillity.
it be
that a man seeks to find his rest in wealth,
he is rendered proud rather than at ease.
Do we not see how many have lost their
how many, too, have
riches on a sudden,
been undone by reason of them, either as
they have been coveting to possess them, or
as they have been borne down and despoiled
of them by others more covetous than themselves ? And even should they remain with
the man all his life long, and never leave
their lover, yet would he himself (have to)
leave them at his death.
For of what measure
is the life of man, even if he lives to old age ?
Or when men desire for themselves old age,
what else do they really desire but long inSo, too, with the honors of this
firmity ?
what are they but empty pride and
world,
For holy Scriptvanity, and peril of ruin ?
ure speaks in this wise: 'All flesh is grass,
and the glory of man is as the flower of grass.
The grass withereth, the flower thereof falleth
away; but the word of the Lord endureth for
Consequently, if any man longs for
ever.' 1
true rest and true felicity, he ought to lift his
hope off things which are mortal and transitory, and fix it on the word of the Lord; so
that, cleaving to that which endures for ever,
he may himself together with it endure for
ever.

25.

There are also other men who neither
crave to be rich nor go about seeking the vain
pomps of honors, but who nevertheless are
minded to find their pleasure and rest in
fornications, and in
dainty meats, and in
those theatres and spectacles which are at
for nothing.
in great cities
their disposal
But it fares with these, too, in the same way;
or they waste their small means in luxury,
and subsequently, under pressure of want,
break out into thefts and burglaries, and at
times even into highway robberies, and so
both
they are suddenly filled
numerous and great; and men who a little

with fears

"

*

Isa. xl. 6, 8 ;

1 Pet. i. 24, 25.

in

of

horrid

themselves

before were binging in the house of revelry,
are now dreaming of the sorrows
the
Moreover, in their eager devotion
prison.
to the public spectacles, they come to resemble demons, as they incite men by their cries
to wound each other, and instigate those who
have done them no hurt to engage in furious
contests with each other, while they seek to
And if they perplease an insane people.
ceive any such to be peaceably disposed, they
straightway hate them and persecute them,
and raise an outcry, asking that they should
be beaten with clubs, as if they had been in
collusion to cheat them; and this iniquity
they force even the judge, who is the (appointed) avenger of iniquities, to perpetrate.
On the other hand, if they observe such men
hostilities
exerting
against each other, whether they be those
who are called si/ihe,- or theatrical actors and
those
players, 3 or charioteers, or hunters,
wretched men whom they engage in conflicts
and struggles, not only men with men, but
even men with beasts,
then the fiercer the
fury with which they perceive these unhappy
creatures rage against each other, the better
they like them, and the greater the enjoyment they have in them; and they favor them
when thus excited, 4 and by so favoring them
they excite them all the more, the spectators
themselves striving more madly with each
other, as they espouse the cause of different
combatants, than is the case even with those
very men whose madness they madly provoke, while at the same time they also long
to be spectators of the same in their mad
frenzy. 5 How then can that mind keep the
soundness of peace which feeds on strifes and
For just as is the food which
contentions ?
is received, such is the health which results.
In fine, although mad pleasures are no pleasures, nevertheless let these things be taken
as they are, and it still remains the case that,
whatever their nature may be, and whatever
the measure of enjoyment yielded by the
boasts of riches, and. the inflation of honors,
and the spendthrift pleasures of the taverns,
and the contests of the theatres, and the impurity of fornications, and the pruriency of
the baths, they are all things of which one

2 Reading sive sintce qui appellantur, for which there occur
such varieties of reading as these : sint athlete? qui appellantur
= those who are called athletes; or sint cequi appellantur ;
or simply sint qui appellantur = whatever name they bear,
whether actors, etc. The term sintte, borrowed from the Greek
SiVrai = devourers, spoilers, may have been a word in common use among the Africans, as the Benedictine editors suggest,
for designating some sort of coarse characters.
3 Thytnelici, strictly = the musicians belonging to the thymele, or orchestra.
4 Reading incitatis favent, for which some mss. give incitati
= excited themselves, they favor them ; and others have incitantes

exciting them, they favor them.
5 Compare a passage in the Confessions, vi. 13.

Chap. XVII.]

ON THE CATECHISING OF THE UNINSTRUCTED.

30 1

while, even from
little fever deprives us,
those who still survive, it takes away the
Then
whole false happiness of their life.
there remains only a void and wounded conscience, destined to apprehend that God as a
Judge whom it refused to have as a Father,
and destined also to find a severe Lord in
Him whom it scorned to seek and love as a
But thou, inasmuch as thou
tender Father.
seekest that true rest which is promised to
Christians after this life, wilt taste the same
sweet and pleasant rest even here among the
bitterest troubles of this life, if thou continuest to love the commandments of Him who
For quickly wilt
hath promised the same.
thou feel that the fruits of righteousness are
sweeter than those of unrighteousness, and
that a man finds a more genuine and pleasurable joy in the possessioaof a good conscience
in the midst of troubles than in that of an evil
For thou
conscience in the midst of delights.
hast not come to be united to the Church of
God with the idea of seeking from it any
temporal advantage.

CHAP. 17.

THE SPECIMEN OF CATECHETICAL
DISCOURSE CONTINUED, IN REFERENCE SPECIALLY TO THE REPROVAL OF FALSE AIMS ON
THE CATECHUMEN'S PART.

26.

" For there are some whose reason for
desiring to become Christians is either that
they may gain the favor of men from whom
they look for temporal advantages, or that
they are reluctant to offend those whom they
But these are reprobate; and although
fear.
the church bears them for a time, as the threshing-floor bears the chaff until the period of winnowing, yet if they fail to amend and begin
to be Christians in sincerity in view of the
everlasting rest which is to come, they will
And let not
be separated from it in the end.
such flatter themselves, because it is possible
for them to be in the threshing-floor along
For they will not be
with the grain of God.
together with that in the barn, but are destined
There are
for the fire, which is their due.
also others of better hope indeed, but neverI mean those
theless in no inferior danger.
who now fear God, and mock not the Christian name, neither enter the church of God
with an assumed heart, but still look for their
felicity in this life, expecting to have more
felicity in earthly things than those enjoy
who refuse to worship God. And the consequence of this false anticipation is, that when
they see some wicked and impious men
strongly established and excelling in
this
they themselves
worldly
either possess it in a smaller degree or miss

prosperity, while

it altogether, they are troubled with the
thought that they are serving God without
reason, and so they readily fall away from the
faith.

27. "But as to the man who has in view
that everlasting blessedness and perpetual
rest which is promised as the lot destined for
the saints after this life, and who desires to
become a Christian, in order that he may not
pass into eternal fire with the devil, but enter
the
into
eternal kingdom together
with
1 such an one is truly a Christian;
Christ,
(and he will be) on his guard in every temptation, so that he may neither be corrupted
by prosperity nor be utterly broken in spirit
by adversity, but remain at once modest and
temperate when the good things of earth
abound with him, and brave and patient when
A person of this
tribulations overtake him.
character will also advance in attainments
until he comes to that disposition of mind
which will make him love God more than he
fears hell; so that even were God to say to
him, 'Avail yourself of carnal pleasures for
ever, and sin as much as you are able, and
you shall neither die nor be sent into hell,
but you will only not be with me,' he would
be terribly dismayed, and would altogether
abstain from sinning, not now (simply) with
the purpose of not falling into that of which
he was wont to be afraid, but with the wish
not to offend Him whom he so greatly loves:
in whom alone also there is the rest, which
eye hath not seen, neither hath ear heard,
neither hath it entered into the heart of man
the rest which God hath pre-
(to conceive),
pared for them that love Him. 2

28.

Now, on the subject of this rest
Scripture is significant, and refrains not [o
speak, when it tells us how at the beginning
of the world, and at the time when God made
heaven and earth and all things which are in
them, He worked during six days, and rested
on the seventh day. 3
For it was in the power
of the Almighty to make all things even in
For He had not
one moment of time.
labored in the view that He might enjoy (a
needful) rest, since indeed "He spake, and
they were made; He commanded, and they
were created;" 4 but that He might signify
how, after six ages of this world, in a seventh
age, as on the seventh day, He will rest in
His saints; inasmuch as these same saints shall
rest also in Him after all the good works in
which He Himwhich they have served Him,
self, indeed, works in them, who calls them, and
instructs them, and puts away the offenses that
are past, and justifies the man who previously

"

1 Cf. Matt. xxv. 34, 41.
3 Gen. ii. 1-3.

2 1 Cor. ii. 9.
4 Ps. cxlviii. 5.

[Chap, XVIII.

For as, when by His gift they
was ungodly.
work that which is good, He is Himself
rightly said to work (that in them), so, when
they rest in Him, He is rightly said to rest
For, as regards Himself, He seeks
Himself.
no cessation, because He feels no labor.
Moreover He made all things by His Word;
and His Word is Christ Himself, in whom
the angels and all those purest spirits of
heaven rest in holy silence.
Man, however,
in that he fell by sin, has lost the rest which
he possessed in His divinity, and receives it
again (now) in His humanity; and for this
purpose He became man, and was born of a
woman, at the seasonable time at which He
Himself knew it behoved it so to be fulfilled.
And from the flesh assuredly He could not
sustain any contamination, being Himself
Of His
rather destined to purify the flesh.
in the
future coming the ancient saints,
revelation of the Spirit, had knowledge, and
prophesied. And thus were they saved by
believing that He was to come, even as we are
saved by believing that He has come. Hence
ought we to love God who has so loved us as
to have sent His only Son, in order that He
might endue Himself with the lowliness ' of
our mortality, and die both at the hands of
For even
sinners and on behalf of sinners.
in times of old, and in the opening ages, the
depth of this mystery ceases not to be prefigured and prophetically announced.

CHAP. 1 8.

OF WHAT IS TO BE BELIEVED ON
THE SUBJECT OF THE CREATION OF MAN AND
OTHER OBJECTS.

29. "Whereas, then, the omnipotent God,
who is also good and just and merciful, who
made all things,
whether they be great or
small, whether they be highest or lowest,
whether they be things which are seen, such
as are the heavens and the earth and the sea,
and in the heavens, in particular, the sun and
the moon and other luminaries, and in the
earth and the sea, again, trees and shrubs
and animals each after their kind, and all
bodies celestial or terrestrial alike, or whether
they be things which are not seen, such as
are those spirits whereby bodies are animated
made also man after
and endowed with life,
His own image, in order that, as He Himself, in virtue of His omnipotence, presides
over universal creation, so man, in virtue of
that intelligence of his by which he comes to
know even his Creator and worships Him,
might preside over all the living creatures of
earth: Whereas, too, he made the woman to
1 Htimanitate, = humanity, also occurs instead of humili-

tate.

"

but for

be an helpmeet for him : not for carnal consince, indeed, they had not corcupiscence,
ruptible bodies at that period, before the punishment of sin invaded them in the form of
this purpose, that the
mortality,
man might at once have glory of the woman
in so far as he went before her to God, and
present in himself an example to her for imitation in holiness and piety, even as he himself was to be the glory of God in so far as he
followed his wisdom:

30.

Therefore did he place them in a certain locality of perpetual blessedness, which
the Scripture designates Paradise: and he
gave them a commandment, on condition of
not violating which they were to continue for
ever in that blessedness of immortality; while,
on the other hand, if they transgressed it,
they were to sustain -the penalties of mortality. Now God knew beforehand that they
Nevertheless, in that He
would trangress it.
is the author and maker of everything good,
He chose rather to make them, as He also
made the beasts, in order that He might replenish the earth with the good things proper
to earth. And certainly man, even sinful
And the comman, is better than a beast.
mandment, which they were not to keep, He
yet preferred to give them, in order that they
might be without excuse when He should
begin to vindicate Himself against them.
For whatever man may have done, he finds
God worthy to be praised in all His doings:
if he shall have acted rightly, he finds Him
worthy to be praised for the righteousness of
His rewards: if he shall have sinned, he finds
Him worthy to be praised for the righteousness of His punishments: if he shall have
confessed his sins and returned to an upright
life," he finds Him worthy to be praised for
the mercy of His pardoning favors.
Why,
then, should God not make man, although
He foreknew that he would sin, when He
might crown him if he stood, and set him
right if he fell, and help him if he rose,
Himself being always and everywhere glorious
in goodness, righteousness, and clemency?
Above all, why should He not do so, since
He also foreknew this, namely, that from the
race of that mortality there would spring
saints, who should not seek their own, but
give glory to their Creator; and who, obtaining deliverance from every corruption by worshipping Him, should be counted worthy to
live for ever, and to live in blessedness with
For He who gave freedom
the holy angels ?
of will to men, in order that they might worship God not of slavish necessity but with ingenuous inclination, gave it also to the angels;
and hence neither did the angel, who, in com-

Chap. XIX.]

ON THE CATECHISING OF THE UNINSTRUCTED.

pany with other spirits who were his satellites,
forsook in pride the obedience of God and
became the devil, do any hurt to God, but to
For God knoweth how to dispose
himself.
of souls l that leave Him, and out of their
righteous misery to furnish the inferior sections of His creatures with the most appropriate and befitting laws of His wonderful
Consequently, neither did the
dispensation.
devil in any manner harm God, whether in
falling himself, or in seducing man to death;
nor did man himself in any degree impair the
truth, or power, or blessedness 2 of His Maker,
in that, when his partner was seduced by the
devil, he of his own deliberate inclination
consented unto her in the doing of that which
God had forbidden.
For by the most righteous laws of God all were condemned, God
Himself being glorious in the equity of retribution, while they were shamed through the
degradation of punishment: to the end that
man, when he turned away from his Creator,
should be overcome by the devil and made
his subject, and that the devil might be set
before man as an enemy to be conquered,
when he turned again to his Creator; so that
whosoever should consent unto the devil even
to the end, might go with him into eternal
punishments; whereas those who should humble themselves to God, and by His grace
overcome the devil, might be counted worthy
of eternal rewards.

CHAP. 19.

OF THE CO-EXISTENCE OF GOOD AND
EVIL IN THE CHURCH, AND THEIR FINAL
SEPARATION.

"

31.

Neither ought we to be moved by the
consideration that many consent unto the
devil, and few follow God; for the grain, too,
in comparison with the chaff, has greatly the
But even as the husbanddefect in number.
man knows what to do with the mighty heap
of chaff, so the multitude of sinners is nothing
to God, who knows what to do with them, so
as not to let the administration of His kingdom
be disordered and dishonored in any part.
Nor is the devil to be supposed to have proved
victorious for the mere reason of his drawing
away with him more than the few by whom
he may be overcome.
In this way there are
one of the ungodly, and
two communities
which are carried down
another of the holy
from the beginning of the human race even
to the end of the world, which are at present
commingled in respect of bodies, but separated in respect of wills, and which, moreover, are destined to be separated also in

1 Rather "spirits."

See the correction made in the Retrac-

tations, ii. 14, as given above in the Introductory Notice.

2 The beatitatem is omitted by several mss.

32.

respect of bodily presence in the day of judgFor all men who love pride and temment.
poral power with vain elation and pomp of
arrogance, and all spirits who set their affections on such things and seek their own glory
in the subjection of men, are bound fast together in one association; nay, even although
they frequently fight against each other on
account of these things, they are nevertheless
precipitated by the like weight of lust into
the same abyss, and are united with each
other by similarity of manners and merits.
And, again, all men and all spirits who humbly
seek the glory of God and not their own, and
who follow Him in piety, belong to one felAnd, notwithstanding this, God is
lowship.
most merciful and patient with ungodly men,
and offers them a place for penitence and
amendment.
" For with respect also to the fact that
He destroyed all men in the flood, with the
exception of one righteous man together with
his house, whom He willed to be saved in
the ark, He knew indeed that they would not
amend themselves; yet, nevertheless, as the
building of the ark went on for the space of
a hundred years, the wrath of God which was
to come upon them was certainly preached to
them: 3 and if they only would have turned to
God, He would have spared them, as at a
later period He spared the city of Nineveh
when it repented, after He had announced to
it, by means of a prophet, the destruction
that was about to overtake it.
Thus, moreover, God acts, granting a space for repentance
even to those who He knows will persist in
wickedness, in order that He may exercise
and instruct our patience by His own example; whereby also we may know how greatly
it befits us to bear with the evil in long-suffering, when we know not what manner of men
they will prove hereafter, seeing that He,
whose cognizance nothing that is yet to be escapes, spares them and suffers them to live.
Under the sacramental sign of the flood, however, in which the righteous were rescued by
the wood, there was also a fore-announcement
of the Church which was to be, which Christ,
its King and God, has raised on high, by the
mystery of His cross, in safety from the subMoreover, God was
mersion of this world.
not ignorant of the fact that, even of those
who had been saved in the ark, there would
be born wicked men, who would cover the
face of the earth a second time with iniquities.
But, nevertheless, He both gave them a pattern of the future judgment, and fore-announced the deliverance of the holy by the

3 Gen. vi. 7.

4 Jonah iii.

|Chap. XX.

33.

For even after these
mystery of the wood.
not cease to sprout
things wickedness did
forth again through pride, and lusts, and illicit
impieties, when men, forsaking their Creator,
not only fell to the (standard of the) creature
which God made, so as to worship instead of
God that which God made, but even bowed
their souls to the works of the hands of men
and to the contrivances of craftsmen, wherein
a more shameful triumph was to be won over
them by the devil, and by those evil spirits
who rejoice in finding themselves adored and
reverenced in such false devices, while they
feed I their own errors with the errors of men.
" But in truth there were not wanting
in those times righteous men also of the kind
to seek God piously and to overcome the
pride of the devil, citizens of that holy community, who were made whole by the humiliation of Christ, which was then only destined
to enter, but was revealed to them by the
From among these, Abraham, a pious
Spirit.
and faithful servant of God, was chosen, in
order that to him might be shown the sacrament -of the Son of God, so that thus, in
virtue of the imitation of his faith, all the
faithful of all nations might be called his
Of him was born a
children in the future.
people, by whom the one true God who made
heaven and earth should be worshipped when
all other nations did service to idols and evil
In that people, plainly, the future
spirits.
Church was much more evidently prefigured.
For in it there was a carnal multitude that
worshipped God with a view to visible beneBut in it there were also a few who
thought of the future rest, and looked longingly for the heavenly fatherland, to whom
through prophecy was revealed the coming
humiliation of God in the person of our King
and Lord Jesus Christ, in
order that they
might be made whole of all pride and arroAnd with respect
gance through that faith.
to these saints who in point of time had precedence of the birch of the Lord, not only
their speech, but also their life, and their
marriages, and their children, and their doings, constituted a prophecy of this time, at
which the Church is being gathered together
out of all nations through faith in the passion
By the instrumentality of those
of Christ.
holy patriarchs and
carnal
people of Israel, who at a later period were
also called Jews, had ministered unto them
at once those visible benefits which they eagerly desired of the Lord in a carnal manner,
and those chastisements, in the form of bodily punishments, which were intended to ter-

prophets

this

fits.

in

this

rify them for the time, as was befitting for
their obstinacy. And in all these, nevertheless, there were also spiritual mysteries signified, such as were meant to bear upon Christ
and the Church; of which Church those
saints also were members, although they existed
life previous to the birth of
For
Christ, the Lord, according to the flesh.
this same Christ, the only-begotten Son of
God, the Word of the Father, equal and coeternal with the Father, by whom all things
were made, was Himself also made man for
our sakes, in order that of the whole Church,
as of His whole body, He might be the Head.
But just as when the whole man is in the process of being born, although he may put the
hand forth first in the act of birth, yet is that
hand joined and compacted together with the
whole body under the head, even as also
among these same patriarchs some were born 2
with the hand put forth first as a sign of this
very thing: so all the saints who lived upon
the earth previous to the birth of our Lord
Jesus Christ, although they were born antecedently, were nevertheless united under the
Head with that universal body of which He
is the Head.

chap. 20.

of Israel's bondage in EGYPT r
THEIR DELIVERANCE, AND THEIR PASSAGE
THROUGH THE RED SEA.

"

34.

then,

That people,

having been
brought down into Egypt, were in bondage
to the harshest of kings; and, taught by the
most oppressive labors, they sought their deliverer in God; and there was sent to them
one belonging to
the
people themselves,
Moses, the holy servant of God, who, in the
might of God, terrified the impious nation of
the Egyptians in those days by great miracles, and led forth the people of God out of
that land through the Red Sea, where the
water parted and opened up a way for them
as they crossed it, whereas, when the Egyptians pressed on in pursuit, the waves returned
to their channel and overwhelmed them, so
that they perished.
Thus, then, just as the
earth through the agency of the flood was
cleansed by the waters from the wickedness
of the sinners, who in those times were destroyed in that inundation, while the righteous escaped by means of the wood; so the
people of God, when they went forth from
Egypt, found a way through the waters by
Nor
which their enemies were devoured.
was the sacrament of the wood wanting there.
For Moses smote with his rod, in order that
that miracle might be effected.
Both these

1 Instead of ftascunt the reading miscent^ =mix, is also found.

2 Gen. xxv. 26, xxxviii. 27-30.

Chap. XXI.]

ON THE CATECHISING OF THE UNINSTRUCTED.

are signs of holy baptism, by which the faithful pass into the new life, while their sins are
done away with like enemies, and perish.
But more clearly was the passion of Christ
prefigured in the case of that people, when
they were commanded to slay and eat the
lamb, and to mark their door-posts with its
blood, and to celebrate this rite every year,
For
and to designate it the Lord's passover.
surely prophecy speaks with the utmost plainness of the Lord Jesus Christ, when it says
that "He was
the
1 And with the sign of His passlaughter."
sion and cross, thou art this day to be marked
on thy forehead, as on the door-post, and all
Christians are marked with the same.

led as a

lamb to

35. "Thereafter this people was conducted
through the wilderness for forty years. They
also received the law written by the finger of
God, under which name the Holy Spirit is
is declared with the utmost
signified, as it
For God is not deplainness in the Gospel.
fined 2 by the form of a body, neither are
members and fingers to be thought of as existent in Him in the way in which we see
them in ourselves.
But, inasmuch as it is
through the Holy Spirit that God's gifts are
divided to His saints, in order that, although
they vary in their capacities, they may nevertheless not lapse from the concord of charity,
and inasmuch as it is especially in the fingers
that there appears a certain kind of division,
while nevertheless there is no separation from
unity, this may be the explanation of the
But whether this may be the case,
phrase.
or whatever other reason may be assigned
for the Holy Spirit being called the finger of
God, we ought not at any rate to think of the
form of a human body when we hear this
The people in question,
expression used.
then, received the law written by the finger
of God, and that in good sooth on tables of
stone, to signify the hardness of their heart
in that they were not to fulfill the law.
For,
as they eagerly sought from the Lord gifts
meant for the uses of the body, they were
held by carnal fear rather than by spiritual
But nothing fulfills the law save
charity.
Consequently, they were burdened
charity.
with many visible sacraments, to the intent
that they should feel the pressure of the yoke
of bondage in the observances of meats, and
in the sacrifices of animals, and in other rites
innumerable; which things, at the same time,
were signs of spiritual matters relating to the
Lord Jesus Christ and to the Church; which,
furthermore, at that time were both understood by a few holy men to the effect of

kingdom.

yielding the fruit of salvation, and observed
by them in accordance with the fitness of the
time, while by the multitude of carnal men
they were observed only and not understood.
36. "In this manner, then, through many
varied signs of things to come, which it would
be tedious to enumerate in complete detail,
and which we now see in their fulfillment in
the Church, that people were brought to the
land of promise, in which they were to reign
in a temporal and carnal way in accordance
with their own longings: which earthly kingdom, nevertheless, sustained the image of a
There Jerusalem was
spiritual
founded, that most celebrated city of God,
which, while in bondage, served as a sign of
the free city, which is called the heavenly
Jerusalem 3 which latter term is a Hebrew
word, and signifies by interpretation the '
visThe citizens thereof are all
ion of peace.'
sanctified men, who have been, who are, and
who are yet to be; and all sanctified spirits,
even as many as are obedient to God with
pious devotion
exalted regions of
heaven, and imitate not the impious pride of
The King of this
the devil and his angels.
city is the Lord Jesus Christ, the Word of
God, by whom the highest angels are governed, and at the same time the Word that
took unto Himself human nature, 4 in order
that by Him men also might be governed,
who, in His fellowship, shall reign all together
In the service of prefigurin eternal peace.
ing this King in that earthly kingdom of the
people of Israel, King David stood forth preeminent, 5 of whose seed according to the flesh
that truest King was to come, to wit, our Lord
' who is over all, God blessed
Jesus Christ,
for ever.' 6
In that land of promise many
things were done, which held good as figures
of the Christ who was to come, and of the
Church, with which you will have it in your
power to acquaint yourself by degrees in the
Holy Books.

in the

CHAP. 21.

OF THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY,

AND THE THINGS SIGNIFIED THEREBY.

For that city

37. "Howbeit, after the lapse of some generations, another type was presented, which
bears very emphatically on the matter in
7 was brought into caphand.
tivity, and a large section of the people were
Now, as Jerusacarried off into Babylonia.
lem signifies the city and fellowship of the
saints, so Babylonia signifies the city and fellowship of the wicked, seeing that by interpretation it denotes confusion. On the sub-

1 Isa. liii. 7.

2 Or = circumscribed, dcfinitus.

3 Cf. Gal. iv. 26.
6 Rom. ix. 5.

4 Hominem.
7 Or= community, civitas,

5 1 Kings xi.

d 06

[Chap. XXI.

r

ject of these two cities, which have been
running their courses, mingling the one with
the other, through all the changes of time
from the beginning of the human race, and
which shall so move on together until the end
of the world, when they are destined to be separated at the last judgment, we have spoken
That captivity, then,
already a little ago.
of the city of Jerusalem, and the people thus
carried into Babylonia in bondage, were ordained so to proceed by the Lord, by the
voice of Jeremiah, a prophet of that time. 2
And there appeared kings 3 of Babylon, under whom they were in slavery, who on occasion of the captivity of this people were so
wrought upon by certain miracles that they
came to know the one true God who founded
universal creation, and worshipped Him, and
commanded that He should be worshipped.
Moreover the people were ordered both to
pray for those by whom they were detained
in captivity, and in their peace to hope for
peace, to the effect that they should beget
children, and build houses, and plant gardens
and vineyards.
But at the end of seventy
years, release from their captivity was promised to them. 5
All this, furthermore, signified in a figure that the Church of Christ in
all His saints, who are citizens of the heavenly
Jerusalem, would have to do service under
For the doctrine of
the kings of this world.
the apostles speaks also in this wise, that
'ever)'- soul should be subject to the higher
powers,' and that there 'should be rendered
all things to all men, tribute to whom tribute
(is due), custom to whom custom,'
6 and all
other things in like manner which, without
detriment to the worship of our God, we render to the rulers in the constitution of human
society: for the Lord Himself also, in order
to set before us an example of this sound
doctrine, did not deem it unworthy of Him
to pay tribute 7 on account of that human
8 wherewith He was invested.
individuality
Again, Christian servants and good believers
are also commanded to serve their temporal
masters in equanimity and
faithfulness; 9
whom they will hereafter judge, if even on
to the end they find them wicked, or with
whom they will hereafter reign in equality, if
they too shall have been converted to the true
God.
Still all are enjoined to be subject to
the powers that are of man and of earth, even
until, at the end of the predetermined time
which the seventy years signify, the Church

'

shall be delivered from the confusion of this
world, like as Jerusalem was to be set free
from the captivity in Babylonia.
By occasion of that captivity, however, the kings of
earth too have themselves been led to forsake
the idols on account of which they were wont
to persecute the Christians, and have come
to know, and now worship, the one true God
and Christ the Lord; and it is on their behalf
that the Apostle Paul enjoins prayer to be
made, even although they should persecute
For he speaks in these terms:
the Church.
I entreat, therefore, that first of all supplicaintercessions, and givings
tions, adorations,
of thanks be made for kings, for all men, and
all that are in authority, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life, with all godliness
and charity.'
Accordingly peace has been
given to the Church by these same persons,
although it be but of a temporal sort,
a temporal quiet for the work of building houses
after a spiritual fashion, and planting gardens and vineyards.
For witness your own
at this very time we are engaged,
case, too,
by means of this discourse, in building you
And the like process
up and planting you.
is going on throughout the whole circle of
the peace allowed by
in virtue of
lands,
the same apostle
Christian kings, even as
thus expresses himself: ' Ye are God's husbandry; ye are God's building.'

38.

And, indeed, after the lapse of the
seventy years of which Jeremiah had mystically prophesied, to the intent of prefiguring
the end of times, with a view still to the perfecting of that same figure, no settled peace
and liberty were conceded again to the Jews.
Thus it was that they were conquered subsequently by the Romans and made tributary.
From that period, in truth, at which they received the land of promise and began to have
kings, in order to preclude the supposition
that the promise of the Christ who was to be
their Liberator had met its complete fulfillment in the person of any one of their kings,
Christ was prophesied of with greater clearness in a number of prophecies; not only by
David himself in the book of Psalms, but also
by the rest of the great and holy prophets,
even on to the time of their conveyance into
captivity in Babylonia; and in that same
captivity there were also prophets whose mission was to prophesy of the coming of the
Lord Jesus Christ as the Liberator of all.
And after the restoration of the temple, when
the seventy years had passed, the Jews sus-

"

1 See Chapter xix.
3 Dan. ii. 47, iii. 29, vi. 26 ;
4 Jer. xxix. 4-7.
6 Rom. xiii. 1, 7.
8 Pro capite kominis, literally = on account of that head of

1 Esdr. ii. 7 ; Bel, 41.
5 Jer. xxv. 12.
7 Matt. xvii. 27.

Jer. xxv. 18, xxix. 1.

man, etc.

9 Eph. vi. 5.

10 Instead of orationes; the better authenticated reading is

adorationcs.

11 1 Tim. ii. 1, 2.
12 1 Cor. iii. 9 ;

cf. Jer. xxv. 12, xxix. 10.

Chap. XXII.]

ON THE CATECHISING OF THE UNINSTRUCTED.

tained grievous oppressions and sufferings at
the hands of the kings of the Gentiles, fitted
to make them understand that the Liberator
was not yet come, whom they failed to apprehend as one who was to effect for them a
spiritual deliverance, and whom they fondly
longed for on account of a carnal liberation.

"

39.

CHAP. 22.

For these

OF THE SIX AGES OF THE WORLD.
Five ages of the world, aceordingly,
having been now completed (there has entered
Of these ages the first is from
the sixth).
the beginning of the human race, that is, from
Adam, who was the first man that was made,
down to Noah, who constructed the ark at the
time of the flood. 1 Then the second extends
from that period on to Abraham, who was
called 2 the father indeed of all nations 3 which
should follow the example of his faith, but
who at the same time in the way of natural
descent from his own flesh was the father of
the destined people of the Jews; which people,
previous to the entrance of the Gentiles into
the Christian faith, was the one people among
all the nations of all lands that worshipped
the one true God: from which people also
Christ the Saviour was decreed to come according to the flesh.
turningpoints 4 of those two ages occupy an eminent
place in the ancient books. On the other
hand, those of the other three ages are also
declared in the Gospel, 5 where the descent of
the Lord Jesus Christ according to the flesh
For the third aa:e exis likewise mentioned.
tends from Abraham on to David the king;
the fourth from David on to that captivity
whereby the people of God passed over into
Babylonia; and the fifth from that transmigration down to the advent of our Lord Jesus
With His coming the sixth age has
Christ.
entered on its process; so that now the spiritual grace, which in previous times was
known to a few patriarchs and prophets,
may be made manifest to all nations; to the
intent that no man should worship God but
fondly desiring of Him not the visible
freely,
rewards of His services and the happiness of
this present life, but that eternal life alone
in which he is to enjoy God Himself: in order
that in this sixth age the mind of man may
be renewed after the image of God, even as
on the sixth day man was made after the
For then, too, is the law
image of God. 7
fulfilled, when all that it has commanded is
done, not in the strong desire for things temporal, but in the love of Him who has given

1 Tien. vi. 22.
2 Instead of dictus est the mss. give also elect us est = was

"

40.

the commandment. Who is there, moreover,
who should not be earnestly disposed to give
the return of love to a God of supreme righteousness and also of supreme mercy, who
has first loved men of the greatest unrighteousness and the loftiest pride, and that, too,
so deeply as to have sent in their behalf His
only Son, by whom He made all things, and
who being made man, not by any change of
Himself, but by the assumption of human
nature, was designed thus to become capable
not only of living with them, but also of dying at once for them and by their hands ?

Thus, then, showing forth the New
Testament of our everlasting
inheritance,
wherein man was to be renewed by the grace
of God and lead a new life, that is, a spiritual
life; and with the view of exhibiting the first
one as an old dispensation, wherein a carnal
people acting out the old man (with the exception of a few patriarchs and prophets,
who had understanding, and some hidden
saints), and leading a carnal life, desiderated
carnal rewards at the hands of the Lord God,
and received in that fashion but the figures of
with this intent, I say,
spiritual blessings;
the Lord Christ, when made man, despised
all earthly good things, in order that He
might show us how these things ought to be
despised; and He endured all earthly ills
which He was inculcating as things needful
to be endured; so that neither might our happiness be sought for in the former class, nor
our unhappiness be apprehended in the latter.
For being born of a mother who, although
she conceived without being touched by man
and always remained thus untouched, in virginity conceiving, in virginity bringing forth,
in virginity dying, had nevertheless been
espoused to a handicraftsman, He extinguished all the inflated pride of carnal noMoreover, being born in the city of
bility.
Bethlehem, which among all the cities of
Judaea was so insignificant that even in our
own day it is designated a village, He willed
not that any one should glory in the exalted
position of any city of earth. He, too, whose are
all things and by whom all things were created,
was made poor, in order that no one, while
believing in Him, might venture to boast
himself in earthly riches. He refused to be
made by men a king, because He displayed
the pathway of humility to those unhappy
ones whom pride had separated from Him; 8
and yet universal creation attests the fact of
An hungered was
His everlasting kingdom.
He who feeds all men; athirst was He by
whom is created whatsoever is drunk, and

chosen to be.

3 Gen. xvii. 4.
6 Gratis.

4 articuli = articles.

5 Matt. i. 17.
7 Gen. i. 27.

8 Reading ab eo ; for which some editions give ab ea = from

that humility.

;oS

[Chap. XXIII.

who in a spiritual manner is the bread of the
hungry and the fountain of the thirsty;
in
journeying on earth, wearied was He who has
made Himself the way for us into heaven; as
like one dumb and deaf in the presence of
His revilers was He by whom the dumb spoke
and the deaf heard; bound was He who freed
us from the bonds of infirmities; scourged
was He who expelled from the bodies of man
the scourges of all distresses; crucified was
He who put an end to our crucial pains;
x dead
did He become who raised the dead.
But He
also rose again, no more to die, so that no one
should from Him learn so to contemn death
as if he were never to live ao-ain.

CHAP. 23.

OF THE MISSION OF THE HOLY
GHOST FIFTY DAYS AFTER CHRIST'S RESURRECTION.
"

41.

which they call

Thereafter, having confirmed the disciples, and having sojourned with them forty
days, He ascended up into heaven, as these
same persons were beholding Him.
And on
the completion of fifty days from His resurrection He sent to them the Holy Spirit (for
so He had promised), by whose agency they
were to have love shed abroad in their hearts,
to the end that they might be able to fulfill
the law, not only without the sense of its
being burdensome, but even with a joyful
This law was given to the Jews in the
mind.
ten commandments,
the
Decalogue. And these commandments, again,
are reduced to two, namely that we should
love God with all our heart, with all our soul,
with all our mind; and that we should love
our neighbor as ourselves. 3
For that on
these two precepts hang all the law and the
prophets, the Lord Himself has at once declared in the Gospel and shown in His own
For thus it was likewise in the inexample.
stance of the people of Israel, that from the
day on which they first celebrated the passover in a form, 4
slaying and eating the sheep,
with whose blood their door-posts were marked
for the securing of their safety,
from this
day, I repeat, the fiftieth day' in succession
was completed, and then they received the
law written by the finger of God, 6 under which
phrase we have already stated that the Holy
7 And in the same manner,
Spirit is signified.
after the passion and resurrection of the
Lord, who is the true passover, the Holy
Ghost was sent personally to the disciples on
the fiftieth day: not now, however, by tables
of stone significant of the hardness of their

hearts; but, when they were gathered together
in one place at Jerusalem itself, suddenly
there came a sound from heaven, as if a violent blast were being borne onwards, and
there appeared to them tongues cloven like
fire, and they began to speak with tongues,
in such a manner that all those who had come
to them recognized each his own language
(for in that city the Jews were in the habit of assembling from every country wheresoever they
had been scattered abroad, and haa learned
the diverse tongues of diverse nations); and
thereafter, preaching Christ with all boldness,
they wrought, many signs in His name,
so
much so, that as Peter was passing by, his
shadow touched a certain dead person, and
the man rose in life again. 9

42.

' But when the Jews perceived

so
great signs to be wrought in the name of
Him, whom, partly through ill-will and partly
in ignorance, they crucified, some of them
were provoked to persecute the apostles, who
were His preachers;
while others, on the
contrary, marvelling the more at this very
circumstance, that so great miracles were
being performed in the name of Him whom
they had derided as one overborne and conquered by themselves, repented, and were
converted, so that thousands of Jews believed
on Him.
For these parties were not bent
now on craving at the hand of God temporal
benefits and an earthly kingdom, neither did
they look any more for Christ, the promised
king, in a carnal spirit; but they continued
in immortal fashion to apprehend and love
Him, who in mortal fashion endured on their
behalf at their own hands sufferings so heavy,
and imparted to them the gift of forgiveness
for all their sins, even down to the iniquity
of His own blood, and by the example of His
own resurrection unfolded
immortality as
the object which they should hope for and
long for at His hands.
Accordingly, now
mortifying the earthly cravings of the old
man, and inflamed with the new experience
of the spiritual life, as the Lord had enjoined
in the Gospel, they sold all that they had,
and laid the price of their possessions at the
feet of the apostles, in order that these might
to every man according as each
distribute
had need; and living in Christian love harmoniously with each other, they did not affirm
anything to be their own, but they had all
things in common, and were one in soul and
heart toward God. 10
Afterwards these same
persons also themselves suffered persecution

1 There is a play in the words here : crucifixus est qui cruciatus nostros Jini'vit.
2 Cf. Rom. v. 5.
4 In imagine.
7 Ex. xxxiv. 28.

3 Matt. xxii. 37-40.
5 Ex. xii.
7 Luke xi. 20.

8 Acts ii.
9 The reference evidently is to Acts v. 15, where, however, it is
only the people's intention that is noticed, and that only in the
instance of the sick, and not of any individual actually dead.

10 Acts ii. 44, iv, 34.

Chap. XXIV.] ON THE CATECHISING OF THE UNINSTRUCTED.

in their flesh at the hands of the Jews, their
carnal fellow-countrymen, and were dispersed
abroad, to the end that, in consequence of
their dispersion, Christ should be preached
more extensively, and that they themselves
at the same time should be followers of the
.For He who in
patience of their Lord.
enjoined them
meekness had endured them, 1
in meekness to endure for His sake.

43. "Among those same persecutors of the
saints the Apostle Paul had once also ranked;
and he raged with eminent violence against
But, subsequently, he bethe Christians.
came a believer and an apostle, and was sent
to preach the gospel to the Gentiles, suffering (in that ministry) things more grievous
on behalf of the name of Christ than were
those which he had done against the name of
Moreover, in establishing churches
Christ.
throughout all the nations where he was sowing the seed of the gospel, he was wont to
give earnest injunction that, as these converts
(coming as they did from the worship of idols
and without experience in the worship of the
one God) could not readily serve God in the
way of selling and distributing their possessions, they should make offerings for the poor
brethren among the saints who were in the
churches of Judea which had believed in
In this manner the doctrine of the
Christ.
apostle constituted some to be, as it were,
soldiers, and others to be, as it were, provincial tributaries, while it set Christ in the
centre of them like the corner-stone (in accordance with what had been announced bein whom both
foretime by the prophet),
parties, like walls advancing from different
sides, that is to say, from Jews and from
Gentiles, might be joined together in the affecBut at a later period heavier
tion of kinship.
and more frequent persecutions arose from
the unbelieving Gentiles against the Church
of Christ, and day by day was fulfilled that
prophetic word which the Lord spake when
He said,
Behold, I send you as sheep in
the midst of wolves.' 3

'

CHAP. 24.

OF THE CHURCH IN ITS LIKENESS
TO A VINE SPROUTING AND SUFFERING PRUNING.
44. "But that vine, which was spreading
forth its fruitful shoots throughout the circle
of lands, according as had been prophesied

1 Adopting the Benedictine version, qui eos mansuetus passus
fuerat, and taking it as a parallel to Acts xiii. 18, Heb. xii. 3.
There is, however, great variety of reading here. Thus we find
qui ante eos, etc. = who had suffered in meekness before them :
qui pro eis, etc. = who had suffered in their stead: qui propter
eos, etc. = who had suffered on their account : and qui per eos,
etc. = who had suffered through them, etc.
But the reading in
the text appears best authenticated.
2 Ps. cxviii. 22 ; Isa. xxviii. 16.

3 Matt. x. 16.

with regard to it, and as had been foretold
by the Lord Himself, sprouted all the more
luxuriantly in proportion as it was watered
with richer streams of the blood of martyrs.
And as these died in behalf of the truth of
the faith in countless numbers throughout all
lands, even the persecuting kingdoms themselves desisted, and were converted to the
knowledge and worship of Christ, with the
Moreover it beneck of their pride broken.
hoved that this same vine should be pruned
in accordance with the Lord's repeated pre4 and that the unfruitful twigs should
dictions,
be cut out of it, by which heresies and
schisms were occasioned in various localities,
under the name of Christ, on the part of men
who sought not His glory but their own;
whose oppositions, however, also served more
and more to discipline the Church, and to
test and illustrate both its doctrine and its

patience.

45. "All these things, then, we now perceive
to be realized precisely as we read of them in
predictions uttered so long before the event.
And as the first Christians, inasmuch as they
did not see these things literally made good
in their own day, were moved by miracles to
believe them; so as regards ourselves, inasmuch as all these things have now been
brought to pass exactly as we read of them
in those books which were written a long time
previous to the fulfillment of the things in
question, wherein they were all announced as
matters yet future, even as they are now seen
to be actually present, we are built up unto
faith, so that, enduring and persevering in
the Lord, we believe without any hesitation
in the destined accomplishment even of those
things which still remain to be realized.
For,
indeed, in the same Scriptures, tribulations
yet to come are still read of, as well as the
final day of judgment itself, when all the citizens of these two states shall receive their
bodies again, and rise and give account of
their life before the judgment-seat of Christ.
For He will come in the glory of His power,
who of old condescended to come in the lowliness of humanity; and He will separate all
the godly from the ungodly,
not only from
those who have utterly refused to believe in
Him at all, but also from those who have believed in Him to no purpose and without fruit.
To the one class He will give an eternal kingdom together with Himself, while to the other
He will award eternal punishment together
But as no joy yielded by
with the devil.
things temporal can be found in any measure
comparable to the joy of life eternal which

4 John xv. 2.

IO

[Chap. XXV.

the saints are destined to attain, so no torment of temporal punishments can be compared to the everlasting torments of the unrighteous.

CHAP. 25.

OF CONSTANCY IN THE FAITH OF
THE RESURRECTION.

Where, I

46. "Therefore, brother, confirm yourself
in the name and help of Him in whom you
believe, so as to withstand the tongues of
those who mock at our faith, in whose case
the devil speaks seductive words, bent above
all on making a mockery of the faith in a
But, judging from your own
resurrection.
1 believe that, seeing you have been,
history,
you will also be hereafter, even as you perceive yourself now to be, although previously
you were not.
For where was this great
structure of your body, and where this formation and compacted connection of members
a few years ago, before you were born, or even
before you were conceived in your mother's
womb?
repeat, was then this
structure and this stature of your body ?
Did
it not come forth to light from the hidden
secrets of this creation, under the invisible
formative operations of the Lord God, and
did it not rise to its present magnitude and
fashion by those fixed measures of increase
which come with the successive periods of
life? 2
Is it then in any way a difficult thing
for God, who also in a moment brings together
out of secrecy the masses of the clouds and
veils the heavens in an instant of time, to
make this quantity of your body again what
it was, seeing that He was able to make it
what formerly it was not? 3
Consequently,
believe with a manful and unshaken spirit that
all those things which seem to be withdrawn
from the eyes of men as if to perish, are safe
and exempt from loss in relation to the omnipotence of God, who will restore them,
without any delay or difficulty, when He is
so minded,
those of them at least, I should
say, that are judged by His justice to merit
restoration; in order that men may give account of their deeds in their very bodies in
which they have clone them ; and that in these
they may be deemed worthy to receive either
the exchange of heavenly incorruption in accordance with the deserts of their piety, or the
corruptible condition of body 4 in accordance
with the deserts of their wickedness,
and
that, too, not a condition such as may be

1 Sed ex te ipso crede.

It may also

but, on your side, do

you believe.

Ccrtisque cetatum incremeiitis, etc.

3 Reading stent non erat ; for which, however, cum non erat

also occurs = seeing He was able to make it when it was not.
4 Lorruptibilem corporis conditional!.
also occurs = the condition of a corruptible body.

But corruptibilis

"

done away with by death, but such as shall
furnish material for everlasting pains.

47.

Flee, therefore, by steadfast faith and
flee, brother, those torments
good manners,
in which neither the torturers fail, nor do the
tortured die; to whom it is death without end,
to be unable to die in their pains. And be
kindled with love and longing for the everlasting life of the saints, in which neither will
action be toilsome nor will rest be indolent;
in which the praise of God will be without
irksomeness and without defect;
wherein
there will be no weariness in the mind, no
exhaustion in the body; wherein, too, there
shall be no want, whether on your own part,
so that you should crave for relief, or on your
neighbor's part, so that you should be in haste
Goof will be the whole
to carry relief to him.
enjoyment and satisfaction 5 of that holy city,
which lives in Him and of Him, in wisdom
and beatitude.
For as we hope and look for
what has been promised by Him. we shall be
made equal to the angels of God, 6 and together with them we shall enjoy that Trinity
now by sight, wherein at present we walk by
For we believe that which we see not,
faith. 7
in order that through these very deserts of
faith we may be counted worthy also to see
that which we believe, and to abide in it; to
the intent that these mysteries of the equality
of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
and the unity of this same Trinity, and the
manner in which these three subsistences are
one God, need no more be uttered by us in
words of faith and sounding syllables, but may
be drunk in in purest and most burning contemplation in that silence.
48. "These things

in your
heart, and call upon the God in whom you
believe, to defend you against the temptations of the devil; and be careful, lest that
adversary come stealthily upon you from a
strange quarter, who, as a most malevolent
solace for his own damnation, seeks others
whose companionship he may obtain in that
For he is bold enough not only
damnation.
to tempt Christian people through the instrumentality of those who hate the Christian
name, or are pained to see the world taken
possession of by that name, and still fondly
desire to do service to idols and to the curious
spirits, but at times he also
rites of evil
attempts the same through the agency of such
men as we have mentioned a little ago, to wit,
persons severed from the unity of the Church,
like the twigs which are lopped off when the
vine is pruned, who are called heretics or

hold fixed

5 Satietas.

Some editions,

however, give societas = the

society.

6 Luke xx. 36.

7 2 Cor. v. 7.

Chap. XXV.]

ON THE CATECHISING OF THE UNINSTRUCTED.

Nevertheless,

instrumentality.

Howbeit sometimes also he
schismatics.
makes the same effort by means of the Jews,
seeking to tempt and seduce believers by
what
their
ought above all things to be guarded against
is, that no individual may suffer himself to
be tempted and deceived by men who are
within the Catholic Church itself, and who
are borne by it like the chaff that is sustained
For in
against the time of its winnowing.
being patient toward such persons, God has
this end in view, namely, to exercise and confirm the faith and prudence of His elect by
means of the perverseness of these others,
while at the same time He also takes account
of the fact that many of their number make
an advance, and are converted to the doing
of the good pleasure of God with a great impetus, when led to take pity upon their own
For not all treasure up for themsouls. 1
selves, through the patience of God, wrath
in the day of the wrath of His just judgment;
but many are brought by the same patience
of the Almighty to the most wholesome pain of
repentance. 3 And until that is effected, they
are made the means of exercising not only
the forbearance, but also the compassion of
those who are already holding by the right
Accordingly, you will have to witness
way.
many drunkards, covetous men, deceivers,
gamesters, adulterers, fornicators, men who
bind upon their persons sacrilegious charms,
and others given up to sorcerers and astrolo4 and diviners practised in all kinds of
gers,
You will also have to observe
impious arts.
how those very crowds which fill the theatres
on the festal days of the pagans also fill the
churches on the festal days of the ChrisAnd when you see these things you
tians.
will be tempted to imitate them.
Nay, why
should I use the expression, you will see, in
reference to what you assuredly are
acFor you are
quainted with even already ?
not ignorant of the fact that many who are
called Christians engage in
ail these evil
briefly mentioned.
things
Neither are you ignorant that at times, perchance, men whom you know to bear the
name of Christians are guilty of even more
But if you
grievous offenses than these.
have come with the notion that you may do
such things as in a secured position, you are
neither will the name of
greatly in error;

which

have

1 Ad placendum Deo miserati animas suas, etc.

Instead
of miserati the reading miseranti also occurs = to the doing of
the geod pleasure of the God who takes pity on their souls. The
Benedictine editors suggest that the whole clause is in reference
to Ecclesiasticus xxx. 24, (23), which in the Latin runs thus:
miserere animce tuce placens Deo.

2 Rom. ii. 5.
3 Cf. Rom. ii. 4.

4 Mathematicis.

Christ be of any avail to you when He begins
to judge in utmost strictness, who also of old
condescended in utmost mercy to come to
For He Himself has foretold
man's relief.
these things, and speaks to this effect in the
' Not every one that saith unto me,
Gospel:
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven; but he that doeth the will of my
Many shall say unto me in that day,
Father.
Lord, Lord, in thy name we have eaten and
For all, therefore, who persedrunken.' s
vere in such works the end is damnation.
Consequently, when you see many not only
doing these things but also defending and
recommending their, keep yourself firmly by
the law of God, and follow not its willful transis not according to their
gressors.
mind, but according to His 6 truth that you
wijl be judged.

For it

For if

49. "Associate with the good, whom you
perceive to be at one with you in loving your
For there are many such for you to
King.
discover, if you also begin to cultivate that
character yourself.
in the public
spectacles you wished to be in congenial company, and to attach yourself closely 7 to men
who are united with you in a liking for some
charioteer, or some hunter, or some player
or other, how much more ought you to find
pleasure in associating with those who are at
one with you in loving that God, with regard
to whom no one that loves Him shall ever
have cause for the blush of shame, inasmuch
as not only is He Himself incapable of being
overcome, but He will also render those unconquerable who are affectionately disposed
At the same time, not even on
toward Him.
those same good men, who either anticipate
you or accompany you on the way to God,
ought you to set your hope, seeing that no
more ought you to place it on yourself, however great may be the progress you have
made, but on Him who justifies both them
and you, and thus makes you what you are.
For you are secure in God, because He
changes not; but in man no one prudently
But if we ought to
counts himself secure.
love those who are not righteous as yet, with
the view that they may be so, how much
more warmly ought those to be loved who
At the same time, it
already are righteous ?
is one thing to love man, and another thing
to set one's hope in man; and the difference
is so great, that God enjoins the one and forMoreover, if you have to
bids the other.
6 Or = its (i.e. the law's) truth.

5 Matt. vii. 21, 22.
7 Adopting nam si in spectaculis cum Hits esse cupiebas et
eis inlaerere.
Another, but less weightily supported reading, is,
nam si in spectaculis et vanitatibus insanorum certa milium
illis cupiebas inhcerere = for if in the public spectacles and vanities of mad struggles you wish to attach yourself closely to men,
etc.

[Chap. XXVI.

sustain either any insults or any sufferings in
the cause of the name of Christ, and neither
fall away from the faith nor decline from the
1 you are certain to receive the
good way,
greater reward; whereas those who give way
to the devil in such circumstances, lose even
But be humble toward God,
the less reward.
in order that He may not permit you to be
tempted beyond your strength."

CHAP. 26.

OK THE FORMAL ADMISSION OF THE
CATECHUMEN, AND OF THE SIGNS THEREIN
MADE USE OF.
50. At the conclusion of this address the
person is to be asked whether he believes
these things and earnestly desires to observe
And on his replying to that effect,
them.
then certainly he is to be solemnly signed
and dealt with in accordance with the custom
of the Church. On the subject of the sacra2 which he receives, it is first to
ment, indeed,
be well impressed upon his notice that the
signs of divine things are, it is true, things
visible, but that the invisible things themselves are also honored in them, and that that
species, 3 which is then sanctified by the blessing, is therefore not to be regarded merely in
is regarded in any comthe way in which it
mon use. And thereafter he ought to be told
what is also signified by the form of words to
which he has listened, and what in him is
seasoned 4 by that (spiritual grace) of which
this material substance presents the emblem.
Next we should take occasion by that ceremony to admonish him that, if he hears anything even in the Scriptures which may carry
a carnal sound, he should, even although he
fails to understand it, nevertheless believe
that something spiritual is signified thereby,
which bears upon holiness of character and
Moreover, in this way he
the future life.
learns briefly that, whatever he may hear in
the canonical books of such a kind as to
make him unable to refer it to the love of
eternity, and of truth, and of sanctity, and to
the love of our neighbor, he should believe

1 Bona via.

bona vita = the good life.

Another and well authenticated rendering is,

2 It has been supposed by the Benedictine editors that sane
may be a misreading for salis. Whether that be or be not the
case, the sacrament mn intended here appears to be the sacramentum salis, in reference to which Xeander (Church History,
iii. p. 458, Fohn's Translation) states that "in the North African
Church the bishop gave to those whom he received as competentes, while signing the cross over them as a symbol of consecration,
a portion of salt over which a blessing had been pronounced.
This was to signify the divine word imparted to the candidates as
the true salt for human nature."
There is an allusion to the same
in the Confessions (i. 11), where Augustin says, "Even from my
mother's womb who greatly hoped in thee, I was signed with the
sign of His cross, and seasoned with His salt."
3 Speciem = kind, in reference to the outward and sensible sign

of the salt.

4 Adopting condiat, which unquestionably is the reading most
accordant with the figure of the sacramental salt here dealt with.
Some editions give condatur = what is hidden in it, i.e. in the
said form uf words.

that to have been spoken or done with a figusignificance; and that, consequently,
rative
he should endeavor to understand it in such a
manner as to refer it to that twofold (duty
of) love. He should be further admonished,
however, not to take the term neighboi- in a
sense, but to understand under it
carnal
every one who may ever be with him in that
holy city, whether there already or not yet
And (he should finally be counapparent.
selled) not to despair of the amendment of
any man whom he perceives to be living under
the patience of God for no other reason, as
says, than that he may be brought
the apostle s
to repentance.

51. If this discourse, in which I have supposed myself to have been teaching some uninstructed person in my presence, appears
to you to be too long, you are at liberty to
expound these matters with greater brevity.
I do not think, however, that it ought to be
At the same time, much
longer than this.
depends on what the case itself, as it goes on,
may render advisable, and what the audience
actually present shows itself not only to bear,
but also to desire.
When, however, rapid
despatch is required, notice with what facility
the whole matter admits of being explained.
Suppose once more that some one comes before us who desires to be a Christian; and
accordingly, suppose further that he has been
interrogated, and that he has returned the
answer which we have taken the former catechumen to have given; for, even should he
decline to make this reply, it must at least be
said that he ought to have given it;
then all
that remains to.be said to him should be put
together in the following manner:
" Of a truth, brother, that is great and
true blessedness which is promised to the
saints in a future world.
All visible things,
on the other hand, pass away, and all the
pomp, and pleasure, and solicitude 7 of this
world will perish, and (even now) they drag
those who love them along with them onward
The merciful God, willing
to destruction.
to deliver men from this destruction, that is
to say, from everlasting pains, if they should
not prove enemies to themselves, and if they
should not withstand the mercy of their Creator, sent His only-begotten Son, that is to
say, His Word, equal with Himself, by whom
He made all things.
And He, while abiding
indeed in His divinity, and neither receding
from the Father nor being changed in anything, did at the same time, by taking on
Himself human nature, 7 and appearing to men
in mortal flesh, come unto men; in order that,

52.

5 Rom. ii. 4.

6 Curiositas.

7 Hominem.

Chap. XXVII.] ON THE CATECHISING OF THE UNINSTRUCTED.

3 1

.

just as death entered among the human race
by one man, to wit, the first that was made,
that is to say, Adam, because he consented
unto his wife when she was seduced by the
devil to the effect that they (both) transgressed
the commandment of God; even so by one
man, Jesus Christ, who is also God, the Son
of God, all those who believe in Him might
have all their past sins done away with, and
enter into eternal life.

CHAP. 27.

OF THE PROPHECIES OF THE OLD
TESTAMENT IN THEIR VISIBLE FULFILLMENT IN
THE CHURCH.

"

53.

For all those things, which at present
in the Church of God, and
you witness
which you see to be taking place under the
name of Christ throughout the whole world,
And even as
were predicted long ages ago.
we read of them, so also we now see them.
And by means of these things we are built
Once of old there occurred a
up unto faith.
flood over the whole earth, the object of which
was that sinners might be destroyed.
And,
nevertheless, those who escaped in the ark
exhibited a sacramental sign of the Church
that was to be, which at present is floating on
the waves of the world, and is delivered from
submersion by the wood of the cross of
It was predicted to Abraham, a
Christ.
faithful servant of God, a single man, that of
Him it was determined that a people should be
born who should worship one God in the midst
of all other nations which worshipped idols;
and all things which were prophesied of as
destined to happen to that people have come
to pass exactly as they were foretold. Among
that people Christ, the King of all saints and
their God, was also prophesied of as destined
to come of the seed of that same Abraham
according to the flesh, which (flesh) He took
unto Himself, in order that all those also who
became followers of His faith might be sons of
Abraham; and thus it has come to pass:
Christ was born of the Virgin Mary, who beIt was foretold by the
longed to that race.
prophets that He would suffer on the cross at
the hands of that same people of the Jews, of
whose lineage, according to the flesh, He
came; and thus it has come to pass.
It was
foretold that He would rise again: He has
risen again; and, in accordance with these
same predictions cf the prophets, He has
ascended into heaven and has sent the Holy
It was foretold not
Spirit to His disciples.
only by the prophets, but also by the Lord
Jesus Christ Himself, that His Church would
exist throughout the whole world, extended
by the martyrdoms and sufferings of the

saints; and this was foretold at a time when
as yet His name was at once undeclared to
the Gentiles, and made a subject of derision
where it was known; and, nevertheless, in the
power of His miracles, whether those which
He wrought by His own hand or those which he
effected by means of His servants, as these
things are being reported and believed, we
already see the fulfillment of that which was
predicted, and behold the very kings of the
earth, who formerly were wont to persecute
the Christians, even now brought into subjection to the name of Christ.
It was also foretold that schisms and heresies would arise
from His Church, and that under His name
they would seek their own glory instead of
Christ's, in such places as they might be able
to command; and these predictions have
been realized.

54.

' ' Will those things, then, which yet
remain fail to come to pass ?
It is manifest
that, just as the former class of things which
were foretold have come to pass, so will these
latter also come to pass.
I refer to all the
tribulations of the righteous, which yet wait
for fulfillment, and to the day of judgment,
which will separate all the wicked from the
righteous in the resurrection of the dead;
and not only will it thus separate those wicked
men who are outside the Church, but also it
will set apart for the fire, which is due to
such, the chaff of the Church itself, which
must be borne with in utmost patience on to
Moreover, they who
the last winnowing.
deride the (doctrine of a) resurrection, because they think that this flesh, inasmuch as
it becomes corrupt, cannot rise again, will
certainly rise in the same unto punishment,
and God will make it plain to such, that He
who was able to form these bodies when as
yet they were not, is able in a moment to restore them as they were.
But all the faithful
who are destined to reign with Christ shall
rise with the same body in such wise that
they may also be counted worthy to be changed
into angelic incorruption; so that they may
be made equal unto the angels of God, even
as the Lord Himself has promised; x and that
they may praise Him without any failure and
without any weariness, ever living in Him and
of Him, with such joy and blessedness as can
be neither expressed nor conceived by man.

55. "Believe these things, therefore, and
be on your guard against temptations (for the
devil seeks for others who may be brought to
perish along with himself); so that not only
may that adversary fail to seduce you by the
help of those who are without the Church,

1 Luke xx. 36.

3H

[Chap. XXVII.

whether they be pagans, or Jews, or heretics;
but you yourself also may decline to follow
the example of those within the Catholic
Church itself whom you see leading an evil
life, either indulging in excess in the pleasures
of the belly and the throat, or unchaste, or
given up to the vain and unlawful observances
of curious superstitions, whether they be addicted to (the inanities of) public spectacles,
1 or be
or charms, or divinations of devils,
living in the pomp and inflated arrogance of
covetousness and pride, or be pursuing any
sort of life which the law condemns and punBut rather connect yourself with the
ishes.
good, whom you will easily find out, if you
yourself were once become of that character;
so that you may unite with each other in worshipping and loving God for His own sake;
for He himself will be our complete reward
to the intent that we may enjoy His goodness
He is to be loved,
and beauty 3 in that life.
however, not in the way in which any object
that is seen with the eyes is loved, but as
wisdom is loved, and truth, and holiness,
4 and whatand righteousness, and charity,
ever else may be mentioned as of kindred
nature; and further, with a love conformable
to these things not as they are in men, but
as they are in the very fountain of incorruptible and unchangeable wisdom.
Whomsoever,
therefore, you may observe to be loving these
yourself to them, so that
things,
through Christ, who became man in order
that He might be the Mediator between God
and men, you may be reconciled to God. But
as regards the perverse, even if they find their
way within the walls of the Church, think not

attach

1 Remediorum ant divinationum diabolicarum.

editions insert sacrilegorum after remediorum
charms or divinations of devils.

Some
sacrilegious

2 Gratis.
t Many mss. omit the words : and holiness, and righteousness,

3 Cf. Zech. ix. 17.

and charity.

that they will find their way into the kingdom
of heaven; for in their own time they will be
set apart, if they have not altered to the
Consequently, follow the example of
better.
good men, bear with the wicked, love all;
forasmuch as you know not what he will be
to-morrow who to-day is evil.
Howbeit, love
not the unrighteousness of such; but love the
persons themselves with the express intent
that they may apprehend righteousness; for
not only is the love of God enjoined upon us,
but also the love of our neighbor, on which
two commandments hang all the law and the
prophets. 5 And this is fulfilled by no one
save the man who has received the (other)
6 the Holy Spirit, who is indeed equal
gift,
with the Father and with the Son; for this
same Trinity is God; and on this God every
hope ought to be placed. On man our hope
ought not to be placed, of whatsoever characFor He, by whom we are
ter he may be.
justified, is one thing; and they, together
with whom we are justified, are another.
is not only by lusts that the
Moreover, it
devil tempts, but also by the terrors of insults, and pains, and death itself.
But whatever a man shall have suffered on behalf of
the name of Christ, and for the sake of the
hope of eternal life, and shall have endured
in constancy, (in accordance therewith) the
greater reward shall be given him; whereas,
if he shall give way to the devil, he shall be
damned along with him.
But works of
mercy, conjoined with pious humility, meet
with this acknowledgment from God, to wit,
that He will not suffer His servants to be
tempted more than they are able to bear." 7

5 Matt. xxii. 37, 30.
6 One edition reads DomSnum, the Lord, the Holy Spirit,

etc., instead of donum.
7 1 Cor. x. 13.

ST. AUGUSTIN :

TREATISE ON

FAITH AND THE CREED.

[DE FIDE ET SYMBOLO.j

TRANSLATED BY

REV. S. D. F. SALMOND, D.D.,

PROFESSOR OF SYSTEMATIC THEOLOGY, FREE CHURCH COLLEGE, ABERDEEN.

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

The occasion and date of the composition of this treatise are indicated in a statement

which Augustin makes in the seventeenth chapter of the First Book of his Retractatio7is.

From this we learn that, in its original form, it was a discourse which Augustin, when
only a presbyter, was requested to deliver in public by the bishops assembled at the Council of Hippo-Regius, and that it was subsequently issued as a book at the desire of friends.
The general assembly of the North African Church, which was thus convened at what is now
Bona, in the modern territory of Algiers, took place in the year 393 a.d., and was otherwise
one of some historical importance, on account of the determined protest which it emitted
against the position elsewhere allowed to Patriarchs in the Church, and against the admittance of any more authoritative or magisterial title to the highest ecclesiastical official than
that of simply

Bishop of the first Church "

(firimce sedis episcopus).

"

The work constitutes an exposition of the several clauses of the so-called Apostles'
The questions concerning the mutual relations of the three Persons in the Godhead
Creed.
are handled with greatest fullness; in connection with which, especially in the use made of
the analogies of Being, Knowledge, and Love, and in the cautions thrown in against certain
applications of these and other illustrations taken from things of human experience, we
come across sentiments which are also repeated in the City of God, the books on the Trinity,
and others of his doctrinal writings.

The passage referred to in the Retractations is as follows:

" About the same period, in
presence of the bishops, who gave me orders to that effect, and who were holding a plenary
Council of the whole of Africa at Hippo-Regius, I delivered, as presbyter, a discussion on
This disputation, at the very pressing request of some
the subject of Faith and the Creed.
of those who were on terms of more than usual intimacy and affection with us, I threw into
the form of a book, in which the themes themselves are made the subjects of discourse, although not in a method involving the adoption of the particular connection of words which
In this book, when discussing the
is given to the competentes
' Rise again the body will, according to the
question of the resurrection of the flesh, I say:
Christian faith, which is incapable of deceiving. And if this appears incredible to any one,
is because] he looks simply to what the flesh is at present, while he fails to consider of
[it
For at that time of angelic change it will no more be
what nature it shall be hereafter.
flesh and blood, but only body;' and so on, through the other statements which I have made
there on the subject of the change of bodies terrestrial into bodies celestial, as the apostle,
when he spake from the same point, said,
' Flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of
But if any one takes these declarations in a sense leading him to suppose that the
God.' 3
earthly body, such as we now have it, is changed in the resurrection into a celestial body, in
any such wise as that neither these members nor the substance of the flesh will subsist any

x to be committed to memory.

1 i.e. the third order of catechumens, embracing those thoroughly prepared for baptism.
2 Chap. x.

3 1 Cor. xv. 50.

24.

?lg

INTRODUCTORY NOTICE.

more, undoubtedly he must be set right, by being put in mind of the body of the Lord, who
subsequently to His resurrection appeared in the same members, as One who was not only
to be seen with the eyes, but also handled with the hands; and made His possession of the
flesh likewise surer by the discourse which He spake, saying, 'Handle me, and see; for a
spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. ' r Hence it is certain that the apostle
did not deny that the substance of the flesh will exist in the kingdom of God, but that under
flesh and blood ' he designated either men who live after the flesh, or the exthe name of '
For
press corruption of the flesh, which assuredly at that period shall subsist no more.
' Flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of God,' what he proceeds
after he had said,
is rightly taken to
to say next,
have been added by way of explaining his previous statement. And on this subject, which
is one on which it is difficult to convince unbelievers, any one who reads my last book, On
the City of God, will find that I have discoursed with the utmost carefulness of which I am
2 The performance in question commences thus: ' Since it is written,' etc."
capable.
[Additional Note by the American Editor.]

namely, 'neither shall corruption inherit incorruption,'

[Another English edition of this treatise De Fide et Symbolo was prepared by the Rev.
Charles A. Heurtley, D.D., Margaret Professor of Divinity and Canon of Christ Church,
Oxford, and published by Parker & Co., Oxford and London, 1886.

The following text of the Apostles' Creed may be collected from this book of St. Au-

gustin, and was current in North Africa towards the close of the fourth century:

1 .

I believe in God the Father Almighty.

Chs. 2 and 3.

2. (And) in Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Only-Begotten of the Father,

or, His Only Son, our Lord.

Ch. 3.

3. Who was born through the Holy Spirit of the Virgin Mary.
4. Who under Pontius Pilate was crucified and buried.
Ch. 5 (
5. On the third day He rose again from the dead.
6. He ascended into Heaven.
7. He sitteth at the right hand of the Father.
8. From thence He will come and judge the living and the dead. Ch. 8 (
9. (And I believe) in the Holy Spirit.

Ch. 6 (

Ch. 9 (

Ch. 5 (

Ch. 4 (

Ch. 7 (

16-19.)

13.)

14.)

12.)

11.)

8.)

i5.)

I believe the Holy Church (Catholic).
23.)
Ch. 10

10.
1 1. The forgiveness of sin.
12. The Resurrection of the body.
13. The Life everlasting.
Ch. 10 (

Ch. 10 (

24.)]

Ch. 10

(

21.)

(

23, 24.)

1 Luke xxiv. 39.

2 City of God^ Bk. xxii. Ch. 21.

CONTENTS OF FAITH AND THE CREED

PAGE

Chap. I.

Chap. II.

Chap. III.

Chap. IV.

Chap. V.

Chap. VI.

Of the origin and object of composition
Of God and his exclusive eternity,
Of the Son of God, and His peculiar designation as the Word,
Of the Son of God as neither made by the Father nor less than the Father, and of His incarnation, 323
Of Christ's passion, burial, and resurrection
Of Christ's ascension into heaven

. 321

Chap. VII.

Chap. VIII.

Of Christ's session. at the Father's right hand,
Of Christ's coming to judgment,

Chap. IX.

Chap, X.

Of the Holy Spirit and the mystery of the Trinity,
Of the Catholic Church, the remission of sins, and the resurrection of the flesh,

A TREATISE ON FAITH AND THE CREED.
[DE FIDE ET SYMBOLO.]

.IN ONE BOOK.

[A DISCOURSE DELIVERED BEFORE A COUNCIL OF THE WHOLE NORTH AFRICAN
EPISCOPATE ASSEMBLED AT HIPPO-REGIUS.]

CHAP. I.

OF THE ORIGIN AND OBJECT OF THE

COMPOSITION.

"

for

says,

i. Inasmuch as it

an apostle

is a position, written
and established on the most solid foundation
of apostolic teaching, "that the just lives of
" * and inasmuch also as this faith defaith;
mands of us the duty at once of heart and
With the
tongue,
heart man believeth unto righteousness, and
with the mouth confession is made unto salit becomes us to be mindful both
vation," 2
of righteousness and of salvation.
For, destined as we are to reign hereafter in everlasting righteousness, we certainly cannot secure
our salvation from the present evil world, unless at the same time, while laboring for the
salvation of our neighbors, we likewise with
the mouth make our own profession of the
And it
faith which we carry in our heart.
must be our aim, by pious and careful watchfulness, to provide against the possibility of
the said faith sustaining any injury in us, on
any side, through the fraudulent artifices [or,
cunning fraud] of the heretics.
We have, however, the catholic faith in the
Creed, known to the faithful and committed
to memory, contained in a form of expression
as concise as has been rendered admissible
by the circumstances of the case; the purpose
of which [compilation] was, that individuals
who are but beginners and sucklings among

It

those who have been born again in Christ,
and who have not yet been strengthened by
most diligent and spiritual handling and understanding of the divine Scriptures, should
be furnished with a summary, expressed in
few words, of those matters of necessary belief which were subsequently to be explained
to them in many words, as they made progress
and rose to [the height of] divine doctrine,
on the assured and steadfast basis of humility
and charity.
is underneath these few
words, therefore, which are thus set in order
in the Creed, that most heretics have endeavored to conceal their poisons; whom divine mercy has withstood, and still withstands,
by the instrumentality of spiritual men, who
have been counted worthy not only to accept
and believe the catholic faith as expounded
in those terms, but also thoroughly to understand and apprehend it by the enlightenment
imparted by the Lord.
is written,
"
Unless ye believe, ye shall not underBut the handling of the faith is of
stand." 3
service for the protection of the Creed; not,
however, to the intent that this should itself
be given instead of the Creed, to be committed to memory and repeated by those
who are receiving the grace of God, but that
it may guard the matters which are retained
in the Creed against the insidious assaults of
the heretics, by means of catholic authority
and a more entrenched defence.

For it

1 Hab. ii. 4; Rom. i. 17 ; Gal. iii. 11 ; Heb. x. 38.
2 Rom. x. 10.

3 Isa. vii. 9, according to the rendering of the Septuagint.

^2 2

[Chap, III.

CHAP. 2.

OF GOD AND HIS EXCLUSIVE ETER-

NITY.

2. For certain parties have attempted to
gain acceptance for the opinion that God the
Father is not Almighty: not that they have
been bold enough expressly to affirm this,
but ki their traditions they are convicted of
entertaining and crediting such a notion.
For when they affirm that there is a nature *
which God Almighty did not create, but of
which at the same time He fashioned this
world, which they admit to have been disthey thereby deny that God
posed in beauty,
is almighty, to the effect of not believing that
He could have created the world without employing, for the purpose of its construction,
another nature, which had been in existence
previously, and which He Himself had not
made.
Thus, forsooth, [they reason] from
their carnal familiarity with the sight of craftsmen and house-builders, and artisans of all
descriptions, who have no power to make good
the effect of their own art unless they get the
help of materials already prepared. And so
these parties in like manner understand the
Maker of the world not to be almighty, if 3
thus He could not fashion the said world
without the help of some other nature, not
framed by Himself, which He had to use as
Or if indeed they do allow
His materials.
God, the Maker of the world, to be almighty,
it becomes matter of course that they must
also acknowledge that He made out of nothing
the things which He did make.
For, granting that He is almighty, there cannot exist
anything of which He should not be the
For although He made something
Creator.
out of something, as man out of clay,
4 nevertheless He certainly did not make any object
out of aught which He Himself had not made;
for the earth from which the clay comes He
had made out of nothing. And even if He had
made out of some material the heavens and
the earth themselves, that is to say, the universe and all things which are in it, according
as it is written, "Thou who didst make the
world out of matter unseen," 5 or also
without form," as some copies give it; yet we are
under no manner of necessity to believe that
this very material of which the universe was
made, although it might be "without form,"
although it might be
unseen," whatever
might be the mode of its subsistence, could
possibly have subsisted of itself, as if it were
co-eternal and co-eval with God.
But what-

"

"

soever that mode was which it possessed to
the effect of subsisting in some manner,
whatever that manner might be, and of being
capable of taking on the forms of distinct
things, this it did not possess except by the
hand of Almighty God, by whose goodness it
is that everything exists,
not only every object which is already formed, but also every
object which is formable.
This, moreover,
is the difference between the formed and the
formable, that the formed has already taken
on form, while the formable is capable of
But the same Being who
taking the same.
imparts form to
also imparts the
objects,
For of Him
capability of being formed.
and in Him is the fairest figure
6 of all things,
unchangeable; and therefore He Himself is
One, who communicates to everything its
possibilities, not only that it be beautiful
actually, but also that it be capable of being
For which reason we do most
beautiful.
right to believe that God made all things of
For, even although the world was
nothing.
made of some sort of material, this self-same
material itself was made of nothing; so that,
in accordance with the most orderly gift of
God, there was to enter first the capacity of
taking forms, and then that all things should
be formed which have been formed.
This,
however, we have said, in order that no one
might suppose that the utterances of the divine
Scriptures are contrary the one to the other,
is written at once that God
in so far as it
made all things of nothing, and that the world
was made of matter without form.

3. As we believe, therefore, in God the
Father Almighty, we ought to uphold the
opinion that there is no creature which has
not been created by the Almighty.
And
since He created all things by the Word,?
which Word is also designated the Truth, and
the Power, and the Wisdom of God, 8
as also
under many other appellations
the Lord
Jesus Christ, who 9
is commended to our
faith, is presented likewise to our mental apprehensions, to wit, our Deliverer and Ruler,
the Son of God; for that Word, by whose
means all things were founded, could not
have been begotten by any other than by
Him who founded all things by His instrumentality;

chap. 3.

of the son of god, and his pecu-

liar designation as the word.

Since this is the case, I repeat, we be-

1 Naturam.
2 Reading pulchre ordinatum. Some editions give pulchre
3 Si mundum fabricare non posset.
4 De li/no=oi mud.

ornatum = beautifully adorned.
qni= inasmuch as He could not, etc.

For si some mss. give

5 Wisd. xi. 17.

6 Speciosissima species = the seemliest semblance.
7 John i. 3.
9 For qui several mss. give quibus here = under many other
appellations is the Lord Jesus Christ introduced to our mental
apprehensions, by which He is commended to our faith.

8 John xiv. 6 ;

1 Cor. 1. 24.

10 For Rector we also find Creator = Creator.

Chap. IV.]

ON FAITH AND THE CREED.

"

lieve also in Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
the Only-begotten of the Father, that is to
say, His only Son, our Lord.
This Word,
however, we ought not to apprehend merely
in the sense in which we think of our own
words, which are given forth by the voice
and the mouth, and strike the air and pass
on, and subsist no longer than their sound
For that Word remains unchangecontinues.
ably: for of this very Word was it spoken
when of Wisdom it was said,
Remaining in
Moreherself, she maketh all things new." 1
over, the reason of His being named the
Word of the Father, is that the Father is
made known by Him.
Accordingly, just as
it is our intention, when we speak truth, that
by means of our words our mind should be
made known to him who hears us, and that
whatever we carry in secrecy in our heart may
be set forth by means of signs of this sort
for the intelligent understanding of another
so this Wisdom that God the
individual;
Father begat is most appropriately named
His Word, inasmuch as the most hidden
Father is made known to worthy minds by
the same. 2

4. Now there is a very great difference
between our mind and those words of ours,
by which we endeavor to set forth the said
mind. We indeed do not beget intelligible
words, 3 but we form them; and in the forming of them the body is the underlying
Between mind and body, however,
material.
But God,
there is the greatest difference.
when He begat the Word, begat that which
He is Himself.
Neither out of nothing, nor
of any material already made and founded,
did He then beget; but He begat of Himself
that which He is Himself.
For we too aim
at this when we speak, (as we shall see) if
we carefully consider the inclination 4 of our
will; not when we lie, but when we speak the
For to what else do we direct our
truth.
efforts then, but to bring our own very mind,
if it can be done at all, in upon the mind of
the hearer, with the view of its being apprehended and thoroughly discerned by him; so
that we may indeed abide in our very selves,
and make no retreat from ourselves, and yet
at the same time put forth a sign of such a
nature as that by it a knowledge of us 5 may

1 Wisd. vii. 27.
2 Adopting the Benedictine version, per ipsam innotescit
dignis animis secretissimus Pater.
There is, however, great
variety of reading here. Some mss. give ignis for dignis = the
most hidden fire
minds.
Others give signis = the most hidden Father is made known by
Others have innotescit animus secretissimus
signs to minds.
Patris, or innotescit signis secretissimus Pater = the most
hidden mind of the Father is made known by the same, or = the
most hidden Father is made known by the same in signs.

Father is made known to

of the

3 Sonantia Tieroa = sounding, vocal words.
4 Appetitum.
5 Nostra notitia = our knowledge.

be effected in another individual; that thus,
so far as the faculty is granted us, another
mind may be, as it were, put forth by the
This
mind, whereby it may disclose itself?
we do, making the attempt
6 both bywords,
and by the simple sound of the voice, and by
the countenance, and by the gestures of the
by so many contrivances, in sooth,
body,
desiring to make patent that which is within;
inasmuch as we are not able to put forth
aught of this nature [in itself completely]:
and thus it is that the mind of the speaker
cannot become perfectly known; thus also it
results that a place is open for falsehoods.
God the Father, on the other hand, who possessed both the will and the power to declare
Himself with the utmost truth to minds designed to obtain knowledge of Him, with the
purpose of thus declaring Himself begat this
[Word] which He Himself is who did beget;
which [Person] is likewise called His Power
and Wisdom, 7 inasmuch as it is by Him that
He has wrought all things, and in order disposed them; of whom these words are for
She (Wisdom) reacheth
this reason spoken:
from one end to another mightily, and sweetly
doth she order all things/'

"

CHAP. 4.

I0 since God, who is eternally

OF THE SON OF GOD AS NEITHER
MADE BY THE FATHER NOR LESS THAN THE
FATHER, AND OF HIS INCARNATION.
5. Wherefore the only-begotten Son of
God was neither made by the Father; for,
according to the word of an evangelist, "all
things were made by Him:" 9 nor begotten
"
instantaneously;
wise, has with Himself His eternal Wisdom:
nor unequal with the Father, that is to say,
in anything less than He; for an apostle also
speaks in this wise, "Who, although He was
constituted in the form of God, thought it
not robbery to be equal with God." I2 By this
catholic faith, therefore, those are excluded,
on the one hand, who affirm that the Son is
the same [Person] as the Father; for
clear that] this Word could not possibly be
with God, were it not with God the Father,
is just as evident that] He who is
and [it
And, on the other
alone is equal to no one.
hand, those are equally excluded who affirm
that the Son is a creature, although not such
an one as the rest of the creatures are.
For

[it

is

6 Reading conantes et verbis, etc.

Three good mss. give
conante fetu verbi = as the offspring of the word makes the
attempt. The Benedictine editors suggest conantes fetu verbi =
making the attempt by the offspring of the word.

8 Wisd. viii. 1.
7 1 Cor. i. 24.
10 According to the literal meaning of the phrase ex tempore.
It may, however, here be used as = under conditions of time, or
11 Reading sempiterne; for which sempitemus = the eternal

9 John i. 3.

in time.

wise God, is also given.

I2 Phil. ii. 6.

3 2 4

[Chap. IV.

"

however great they declare the creature to
it is a creature, it has been fashioned
be, if
and made. 1
For the terms fashion and
create* mean one and the same thing;
although in the usage of the Latin tongue the
phrase create is employed at times instead of
what would be the strictly accurate word,
But the Greek language makes a disbeget.
For we call that creatura (creature)
tinction.
which they call xriff/ua or nriais; and when
we desire to speak without ambiguity, we use
not the word creare (create), but the word
condere (fashion, found).
Consequently, if
the Son is a creature, however great that may
be, He has been made.
But we believe in
Him by whom all things {omnia) were made,
not in Him by whom the rest of things {cetera)
For here again we cannot take
were made.
this term all things in any other sense than
as meaning whatsoever things have been
made.

6. But as

the Word was made flesh, and
dwelt among us," 3 the same Wisdom which
was begotten of God condescended also to
There is a referbe created among men. 4
" The Lord created
ence to this in the word,
me in the beginning of His ways." 5 For the
beginning of His ways is the Head of the
Church, which is Christ 6 endued with human
nature {liomine indutus), by whom it was purposed that there should be given to us a
pattern of living, that is, a sure 7 way by
which we might reach God.
For by no other
path was it possible for us to return but by
humility, who fell by pride, according as it
was said to our first creation,
Taste, and
8 Of this humility,
ye shall be as gods."
therefore, that is to say, of the way by which
it was needful for us to return, our Restorer
Himself has deemed it meet to exhibit an
example in His own person, "who thought
it not robbery to be equal with God, but
emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant;" 9 in order that He might be created
Man in the beginning of His ways, the Word
by whom all things were made.
Wherefore,
in so far as He is the Only-begotten, He has
no brethren; but in so far as He is the Firstbegotten, He has deemed it worthy of Him
to give the name of brethren to all those who,
subsequently to and by means of His preeminence, 10 are born again into the grace of

"

God through the adoption of sons, according
to the truth commended to us by apostolic
Thus, then, the Son according to
teaching."
nature {naturalis filius) was born of the very
substance of the Father, the only one so
born, subsisting as that which the Father is,
God of God, Light of Light.
We, on the
other hand, are not the light by nature, but
are enlightened by that Light, so that we may
be able to shine in wisdom. For, as one says,
"that was the
true Light, which lighteth
every man that cometh into the world." 13
Therefore we add to the faith of things eternal likewise the temporal dispensation I4 of our
Lord, which He deemed it worthy of Him to
bear for us and to minister in behalf of our
For in so far as He is the onlysalvation.
begotten Son of God, it cannot be said of
Him that He was and that He shall be, but
only that He is; because, on the one hand,
that which was, norc is not; and, on the other,
that which shall be, as yet is not.
He, then,
is unchangeable, independent of the condition
And it is my opinion,
of times and variation.
that this is the very consideration to which
was due the circumstance that He introduced
to the apprehension of His servant Moses
the kind of name [which He then adopted].
For when he asked of Him by whom he
should say that he was sent, in the event of
the people to whom he was being sent despising him, he received his answer when He
I am that I am." Therespake in this wise:
after, too, He added this: "Thus shalt thou
say unto the children of Israel, He that is
{Qui est) has sent me unto you." I5

7. From this, I trust, it is now made patent
to spiritual minds that there cannot possibly
For if He
exist any nature contrary to God.
and this is a word which can be spoken
with propriety only of God (for that which
truly is remains unchangeably; inasmuch as
that which is changed has been something
which now it
is not, and shall be something
it follows that God
which as yet it is not),
For if the
has nothing contrary to Himself.
question were put to us, What is contrary to
white? we would reply, black; if the question were, What is contrary to hot ? we would
reply, cold; if the question were, What is
contrary to quick? we would reply, slow; and

is,

"

1 Condi'ta et facta est.
2 Condere and creare.
4 Adopting in hominibus creavi. One important ms. gives in
omnibus = amongst all.

5 Prov. viii. 22, with creavit me instead of the possessed me

3 John i. 14.

of the English version.

6 Various editions give principium et caput Ecclesi& est
C/iristus=the beginning of His ways and the Head of the Church
7 For via certa others give via recta = a right way.
is Christ.
8 Gen. iii. 5.
10 per ejus primatum = by means of His standing as the First-

9 Phil. li. 6, 7.

tion.

born. We follow the Benedictine reading, qui post ejus et per ejus
primatum in Dei gratia m renascuntur.
But there is another,
although less authoritative, version, viz. qui post ejus primitias
in Dei gratia nascimur = all of us who, subsequently to His
first-fruits, are born in the grace of God.

11 Luke viii. 21; Rom. viii. 15-17; Gal. iv. 5; Eph. i. 5; Heb. ii. 11.
12 Id existens quod Pater est, etc. Another version is. idem
existens quod Pater Dens = subsisting as the same that God the
Father is.
14 The term dispensatio occurs very frequently as the equivalent of the Greek oIkovo/j-Co. = economy, designating the Incarna-

J 3 John i. 9.

T 3 Ex. iii. 14.

Chap. IV.]

ON FAITH AND THE CREED.

;^5

it

all similar interrogations we would answer in
like manner.
is asked,
What is contrary to that which is ? the right
reply to give is, that which is not.

When, however, it

1 without detriment.

But if any one shall

8. But whereas, in a temporal dispensation, as I have said, with a view to our salvation and restoration, and with the goodness of
God acting therein, our changeable nature
has been assumed by that unchangeable Wisdom of God, we add the faith in temporal
things which have been done with salutary effect on our behalf, believing in that Son of God
WHO WAS BORN THROUGH THE HOLY GHOST OF
the Virgin Mary.
For by the gift of God,
that is, by the Holy Spirit, there was granted
to us so great humility on the part of so
great a God, that He deemed it worthy of
Him to assume the entire nature of man
(totum hominem) in the womb of the Virgin,
inhabiting the material body so that it sustained no detriment {integrum), and leaving
This temporal dispensation is in many ways craftily assailed b)
have
the heretics.
grasped the catholic faith, so as to believe
that the entire nature of man was assumed
by the Word of God, that is to say, body,
soul, and spirit, he has sufficient defense
For surely, since that
against those parties.
assumption was effected in behalf of our salvation, one must be on his guard lest, as he
believes that there is something belonging to
our nature which sustains no relation to that
assumption, this something may fail also to
sustain any relation to the salvation. 2 And
seeing that, with the exception of the form
of the members, which has been imparted to
the varieties of living objects with differences
adapted to their different kinds, man is
in
nothing separated from the cattle but in [the
rational
[rationali
possession
spiritu), which is also named mind (mens),
how is that faith sound, according to which
the belief is maintained, that the Wisdom of
God assumed that part of us which we hold
in common with the cattle, while He did not
assume that which is brightly illumined by
the light of wisdom, and which is man's
peculiar gift ?

spirit

of]

a

T

9. Moreover, those parties 3 also are to be
abhorred who deny that our Lord Jesus
Christ had in Mary a mother upon earth;
while that dispensation has honored both
sexes, at once the male and the female, and
has made it plain that .not only that sex
which He assumed pertains to God's care,
but also that sex by which He did assume
1 Deserens. With less point, deferens has been suggested
2 Or it may = he should fail to have any relation to the salva-

bearing it, or delivering it.

tion.

3 Referring to the Manicheans.

in respect

this other, in that He bore [the nature of]
the man (virum gerendo), [and] in that He
was born of the woman.
Neither is there
anything to compel us to a denial of the
mother of the Lord, in the circumstance that
this word was spoken by Him: "Woman,
Mine hour is
what have I to do with thee ?
But He rather admonishes
not yet come." 4
us to understand that, in respect of His being
God, there was no mother for Him, the part
of whose personal majesty (cujus majestatis
personam) He was preparing to show forth
But as
in the turning of water into wine.
regards His being crucified, He was cruof his being man; and
cified
that was the hour which had not come
yet, at the time when this word was
as
spoken, "What have I to do with thee?
Mine hour is not yet come;" that is, the
hour at which I shall recognize thee.
For at
that period, when He was crucified as man,
He recognized His human mother (hominem
matrem), and committed her most humanely
(humanissime) to the care of the best beloved
Nor, again, should we be moved
disciple.
by the fact that, when the presence of His
mother and His brethren was announced to
Him, He replied, "Who is my mother, or
who my brethren?" etc. 6
But rather let it
teach us, that when parents hinder our ministry wherein we minister the word of God to
our brethren, they ought not to be recognized
For if, on the ground of His having
by us.
said, "Who is my mother?" every one
should conclude that He had no mother on
earth, then each should as matter of course
be also compelled to deny that the apostles
had fathers on earth; since He gave them an
Call no man
injunction in these terms:
your father upon the earth; for one is your
Father, which is in heaven." 7

"

10. Neither should the thought of the
woman's womb impair this faith in us, to the
effect that there should appear to be any
necessity for rejecting such a generation of
our Lord for the mere reason that worthless
men consider it unworthy (sordidi sordidam
For most true are these sayings of
putanf).
"
the foolishness of God
an apostle, both that
is wiser than men," 8 and that "to the pure
all things are pure." 9
therefore,
who entertain this opinion ought to ponder
the fact that the rays of this sun, which indeed they do not praise as a creature of God,
but adore as God, are diffused all the world
over, through the noisomenesses of sewers
and every kind of horrible thing, and that

Those, 10

4 John ii. 4.
6 Matt. xii. 48.
8 1 Cor. i. 25.
10 In reference to the Manicheans.

5 John xix. 26, 27.
7 Matt, xxiii. 9.
9 Tit. 1. 15.

[Chap. VII.

they operate in these according to their nature, and yet never become debased by any
defilement thence contracted, albeit that the
visible light is by nature in closer conjunction with visible pollutions. How much less,
therefore, could the Word of God, who is
neither corporeal nor visible, sustain defilement from the female body, wherein He assumed human flesh together with soul and
spirit, through the incoming of which the
majesty of the Word dwells in a less immediate conjunction with the frailty of a human
is manifest that the Word
body !
- of God could in no way have been defiled by
a human body, by which even the human
For not when it rules
soul is not defiled.
the body and quickens it, but only when it
lusts after the mortal good things thereof, is
But if these
the soul defiled by the body.
persons were to desire to avoid the defilements of the soul, they would dread rather
these falsehoods and profanities.

Hence it

'

chap. 5.

of Christ's passion, burial, and

" 2

resurrection.
11. But little [comparatively] was the humiliation (Jiwnilitas) of our Lord on our behalf in His being born: it was also added that
He deemed it meet to die in behalf of mortal
For " He humbled Himself, being
men.
made subject even unto death, yea, the death
lest any one of us, even were
of the cross:
he able to have no fear of death [in general],
should yet shudder at some particular sort
of death which men reckon most shameful.
Therefore do we believe in Him who under
Pontius Pilate was crucified and buried.
For it was requisite that the name of the judge
should be added, with a view to the cognizance
Moreover, when that burial is
of the times.
made an object of belief, there enters also
the recollection of the new tomb, 3 which was
meant to present a testimony to Him in His
destiny to rise again to newness of life, even
as the Virgin's womb did the same to Him
in His appointment to be born.
For just as
in that sepulchre no other dead person was
buried, 4 whether before or after Him; so
neither in that womb, whether before or after,
was anything mortal conceived.

12. We believe also, that on the third day
He rose again from the dead, the first-begotten for brethren destined to come after Him,
whom He has called into the adoption of the

1 The Benedictine text gives, quibus intervenientibus habitat
Verbi ab humani corporis fragilitate secretins.
majestas
Another well-supported version is, ad humani corporis fragiiitatem, etc.= more retired in relation to the frailty of the human
body.

2 Phil. ii. 8.

3 For monumenti some editions give testa7>ienti=testament.
4 John xix. 41.

sons of God, 5 whom [also] He has deemed it
meet to make His own joint-partners and
joint-heirs.

"

chap. 6.

of Christ's ascension into heaven.
13. We believe that He ascended into
heaven, which place of blessedness He has
likewise promised unto us, saying, "They
shall be as the angels in the heavens," 7 in
that city which is the mother of us all,
8 the
But it is
Jerusalem eternal in the heavens.
wont to give offense to certain parties, either
impious Gentiles or heretics, that we should
believe in the assumption of an earthly body
The Gentiles, however, for the
into heaven.
most part, set themselves diligently to ply us
with the arguments of the philosophers, to the
effect of affirming that there cannot possibly
be anything earthly in heaven.
For they
know not our Scriptures, neither do they understand how it has been said,
It is sown an
animal body, it is raised a spiritual body." 9
For thus it has not been expressed, as if body
were turned into spirit and became spirit;
inasmuch as at present, too, our body, which
is called animal (atumale), has
not been
turned into soul and become soul (ani/na).
But by a spiritual body is meant one which
has been made subject to spirit in such wise 1*
that it is adapted to a heavenly habitation,
all frailty and every earthly blemish having
been changed and converted into heavenly
purity and stability.
This is the change concerning which the apostle likewise speaks
" We shall all rise, but we shall not all
thus:
be changed." 11 And that this change is made
not unto the worse, but unto the better, the
same [apostle] teaches, when he says, "And
we shall be changed." I2
But the question as
to where and in what manner the Lord's body
is in heaven, is one which it would be altogether over-curious and superfluous to proseOnly we must believe that it
cute.
is in
For it pertains not to our frailty to
heaven.
investigate the secret things of heaven, but it
does pertain to our faith to hold elevated and
honorable sentiments on the subject of the
dignity of the Lord's body.

Christ's

chap. 7.

of
session
father's right hand.
14. We believe also that He sitteth at the
right hand of the Father. This, however, is

at

the

5 Eph. i. 5.
7 Matt. xxii. 30.
9 1 Cor. xv. 44.
10 Adopting the Benedictine reading, quod ita spiritui subBut several mss. give quia ita coaptandum <\r/ = it is
ditum est.
understood to be a spiritual body, in that it is to be so adapted as
to suit a heavenly habitation.

6 Rom. viii. 17.
8 Gal. iv. 26.

11 1 Cor. xv. 51, according to the Vulgate's transposition of the

negative.

'-' 1 Cor. xv. 5J.

Chap. IX.]

ON FAITH AND THE CREED.

not to lead us to suppose that God the Father
is, as it were, circumscribed by a human form,
so that, when we think of Him, a right side
or a left should suggest itself to the mind.
Nor, again, when it
is thus said in express
terms that the Father sitteth, are we to fancy
that this is done with bended knees; lest we
should fall into that profanity, in [dealing
with] which an apostle execrates those who
"
changed the glory of the incorruptible God
into the likeness of corruptible man." 1
For
it is unlawful for a Christian to set up any
such image for God in a temple; much more
nefarious is it, [therefore], to set it up in the
heart, in which truly is the temple of God,
provided it be purged of earthly lust and
at the right hand,"'
error.
therefore, we must understand to signify a
supremest blessedness, where
position
righteousness and peace and joy are; just as
2 that is to
the kids are set on the left hand,
say, in misery, by reason of unrighteousness,
labors, and torments. 3 And in accordance
with this, when it is said that God "
sitteth,"
the expression indicates not a posture of the
members, but a judicial power, which that
Majesty never fails to possess, as He is always awarding deserts as men deserve them
{clig/m dignis tribuendd) ; although at the last
judgment the unquestionable brightness of
the only-begotten Son of God, the Judge of
the living and the dead, is destined yet to be 4
a thing much more manifest among men.

This expression,

in

"

chap. 8.

of Christ's coming to judgment.

15. We believe also, that at the most seasonable time He will come from thence, and
WILL JUDGE THE QUICK AND THE DEAD: whether
by these terms are signified the righteous and
sinners, or whether it be the case that those
persons are here called the quick, whom at
that period He shall find, previous to [their]
death, 5 upon the earth, while the dead denote
those who shall rise again at His advent.
This temporal dispensation not only is, as
holds good of that generation which respects
His being God, but also hath been and shall be.
For our Lord hath been upon the earth, and
at present He is in heaven, and [hereafter]
He shall be in His brightness as the Judge of
For He shall yet
the quick and the dead.
come, even so as He has ascended, according

2 Matt. xxv. 33.

1 Rom. i. 23.
3 Reading propter iniquitates, labores atque cruciatus.
Several mss. give propter iniquitatis labores, etc. = by reason of
the labors and torments of unrighteousness.
4 Readingya/Krrt sit ; for which fuisura sit also occurs =
5 The text gives simply ante mortem. Some editions insert

is destined to shine much more manifestly, etc.
nostrum = previous to our death.

to the authority which is contained in the
It is in accordance
Acts of the Apostles.
with this temporal dispensation, therefore,
that He speaks in the Apocalypse, where it
is written in this wise: "These things saith
He, who is, and who was, and who is to
come." 7

"

CHAP. 9.

SPIRIT AND THE

OF THE HOLY
MYSTERY OF THE TRINITY.
16. The divine generation, therefore, of
our Lord, and his human dispensation, having
both been thus systematically disposed and
commended to faith,
8 there is added to our
Confession, with a view to the perfecting of
the faith which we have regarding God, [the
doctrine of] the Holy Spirit, who is not of a
nature inferior 9 to the Father and the Son,
but, so to say, consubstantial and co-eternal:
for this Trinity is one God, not to the effect
that the Father is the same [Person] as the
Son and the Holy Spirit, but to the effect that
the Father is the Father, and the Son is the
Son, and the Holy Spirit is the Holy Spirit;
and this Trinity is one God, according as it
Hear, O Israel, the Lord your
is written,
God is one God." I0 At the same time, if we
be interrogated on the subject of each separately, and if the question be put to us,
Is
the Father God?" we shall reply, "He is
If it be asked whether the Son is
God.''
God, we shall answer to the same effect.
Nor, if this kind of inquiry be addressed to
us with respect to the Holy Spirit, ought we
to affirm in reply that He is anything else
than God; being earnestly on our guard,
this
[however],
merely in the sense in which it is applied to
men, when it is said,
For
of all those who have been made and fashioned
of the Father, through the Son, by the gift of
the Holy Spirit, none are gods according to
is this same Trinity that is
nature.
" For of Him,
signified when an apostle says,
and in Him, and through Him, are
Consequently, although, when we
things."
are interrogated on the subject of each [of
these Persons] severally, we reply that that
particular one regarding whom the question
is asked, whether it be the Father, or the
Son, or the Holy Spirit, is God, no one, notwithstanding this, should suppose that three
Gods are worshipped by us.

against an acceptance of

" Ye are gods."

For it

all

"

"

7 Rev. i. 8.

6 Acts i. 11.
8 Instead of /ideique commendata et diin'tia generatione, etc.,
another, but weakly supported, version is, fide atque commendata
divina, etc., which makes the sense = The faith, therefore, having been systematically disposed, and our Lord's divine generation
and human dispensation having been commended to the understanding, etc.
9 Xon minore natura quavt Pater. The Benedictine editors
suggest minor for minore = not inferior in nature, etc.

10 Deut. vi. 4.

" Ps. Ixxxii. 6.

I2 Rom. xi. 36.

[Chap. IX.

17. Neither is it strange that these things
are said in reference to an ineffable Nature,
when even in those objects which we discern
with the bodily eyes, and judge of by the
bodily sense, something similar holds good.
For take the instance of an interrogation on
the subject of a fountain, and consider how
we are unable then to affirm that the said
fountain is itself the river; and how, when we
are asked about the river, we are as little able
to call it the fountain; and, again, how we
are equally unable to designate the draught,
which comes of the fountain or the river,
either river or fountain.
Nevertheless, in
the case of this trinity we use the name water
[for the.whole]; and when the question is put
regarding each of these separately, we reply
in each several instance that the thing: is
For if I inquire whether it is water
water.
in the fountain, the reply is given that it is
water; and if we ask whether it is water in
the river, no different response is returned;
and in the case of the said draught, no other
answer can possibly be made: and yet, for all
this, we do not speak of these things as three
waters, but as one water. At the same time, of*
course, care must be taken that no one should
conceive of the ineffable substance of that
Majesty merely as he might think of this
visible and material *
fountain, or river, or
For in the case of these latter,
draught.
that water which is at present in the fountain
goes forth into the river, and does not abide
in itself; and when it passes from the river
or from the fountain into the draught, it does
not continue permanently there where it
is
taken from.
Therefore it
is possible here
that the same water may be in view at one
time under the appellation of the fountain,
and at another under that of the river, and
at a third under that of the draught.
But in
the case of that Trinity, we have affirmed it
to be impossible that the Father should be
sometime the Son, and sometime the Holy
just as, in a tree, the root is nothing
Spirit:
else than the root, and the trunk {robur) is
nothing else than the trunk, and we cannot
call the branches anything else than branches;
for, what is
cannot be
called trunk and branches; and the wood
which belongs to the root cannot by any
of transference be now in the root,
sort
and again in the trunk, and yet again in the
branches, but only in the root; since this rule
of designation stands fast, so that the root is
wood, and the trunk is wood, and the branches
are wood, while nevertheless it is not three
woods that are thus spoken of, but only one.

the root

called

1 Corporetim = corporeal.

Or, if these objects have some sort of dissimilarity, so that on account of their difference in strength they may be spoken of, without any absurdity, as three woods; at least
all parties admit the force of the former exnamely, that if three cups be filled
ample,
out of one fountain, they may certainly be
called three cups, but cannot be spoken of as
three waters, but only as one all together.
Yet, at the same time, when asked concerning the several cups, one by one, we may
answer that in each of them by itself there is
water; although in this case no such transference takes place as we were speaking of as
occurring from the fountain into the river.
But these examples in things material (corporalia exetnpla) have been adduced not in
virtue of their likeness to that divine Nature,
but in reference to the oneness which subsists
even in things visible, so that it may be understood to be quite a possibility for three
objects of some sort, not only severally, but
also all together, to obtain one single name;
and that in this way no one may wonder and
think it absurd that we should call the Father
God, the Son God, the Holy Spirit God,
and that nevertheless we should say that there
are not three Gods in that Trinity, but one
God and one substance. 2

18. And, indeed, on this subject of the
Father and the Son, learned and spiritual
men have conducted discussions in many
books, in which, so far as men could do with
men, they have endeavored to introduce an
intelligible account as to how the Father was
not one personally with the Son, and yet the
two were one substantially;
4 and as to what
the Father was individually (proprie), and
what the Son: to wit, that the former was the
Begetter, the latter the Begotten; the former
not of the Son, the latter of the Father: the
former the Beginning of the latter, whence
also He is called the Head of Christ, 5 al6 but
though Christ likewise is the Beginning,
not of the Father; the latter, moreover, the
Image 7 of the former, although in no respect
dissimilar, and although absolutely and without difference equal (om?ii?io et indiffcrcnter
These questions are handled with
cequalis).
greater breadth by those who, in less narrow
limits than ours are at present, seek to set

2 Many mss., however, insert colamus after Deutn in the closing
sentence, sed unum Deu7ii unamque substantia}!:. The sense
then will be = and that nevertheless we should worship in that
Trinity not three Gods, but one God and one substance.
3 Spiritales, for which religiosi = religious, is also sometimes
4 Non unus esset Pater et Filius, sed unum essent =- how the
Father and the Son were not one in person, but were one in essence.

given.

5 1 Cor. xi. 3.
6 In reference probably to John viii. 25, where the Vulgate
gives principium qui et loquor vobis as the literal equivalent for
ai AaAw iir)lv.
the Greek t<]v apxrjy 6,ti

7 Col. 1. 15.

Chap. IX.]

ON FAITH AND THE CREED.

" 2

the

and,

" 3 and,

forth the profession of the Christian faith in
Accordingly, in so far as He is
its totality.
the Son, of the Father received He it that
He is, while that other [the Father] received
not this of the Son; and in so far as He, in
unutterable mercy, in a temporal dispensation took upon Himself the [nature of] man
to wit, the changeable creature
(hominem),
that was thereby to be changed into somemany statements concerning
thing better,
Him are discovered in the Scriptures, which
are so expressed as to have given occasion to
error in the impious intellects of heretics,
with whom the desire to teach takes precedence of that to understand, so that they
have supposed Him to be neither equal with
the Father nor of the same substance.
Such
statements [are meant] as
following:
"For the Father is greater than I;" 1 and,
" The head of the woman is the man, the
Head of the man is Christ, and the Head of
" Then shall He HimChrist is God;
self be subject unto Him that put all things
"
under Him;
I go to my Father and
your Father, my God and your God " 4 together with some others of like tenor. Now
all these have had a place given them, [certainly] not with the object of signifying an
inequality of nature and substance; for to
take them so would be to falsify a different
class of statements, such as, "I and my
Father are one" (unum); s and, "He that
hath seen me hath seen my Father also;" 6
" The Word was God," 7 for He was not
and,
all things were made by
made, inasmuch as
and, "He thought it not robbery
Him;" 8
to be equal with God: *' 9 together with all the
But these
other passages of a similar order.
statements have had a place given them,
partly with a view to that administration of
His assumption of human nature (administrationcm szcscepti hominis), in accordance with
" He emptied Himself:"
which it is said that
not that that Wisdom was changed, since it is
absolutely unchangeable; but that it was His
will to make Himself known in such humble
fashion to men.
Partly then, I repeat, it is
with a view to this administration that those
things have been thus written which the
heretics make the ground of their false allegations; and partly it was with a view to the
consideration that the Son owes to the Father
that which He is,
thereby also certainly
owing this in particular to the Father, to wit,
that He is equal to the same Father, or that
He is His Peer (eidem Patri (Equalis atit par

"

est), whereas the Father owes whatsoever He
is to no one.

19. With respect to the Holy Spirit, however, there has not been as yet, on the part
of learned and distinguished investigators of
the Scriptures, a discussion of the subject full
enough or careful enough to make it possible
for us to obtain an intelligent conception of
what also constitutes His special individuality
in virtue of which special in-
(proprhim):
dividuality it comes to be the case that we
cannot call Him either the Son or the Father,
but only the Holy Spirit; excepting that they
predicate Him to be the Gift of God, so that
we may believe God not to give a gift inferior
At the same time they hold by
to Himself.
this position, namely, to predicate the Holy
Spirit neither' as begotten, like the Son, of
the Father; for Christ is the only one [so begotten]: nor as [begotten] of the Son, like a
Grandson of the Supreme Father: while they
do not affirm Him to owe that which He is
to no one, but [admit Him to owe it] to the
Father, of whom are all things;
lest we
should establish two Beginnings without beginning (ue duo opnstituamus principia is7ie
principid), which would be an assertion at
once most false and most absurd, and one
proper not to the catholic faith, but to the
error of certain heretics."
Some, however,
have gone so far as to believe that the communion of the Father and the Son, and (so
to speak) their Godhead (deitateni), which the
Greeks designate dsorr/s, is the Holy Spirit;
so that, inasmuch as the Father is God and
the Son God, the Godhead itself, in which
they are united with each other,
to wit, the
former by begetting the Son, and the latter
should [thereby]
by cleaving to the Father,
be constituted equal with Him by whom He
This Godhead, then, which
is begotten.
they wish to be understood likewise as the
love and charity subsisting between these
two [Persons], the one toward the other, they
affirm to have received the name of the Holy
And this opinion of theirs they supSpirit.
port by many proofs drawn from the Scriptures; among which we might instance either
For the love of
the passage which says,
God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy
Ghost, who has been given unto us," 13 or
many other proofs texts of a similar tenor:
while they ground their position also upon the
express fact that it is through the Holy Spirit
that we are reconciled unto God; whence
also, when He is called the Gift of God, they
will have it that sufficient indication is of-

"

1 John xiv. 28.
4 John xx. 17.
7 John i. i.
9 Phil. ii. 9. [See R. V.]
10 Or it may be = that the Son owes it to the Father that He is.

3 1 Cor. xv. 28.
6 John xiv. 9.

2 1 Cor. xi. 3.
S John x. 30.

'8 John i. 3.

11 In reference, again, to Manichean errorists.
2 Patri cohccrcndo = by close connection with the Father.
'3 Rom. v. 5.

[Chap. IX.

"

of

fered of the love of God and the Holy Spirit
For we are not reconciled
being identical.
unto Him except through that love in virtue
of which we are also called sons: 1 as we are
no more "under fear, like servants,"
2 belove, when it is made perfect, casteth
cause
out fear;" 3 and [as] "we have received the
liberty, wherein we cry, Abba,
spirit
Father." 4 And inasmuch as, being reconciled and called back into friendship through
love, we shall be able to become acquainted
with all the secret things of God, for this rea-
" He shall
son it is said of the Holy Spirit that
For the same realead you into all truth/' 5
son also, that confidence in preaching the
truth, with which the apostles were filled at
His advent,
is rightly ascribed to love; because diffidence also is assigned'to fear, which
the perfecting of love excludes.
Thus, likewise, the same is called the Gift of God, 7 because no one enjoys that which he knows,
To enjoy the Wisunless he also love it.
dom of God, however, implies nothing else
than to cleave to the same in love (ei dilectione
Neither does any one abide in
cohczrere).
that which he apprehends, but by love; and
accordingly the Holy Spirit
called the
Spirit of sanctity (Spiritus Sanctus), inasmuch
as all things that are sanctioned (sanciuntur)
are sanctioned with a view to their permanence, and there is no doubt that the term
sanctity (sanctitatem) is derived from sanction
Above all, however, that testi-
[a sanciendd).
mony is employed by the upholders of this
" That which
opinion, where it is thus written,
is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is
for God is a
born of the Spirit is spirit;"
I0 For here He speaks of our regeneSpirit."
" which is not, according to Adam, of
ration,
the flesh, but, according to Christ, of the Holy
Wherefore, if in this passage mention
Spirit.
is made of the Holy Spirit, when it is said,
"
For God is a Spirit," they maintain that we
must take note that it is not said,
for the
"
for God is a Spirit;"
Spirit is God," 12
so that the very Godhead of the Father and
the Son is in this passage called God, and
that is the Holy Spirit. To this is added
another testimony which the Apostle John
offers, when he says, "For God is love." 13
1 i John iii. i. The word Dei=o( God, is sometimes added here.
2 Rom. viii. 15.
3 ijohn iv. 18.
* Acts ii. 4.
5 John xvi. 13.
8 Instead of sanciuntur, which is the reading of the mss., some
editions give sanctificantur = all things that are sanctified are

4 Rom. viii. 15.
7 Eph. iii.
7, 8.

9 "

but,

"

is

>J

sanctioned, etc.
9 John iii. 6.
11 Reading, with the mss. and the Benedictine editors, Hie
cnim regenerationem nostrum dicit. Some editions give Hoc
for Hie, and dicunt for dicit = for they say that this expresses
our regeneration.
But various editions and mss.
give Dei for Deus = for the Spirit is of God.

12 Quoniant Spiritus Dens est.

1 John iv. 24.

"

"

" God is love;

For here, in like manner, what he says is not,
" Love is God," I4 but,
so that
the very Godhead is taken to be love. And
with respect to the circumstance that, in that
enumeration of mutually connected objects
which is given when it is said,
All things are
yours, and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is
" The head of the woman is
God's," 15 as also,
the man, the Head of the man is Christ, and
the Head of Christ is God," l6 there is no
mention of the Holy Spirit; this they affirm
to be but an application of the principle that,
in general, the connection itself is not wont
to be enumerated among the things which are
connected with each other.
Whence, also,
those who read with closer attention appear
to recognize the express Trinity likewise in
that passage in which it
For of
Him, and through Him, and in Him, are all
things." 17 " Of Him," as if it meant, of that
One who owes it to no one that He is;
through Him," as if the idea were, through
' in Him," as if it were, in that
a Mediator;
One who holds together, that is, unites by
connecting.

is said,

"

; '

20. Those parties oppose this opinion who
think that the said communion, which we call
either Godhead, or Love, or Charity, is not
a substance.
Moreover, they require the
Holy Spirit to be set forth to them according
to substance; neither do they take it to have
been otherwise impossible for the expression
"God is Love" to have been used, unless
love were a substance.
In this, indeed, they
are influenced by the wont of things of a
For if two bodies are conbodily nature.
nected with each other in such wise as to be
placed in juxtaposition one with the other,
the connection itself is not a body: inasmuch
as when these bodies which had been connected are separated, no such connection certainly is found [any more]; while, at the
same time, it is not understood to have departed, as it were, and migrated, as is the
But men
case with those bodies themselves.
like these should make their heart pure, so
far as they can, in order that they may have
power to see that in the substance of God
there is not anything of such a nature as
would imply that therein substance is one
thing, and that which is accident to substance
(a/iud quod accidat substantias) another1 thing,
and not substance; whereas whatsoever can
These
be taken to be therein is substance.
things, however, can easily be spoken and
believed; but seen, so as to reveal how they are
in themselves, they absolutely cannot be, exFor which reason,
cept by the pure heart.

1 3 1 John iv. 16.
J 4 Here again, instead oldilectio Deus est, we also find dilectio

Dei est = love is of God.

*5 1 Cor. iii. 22, 23.

16 1 Cor. xi. 3.

J 7 Rom. xi. 36.

Chap. X.]

ON FAITH AND THE CREED.

OJ

whether the opinion in question be true, or
something else be the case, the faith ought to
be maintained unshaken, so that we should
call the Father God, the Son God, the Holy
Spirit God, and yet not affirm three Gods,
but hold the said Trinity to be one God;
and again, not affirm these [Persons] to be
different in nature, but hold them to be of
the same substance; and further uphold it,
not as if the Father were sometime the Son,
and sometime the Holy Spirit, but in such
wise that the Father is always the Father,
and the Son always the Son, and the Holy
Neither should
Spirit always the Holy Spirit.
we make any affirmation on the subject of
things unseen rashly, as if we had knowledge,
For these
but [only modestly] as believing.
things cannot be seen except by the heart
made pure; and [even] he who in this life
sees them "
in part," as it has been said, and
"
in an enigma," l cannot secure it that the
person to whom he speaks shall also see
them, if he is hampered by impurities of
"Blessed," however, "are they of a
heart.
pure heart, for they shall see God." 2
This
is the faith on the subject of God our Maker
and Renewer.

21. But inasmuch as love is enjoined upon
us, not only toward God, when it was said,
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy mind;" 3 but also toward our neighbor,
for
thy neigh4 and inasmuch, moreover, as
bor as thyself;"
the faith in question is less fruitful, if it does
not comprehend a congregation and society of
men, wherein brotherly charity may operate;

thou shalt love," saith He,

"

"

CHAP. IO.

OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH, THE REMISSION OF SINS, AND THE RESURRECTION OF
THE FLESH.

Inasmuch, I repeat, as this is the case,
we believe also in the holy Church, [intending thereby] assuredly the catholic
For
both heretics and schismatics style their conBut heretics, in holdgregations churches.
ing false opinions regarding God, do injury
to the faith itself; while schismatics, on the
other hand, in wicked separations break off
from brotherly charity, although they may
Wherefore
believe just what we believe.
neither do the heretics belong to the Church
catholic, which loves God; nor do the schismatics form a part of the same, inasmuch as
it loves the neighbor, and consequently readily
forgives the neighbor's sins, because it prays
that forgiveness may be extended to
itself

1 i Cor. xiii. 12.
4 Luke x. 27.

-' Matt. v.

3 Deut. vi. 5.

by Him who has reconciled us to Himself,
doing away with all past things, and calling
And until we reach the
us to a new life.
perfection of this new life, we cannot be
without sins.
Nevertheless it is a matter of
consequence of what sort those sins may be.
22. Neither ought we only to treat of the difference between sins, but we ought most thoroughly to believe that those things in which
we sin are in no way forgiven us, if we show
ourselves severely unyielding in the matter
of forgiving the sins of others. 5
Thus, then,
we believe also in the remission of sins.

23. And inasmuch as there are three things
of which man consists,
namely, spirit, soul,
and body,
which again are spoken of as two,
because frequently the soul is named along
with the spirit; for a certain rational portion
of the same, of which beasts are devoid, is
called spirit: the principal part in us is the
spirit; next, the life whereby we are united
with the body is called the soul; finally, the
body itself, as it is visible, is the last part in
This "whole creation" {creatura), howus.
"
groaneth and travaileth until now." 6
ever,
Nevertheless, He has given it the first-fruits
of the Spirit, in that it has believed God, and
is now of a good will. 7
This spirit is also
called the mind, regarding which an apostle
speaks thus: "With the mind I serve the
law of God." 8 Which apostle likewise expresses himself thus
in another passage:
"
For God is my witness, whom I serve in
Moreover, the soul, when as
my spirit."
yet it lusts after carnal good things, is called
For a certain part thereof resists 1 *
the flesh.
the Spirit, not in virtue of nature, but in virtue of the custom of sins; whence it is said,
" With the mind I serve the law of God, but
with the flesh the law of sin." And this custom has been turned into a nature, according
to mortal generation, by the sin of the first
man.
Consequently it is also written in this
wise, "And we were sometime by nature the
" that is, of vengeance,
children of wrath,"
through which it has come to pass that we
serve the law of sin. The nature of the soul, .
is made subject
however, is perfect when it
to its own spirit, and when it follows that
spirit as the same follows God.
Therefore
"the animal man 12 receiveth not the things
But the
which are of the Spirit of God." I3
soul is not so speedily subdued to the spirit

6 Rom. viii. 22.

5 Matt. vi. 15.
7 Reading spiritus.

Taking spiritus, the sense might be =
Nevertheless, the spirit hath imparted the first-fruits, in that it has
believed God, and is now of a good will.

8 Rom. vii. 25.
Pars enim ejus quondam
10 Instead of caro nominatur.
reszstit, etc., some good mss. read caro nominatur et resistit, etc.
= is called the tlesh, and resists, etc.

9 Rom. i. 9.

11 Eph. ii. 3.
12 Animalis homo, hterally=the soulisli man.

'3 1 Cor. ii. 14.

33 2

[Chap. X-

unto good action, as is the spirit to God unto
true faith and goodwill; but sometimes its
impetus, whereby it moves downwards into
things carnal and temporal, is more tardily
But inasmuch as this same soul is
bridled.
also made pure, and receives the stability of
its own nature, under the dominance of the
spirit, which is the head for it, which head of
the said soul has again its own head in Christ,
we ought not to despair of the restoration of
the body also to its own proper nature.
But
this certainly will not be effected so speedily
as is the case with the soul; just as the soul,
too, is not restored so speedily as the spirit.
Yet it will take place in the appropriate season, at the last trump, when "the dead shall
rise uncorrupted, and we shall be changed." J
And accordingly we believe also in the resurrection of the flesh, to wit, not merely that
that soul, which at present by reason of carnal affections is called the flesh, is restored;
but that it shall be so likewise with this visible flesh, which is the flesh according to
nature, the name of which has been received
by the soul, not in virtue of nature, but in
reference to carnal affections:
this visible
flesh, then, I say, which is the flesh properly
so called, must without doubt be believed to
For the Apostle
"be destined to rise again.
Paul appears to point to this, as it were, with
his finger, when he says, "This corruptible
For when he
must put on incorruption."
says this, he, as it were, directs his finger
toward it. Now it
is that which is visible
that admits of being pointed out with the
finger; since the soul might also have been
called corruptible, for it is itself corrupted by
vices of manners.
is read,
" and this mortal [must] put on immortality,"
the same visible flesh is signified, inasmuch
as at it ever and anon the finger is thus as it
For the soul also may thus in
were pointed.
like manner be called mortal, even as it
is
designated corruptible in reference to vices
For assuredly it is "the death
of manners.
" 3 which
of the soul to apostatize from God;
is its first sin in Paradise, as it is contained
in the sacred writings.

And when it

24. Rise again, therefore, the body will,
according to the Christian faith, which is incapable of deceiving. And if this appears
incredible to any one, [it is because] he looks
simply to what the flesh is at present, while
he fails to consider of what nature it shall be
For at that time of angelic change
hereafter.
it will no more be flesh and blood, but only

1 1 Cor. xv. 52.
3 The text gives, Mors guippe animee est apostatare a Deo.
The reference, perhaps, is to Ecclus. x. 12, where the Vulgate has,
initium supcrbiae hominis, apostatare a Deo.

2 i Cor. xv. 53.

"

"

flesh

For when the apostle speaks of the
body. 4
" There is one flesh of cattle,
flesh, he says,
another of birds, another of fishes, another
of creeping things: there are also both celestial bodies and terrestrial bodies." 5 Now
what he has said here is not
celestial flesh,"
but
' both celestial bodies and terrestrial
For all
bodies."
is also body; but
every body is not also flesh.
In the first
instance, [for example, this holds good] in
the case of those terrestrial bodies, inasmuch
as wood is body, but not flesh.
In the case
of man, again, or in that of cattle, we have
both body and flesh.
In the case of celestial
bodies, on the other hand, there is no flesh,
but only those simple and lucent bodies which
the apostle designates spiritual, while some
call them ethereal. And consequently, when
Flesh and blood shall not inherit
he says,
the kingdom of God," 6 that does not contradict the resurrection of the flesh; but the
sentence predicates what will be the nature
of that hereafter which at present is flesh and
And* if any one refuses to believe
blood.
that the flesh is capable of being changed into
the sort of nature thus indicated, he must be
For if you
led on, step by step, to this faith.
inquire of him whether earth is capable of
being changed into water, the nearness of the
thing will make it not seem incredible to him.
Again, if you inquire whether water is capable
of being changed into air, he replies that this
also is not absurd, for the elements are near
each other. And if, on the subject of the
air, it is asked whether that can be changed
into an ethereal, that is, a celestial body, the
simple fact of the nearness at once convinces
him of the possibility of the thing.
But if,
then, he concedes that through such gradais quite a possible thing that earth
tions it
should be changed into an ethereal body, why
does he refuse to believe, when that will of
God, too, enters in addition, whereby a human body had power to walk upon the waters,
that the same change is capable of being effected with the utmost rapidity, precisely in
" in the twinkling
accordance with the saying,
of an eye," 7 and without any such gradations,
even as, according to common wont, smoke is
changed into flame with marvellous quickFor our flesh assuredly is of earth.
ness ?
But philosophers, on the ground of whose
arguments opposition is for the most part offered to the resurrection of the flesh, so far
as in these they assert that no terrene body
can possibly exist in heaven, yet concede that
any kind of body may be converted and

4 Augustin refers to this statement in the

from the Retractations in the Introductory Notice above.

passage quoted

5 1 Cor. xv. 39, 40.

6 1 Cor. xv. 50.

7 1 Cor. xv. 52.

Chap. X.]

ON FAITH AND THE CREED.

1 1 1

changed into every [other] sort of body. And
when this resurrection of the body has taken
place, being set free then from the condition
of time, we shall fully enjoy eternal life in
ineffable love and steadfastness, without corthen shall be brought to
ruption.
pass the saying which is written, Death is
Where is, O death,
swallowed up in victory.

For "

1 Instead of a tevtporis conditione literati, oeterna vita
ineffabili caritate atgue stabilitate sine corruptioneperfruemur,
several mss. read, corpus a temporis conditione liberatum ceterna
7'ita ineffabili caritate perfruetur = the body, set free from the
condition of time, shall fully enjoy eternal life in ineffable love.

thy sting? Where is, O death, thy contention?" 2

25. This is the faith which in few words is
given in the Creed to Christian novices, to
And these few words are
be held by them.
known to the faithful, to the end that in believing they may be made subject to God;
that being made subject, they may rightly
live; that in rightly living, they may make
the heart pure; that with the heart made
pure, they may understand that which they
believe.

2 1 Cor. xv. 54, 55.

ST. AUGUSTIN:

CONCERNING

FAITH OF THINGS NOT SEEN
[DE FIDE RERUM QXJJE NON VIDENTUR.]

TRANSLATED BY

REV. C. L CORNISH, M.A.

CONCERNING

FAITH OF THINGS NOT SEEN.
[DE FIDE RERUM QU^E NON VIDENTUR.]

This tract was thought spurious by some, but is known to be St. Augustin's by his
It seems to have been written after 399,

10; for in that year Honorius enacted laws against them.

mention of it in Ep. ccxxxi. ad Darium Comitem.
from what is said about Idols,
From Bened. Ed.

The reader of Butler's Analogy will recognise many similar turns of thought.

1. There are those who think that the
Christian religion is what we should smile at,
rather than hold fast, for this reason, that, in
it, not what may be seen, is shown, but men
are commanded faith of things which are not
seen. We therefore, that we may refute
these, who seem to themselves through prudence to be unwilling to believe what they
cannot see, although we are not able to show
unto human sight those divine things which
we believe, yet do show unto human minds
that even those things which are not seen are
to be believed. And first they are to be admonished, (whom folly hath so made subject
to their carnal eyes, as that, whatsoever they
see not through them, they think not that
they are to believe,) how many things they
not only believe but also know, which cannot
Which things being
be seen by such eyes.
without number in our mind itself, (the nature of which mind is incapable of being seen,)
not to mention others, the very faith whereby
we believe, or the thought whereby we know
that we either believe any thing, or believe
not, being as it is altogether alien from the
sight of those eyes; what so naked, so clear,
what so certain is there to the inner eyes of
our minds ? How then are we not to believe
what we see not with the eyes of the body,
whereas, either that we believe, or that we

believe not, in a case where we cannot apply
the eyes of the body, we without any doubt
see?

2- But, say they, those things which are in
the mind, in that we can by the mind itself
discern them, we have no need to know
through the eyes of- the body; but those
things, which you say unto us that we should
believe, you neither point to without, that
through the eyes of the body we may know
them; nor are they within, in our own mind,
that by exercising thought we may see them.
And these things they so say, as though any
one would be bidden to believe, if that, which
is believed, he could already see set before
Therefore certainly ought we to believe
him.
certain temporal things also, which we see not,
that we may merit 1 to see eternal things. also,
which we believe.
But, whosoever thou art
who wilt not believe save what thou seest, lo,
bodies that are present thou seest with the
eyes of the body, wills and thoughts of thine
own that are present, because they are in
thine own mind, thou seest by the mind itself; tell me, I pray thee, thy friend's will toFor
wards thee by what eyes seest thou ?
no will can be seen by the eyes of the body.
What ? see you in your own mind this also

1 Mereatnur,

which is going on in the mind of another?
But if you see it not, how do you repay in
turn the good will of your friend, if what you
cannot see, you believe not ?
Will you haply
say that you see the will of another through
Therefore you will see acts, and
his works ?
hear words, but, concerning your friend's
will, that which^cannot be seen and heard you
For that will is not color or figwill believe.
ure, so as to be thrown upon the eyes; or
sound or strain, so as to glide into the ears;
it your own, so as to be pernor indeed is
ceived by the motion ' of your own heart.
It
remains therefore that, being neither seen,
nor heard, nor beheld within thyself, it be
believed, that thy life be not left deserted
without any friendship, or affection bestowed
upon thee be not repaid by thee in return.
Where then is that which thou saidest, that
thou oughtest not to believe, save what thou
sawest either outwardly in the body, or inLo, out of thine own
wardly in the heart ?
heart, thou believest an heart not thine own;
and lendest thy faith, where thou dost not
direct the glance of thy body or of thy mind.
Thy friend's face thou discernest by thy own
body, thy own faith thou discernest by thine
own mind; but thy friend's faith is not loved
by thee, unless there be in thee in return that
faith, whereby thou mayest believe that which
Although a man may
in him thou seest not.
also deceive by feigning good will, and hiding
malice: or, if he have no thought to do harm,
yet by expecting some benefit from thee,
feigns, because he has not, love.

3. But you say, that you therefore believe
your friend, whose heart you cannot see, because you have proved him in your trials, and
have come to know of what manner of spirit
he was towards you in your dangers, wherein
Seemeth it therefore to
he deserted you not.
you that we must wish for our own affliction,
that our friend's love towards us may be
proved ? And shall no man be happy in most
sure friends, unless he shall be unhappy
through adversity ? so that, forsooth, he enjoy
not the tried love of the other, unless he be
racked by pain and fear of his own ? And
how in the having of true friends can that
happiness be wished for, and not rather
feared, which nothing save unhappiness can
put to the proof ? And yet it is true that a
friend may be had also in prosperity, but
proved more surely in adversity.
But assuredly in order to prove him, neither would you
commit yourself to dangers of your own, unless you believed; and thus, when you commit yourself in order to prove, you believe

1 Affectione.

For surely, if we ought
before you prove.
not to believe things not seen,
2 since indeed
we believe the hearts of our friends, and that,
not yet surely proved; and, after we shall
have proved them good by our own ills, even
then we believe rather than see their good
will towards us: except that so great is faith,
that, not unsuitably, we judge that we see,
with certain eyes of it, that which we believe,
whereas we ought therefore to believe, because we cannot see.

4. If this faith be taken away from human
affairs, who but must observe how great disorder in them, and how fearful confusion
For who will be loved by any
must follow?
with mutual affection, (being that the loving 3
itself is invisible,) if what I see not, I ought
Therefore will the whole of
not to believe ?
friendship perish, in that it consists not save
For what of it will it be able
of mutual love.
to receive from any, if nothing of it shall be
believed to be shown ?
Further, friendship
perishing, there will be preserved in the mind
the bonds neither of marriages, nor of kindreds and relations; because in these also
there is assuredly a friendly union of sentiment.
Spouse therefore will not be able to
love spouse in turn, inasmuch as each believes not the other's love, because the love
Nor will they long to
itself cannot be seen.
have sons, who they believe not will make
And if these be born and
them a return.
grow up, much less will the parents themselves love their own children, whose love
towards themselves in those children's hearts
they will not see, it being invisible; if
it be
not praiseworthy faith, but blameable rashness, to believe those things which are not
seen. Why should I now speak of the other
connections, of brothers, sisters, sons-in-law,
and fathers-in-law, and of them who are
joined together by any kindred or affinity, if
love is uncertain, and the will suspected, that
of parents by sons, and that of sons by parents, whilst due benevolence is not rendered;
because neither is it thought to be due, that
which is not seen in another not being thought
Further, if this caution be not a
to exist.
mark of ability,
4 but be hateful, wherein we
believe not that we are loved, because we see
not the love of them who love, and repay not
them, unto whom we think not that we owe a
return; to that degree are human affairs
thrown into disorder, if what we see not we
believe not, as to be altogether and utterly
overthrown, if we believe no wills of men,

2 The text seems corrupt. A MS. in Brasenose Library reads,
" si non vis rebus credere.''''
If we read "rSV non vis rebus non
visis credere" the sense will be, "For certainly if you will not have
us believe things unseen, we ought not (to believe this), since" etc.

3 Dilectio.

4 Ingeniosa.

CONCERNING FAITH OF THINGS NOT SEEN.

which assuredly we cannot see.
I omit to
mention in how many things they, who find
fault with us because we believe what we see
not, believe report or history; or concerning
places where they have not themselves been;
and say not, we believe not, because we have
not seen.
Since if they say this, they are
obliged to confess that their own parents are
not surely known to them: because on this
point also they have believed the accounts
of others telling of it, who yet are unable to
show it, because it is a thing already past;
retaining themselves no sense of that time,
and yet yielding assent without any doubting
to others speaking of that time: and unless
this be done, there must of necessity be incurred a faithless impiety towards parents,
whilst we are, as it were, showing a rashness
of belief in those things which we cannot see.
Since therefore, if we believe not those things
which we cannot see, human society itself,
through concord perishing, will not stand;
how much more is faith to be applied to divine things, although they be not seen; failing the application of which, it
is not the
friendship of some men or other, but the
very chiefest bond of piety
1 that is violated,
so as for the chiefest misery to follow.

"

5. But you will say, the good will of a
friend towards me, although I cannot see it,
yet can I trace it out by many proofs; but
you, what things you will us to believe not
being seen, you have no proofs whereby to
In the mean time it is no slight
show them.
thing, that you confess that by reason of the
clearness of certain proofs, some things, even
such as are not seen, ought to be believed:
for even thus it is agreed, that not all things
which are not seen, are not to be believed;
and that saying,
that we ought not to believe
things which we see not," falls to the ground,
But they are much
cast away, and refuted.
deceived, who think that we believe in Christ
For
without any proofs concerning Christ.
what are there clearer proofs
than those
things, which we now see to have been foreWherefore do ye, who
told and fulfilled ?
think that there are no proofs why ye ought
to
believe concerning Christ those things
which ye have not seen, give heed to what
The Church herself addresses
things ye see.
you out of the mouth of a mother's love:
whom ye view with wonder throughout the
whole world, bearing fruit and increasing, was
not once such as ye now behold me."
But,
'' In thy Seed shall all nations be blessed." 2
When God blessed Abraham, He gave the
promise of me; for throughout all nations in

"

I,

the blessing of Christ am I shed abroad.
That Christ is the Seed of Abraham, the
order of successive generations bears witness.
Shortly to sum up which, Abraham begat
Isaac, Isaac begat Jacob, Jacob begat twelve
sons, of whom sprung the people Israel.
For
Jacob himself was called
israel. Among
these twelve sons he begat Judah, whence
the Jews have their name, of whom was born
the Virgin Mary, who bore Christ.
And, lo,
in Christ, that is, in the seed of Abraham,
that all the nations are blessed, ye see and
are amazed: and do ye still fear to believe in
Him, in Whom ye ought rather to have feared
not to believe ? What ? doubt ye, or refuse
ye to believe, the travail of a Virgin, whereas
ye ought rather to believe that it was fitting
that so God should be born Man.
For this
also receive ye to have been foretold by the
Prophet; 3 "Behold, a Virgin shall conceive
in the womb, and shall bring forth a Son, and
they shall call His Name Emmanuel, which
is, being interpreted, God with us."
Ye will
not therefore doubt of a Virgin bringing forth,
if ye be willing to believe of a God being
born; leaving not the governance of the world,
and coming unto men in the flesh; unto His
Mother bringing fruitfulness, not taking away
For thus behoved it that He
maidenhood.
should be born as Man, albeit 4 He was ever 5
God, by which birth He might become a God
Hence again the Prophet says conunto us.
Thy Throne, O God, is for
cerning Him,
ever and ever; a sceptre of right, the sceptre
of Thy Kingdom. Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore God, Thy
God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above Thy fellows." 6
This anointing is
spiritual, wherewith God anointed God, the
Father, that is, the Son: whence called from
Chrism," that is, from the anointing, we
the
know Him as Christ.
I am the Church, concerning whom it is said unto Him in the same
Psalm, and what was future foretold as al-
" There stood at Thy right hand
ready done;
the Queen, in a vesture of gold, in raiment
of divers colors;" that is, in the mystery of
wisdom, "adorned
with divers tongues."
There it said unto me, "Hearken, O daughter,
and see, and incline thine ear, and forget thy
own people and thy father's house: for the
King hath desired thy beauty: seeing that He
is the Lord thy God: and the daughters of
Tyre shall worship Him with gifts, thy face
shall all the rich of the people entreat.
All
the glory of that King's daughter is within,
in fringes of gold, with raiment of divers
There shall be brought unto the
colors.

"

"

1 "

Religio," (toward parents).

2 Gen. xxii. 18.

3 Is. vii. 14; Matt. i. 23.
4 mss. "si" "if."

5 Semper.

6 Ps. xlv. 6-17.

King the maidens after her; her companions
shall be brought unto Thee.
They shall be
brought with joy and gladness, they shall be
brought into the Temple of the King.
Instead of thy fathers, there are born unto thee
sons, thou shalt set them as princes over the
whole earth.
They shall be mindful of thy
name, even from generation to generation.
Therefore shall the people confess unto thee
for ever, and for ever and ever.

"

"

6. If this Queen ye see not, now rich also
If she see not that fulwith royal progeny.
filled which she heard to have been promised,
she, unto whom it was said, "Hear, O
daughter, and see."
If she hath not left the
ancient rites of the world, she, unto whom it
Forget thy own people and thy
was said,
Father's house."
If she confesses not every
where Christ the Lord, she, unto whom it was
said, "The King hath desired thy beauty,
for He is the Lord thy God."
If she sees
not the cities of the nations pour forth prayers
and offer gifts unto Christ, concerning Whom
it was said unto her, "There shall worship
Flim the daughters of Tyre with gifts."
If
the pride also of the rich is not laid aside,
and they do not entreat help of the Church,
unto whom it was said,
Thy face shall all
If He acthe rich of the people entreat."
knowledges not the
King's daughter, unto
" Our Father,
Whom she was bidden to say,
Who art in Heaven;" 1 and in her saints in
the inner man she is not renewed from day to
day, concerning whom it was said, "All the
glory of that King's daughter is within:" although she strike upon the eyes of them also
that are without with the blaze 2 of the fame
of her preachers, in diversity of tongues, as
"in fringes of gold, and raiment of divers
If there be not, now that His fame
colors."
is spread abroad in every place by His good
odor, 3 virgins also brought unto Christ to be
consecrated, of Whom it is said, and to Whom
it is said, "There shall be brought unto the
King the virgins after her, her companions
shall be brought unto Thee." And that they
might not seem to be brought like captives,
into some, as it were, prison, he says,
They
shall be brought in joy and gladness, they
shall be brought into the King's temple."
If
she brings not forth sons, that of them she
may have, as it were, fathers, whom she may
appoint unto herself every where as rulers,
she, unto whom it
is said, "Instead of thy
fathers there are born unto thee sons, thou
shalt set them as princes over the whole
unto whose prayers their mother both
earth:

"

"

1 Matt. vi. 9; 2 Cor. iv. 16.
2 Ben. con/, "fulgente" for "fulgentes."
3 Song of Sol. i. 3.

"

ever."

preferred and made subject, commends herself, "They shall be mindful of thy name,
even from generation to generation."
If, by
reason of the preaching of those same fathers,
wherein they have without ceasing made mention of her name, there are not so great multitudes in her gathered together, and without
end in their own tongues unto her confess the
praise of grace, unto whom it is said,
Therefore shall the people confess unto thee for
ever, and for ever and
If these
things are not so shown to be clear, as that
the eyes of enemies find not in what direction
to turn aside, where the same clearness strikes
them not, so as by it to be obliged to confess
what is evident: you perhaps assert with reason, that no proofs are shown to you, by seeing which you may believe those things also
which you see not.
But if those things, which
you see, both have been foretold long before,
and are so clearly fulfilled;
if the truth itself
makes itself clear to you, by effects 4 going
before and following after, O remnant of unbelief, that ye may believe the things which
you see not, blush at those things which ye see.
7. "Give heed unto me," the Church says
unto you; give heed unto me, whom ye see,
For the
although to see ye be unwilling.
faithful, who were in those times in the land
of Judaea, were present at, and learnt as
present, Christ's wonderful birth of a virgin,
and His passion, resurrection, ascension; all
His divine words and deeds.
These things
ye have not seen, and therefore ye refuse to
Therefore behold these things, fix
believe.
your eyes on these things, these things which
ye see reflect on, which are not told you as
things past, nor foretold you as things future,
What?
but are shown you as things present.
seemeth it to you a vain or a light thing, and
think you it to be none, or a little, divine
miracle, that in the name of One Crucified
Ye saw not
the whole human race runs ?
what was foretold and fulfilled concerning the
human birth of Christ,
Behold, a Virgin
shall conceive in the womb, and shall bear a
Son;" 5 but you see the Word of God which
was foretold and fulfilled unto Abraham,
In
thy seed shall all nations be blessed." 6 Ye
saw not what was foretold concerning the
wonderful works of Christ, "Come ye, and
see the works of the Lord, what wonders He
hath set upon the earth:" 7 but ye see that
which was foretold, "The Lord said unto
Me, My Son art Thou, I have this day begotten Thee; demand of Me and I will give

"

"

4 The Prophecy might be called an "
"

ment; or read " verbis" for
fore and effects following after."
Aug. on Ps. 45.
5 Is. vii. 14.

"

6 Gen. xxii. 18.

71061s,"

effect" as well as its fulfillclear by words going beFor further illustration see St.

7 Ps. xlvi. 8.

CONCERNING FAITH OF THINGS NOT SEEN.

"

Thee nations as Thy inheritance, and as Thy
possession the bounds of the earth." 1 Ye
saw not that which was foretold and fulfilled
concerning the Passion of Christ,
They
pierced My hands and My feet, they numbered all My bones; but they themselves regarded and beheld Me; they divided among
them My garments, and upon My vesture
2 but ye see that which
they cast the lot;"
was in the same Psalm foretold, and now is
clearly fulfilled; "All the ends of the earth
shall remember and be turned unto the Lord,
and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship in His sight;
for the kingdom is the
Lord's, and He shall rule over the nations." 3
Ye saw not what was foretold and fulfilled
concerning the Resurrection of Christ, the
Psalm speaking, in His Person, first concerning His betrayer and persecutors: "They
went forth out of doors, and spake together:
against Me whispered all My enemies, against
Me thought they evil for Me;" they set in
an unrighteous word against Me. 4
order
Where, to show that they availed nothing by
slaying Him Who was about to rise again,
" What? will not He, that
He adds and says;
sleeps, add this, that He rise again?"
And
a little after, when He had foretold, by means
of the same prophecy, concerning His betrayer himself, that which is written in the
" He that did eat of My bread,
Gospel also,
enlarged his heel upon Me," 5 that is, trampled
" But
Me under foot: He straightway added,
do Thou, O Lord, have mercy upon Me, and
raise Thou Me up again, and I shall repay
This was fulfilled, Christ slept and
them."
awoke, that is, rose again: Who through the
same prophecy in another Psalm says,
slept and took my rest; and I rose again, for
the Lord will uphold Me.'* 6
But this ye saw
not, but ye see His Church, concerning whom
is written in like manner, and fulfilled,
"O Lord My God, the nations shall come
unto Thee from the extremity of the earth
and shall say, Truly our fathers worshipped
lying images, and there is not in them any
profit." 7 This certainly, whether ye will or no,
ye behold; even although ye yet believe, that
there either is, or was, in those idols some
profit; yet certainly unnumbered peoples of
the nations, after having left, or cast away,
or broken in pieces such like vanities, ye have
heard say, "Truly our fathers worshipped
lying images, and there is not in them any
profit; shall a man make gods, and, lo, they
" 8 Nor think that it was foreare no gods ?
told that the nations should come unto some

"

it

1 Ps. ii. 7, 8; Heb. i. 5 ; v. 5; Acts. xiii. 33.
2 Ps. xxii. 16, 17, 18; John xix. 23, 24.
3 Ps. xxii. 27, 28.
6 Ps. iv. 8.

4 Ps. xli. 6-8.
7 Jer. xvi. 19.

5 Ps. xli. 9, 10.
8 Jer. xvi. 19, 20.

" Unto
one place of God, in that it was said,
Thee shall the nations come from the extremity of the earth."
Understand, if you
can, that unto the God of the Christians, Who
is the Supreme and True God, the peoples of
the nations come, not by walking but by beFor the same thing was by another
lieving.
" The Lord," saith he,
prophet thus foretold,
"
shall prevail against them, and shall utterly
destroy all the gods of the nations of the
earth: and all the isles of the nations shall
worship Him, each man from his place." 9
Whereas the one says, "Unto Thee all
nations shall come;" this the other says,
"
They shall worship Him, each man from his
place." Therefore they shall come unto Him,
not departing from their own place, because
believing in Him they shall find Him in their
Ye saw not what was foretold and
hearts.
fulfilled concerning the ascension of Christ;
"Be Thou exalted above the Heavens, O
" I0 but ye see what follows immediately
God;
after, "And above all the earth Thy Glory."
Those things concerning Christ already done
and past, all of them ye have not seen; but
these things present in His Church ye deny
Both things we point out to
not that ye see.
you as foretold; but the fulfillment of both
we are therefore unable to point out for you
to see, because we cannot bring back into
sight things past.

8. But as the wills of friends, which are
not seen, are believed through tokens which
are seen; thus the Church, which is now seen,
is, of all things which are not seen, but which
are shown forth in those writings wherein
itself also is foretold, an index of the past,
and a herald of the future.
Because both
things past, which cannot now be seen, and
things present which cannot be seen all of
them, at the time at which they were foretold,
no one of these could then be seen.
Therefore, since they have begun to come to pass
as they were foretold, from those things which
have come to pass unto those which are coming to pass, those things which were foretold
concerning Christ and the Church have run
on in an ordered series: unto which series
these pertain concerning the day of Judgment, concerning the resurrection of the dead,
concerning the eternal damnation of the ungodly with the devil, and concerning the
eternal recompense of the godly with Christ,
things which, foretold in like manner, are yet
to come. Why therefore should we not believe the first and the last things which we
see not, when we have, as witnesses of both,
the things between, which we see, and in the
books of the Prophets either hear or read both

9 Zeph. ii. 11.

10 Ps. cviii. 5.

the first things, and the things between, and
the last things, foretold before they came to
Unless haply unbelieving men judge
pass ?
those things to have been written by Christians, in order that those things which they
already believed might have greater weight
of authority, if they should be thought to
have been promised before they came.

9. If they suspect this, let them examine
* of our enemies the Jews.
carefully the copies
There let them read those things of which
we have made mention, foretold concerning
Christ in Whom we believe, and the Church
whom we discern from the toilsome beginning of faith even unto the eternal blessedness of the kingdom.
But, whilst they read,
let them not wonder that they, whose are the
books, understand not by reason of the darkFor that they would not
ness of enmity.
understand was foretold beforehand by the
same Prophets; which it behoved should be
fulfilled in like manner as the rest, and that
by the secret and just judgment of God a
due punishment should be rendered to their
He indeed, Whom they crucified,
deserts.
and unto Whom they gave gall and vinegar,
although when hanging upon the Tree, by
reason of those whom He had been about to
lead forth from darkness into light, He said
unto the Father, "Forgive them, for they
know not what they do;" 2
yet by reason of
those whom through more hidden causes He
had been about to desert, by the Prophet so
"
They gave Me gall
long before foretold,
for My meat, and in My thirst they gave Me
vinegar to drink; let their table become a
snare before them, and a recompense, and a
stumbling-block: let their eyes be darkened
that they see not, and ever bow Thou down
Thus, having with them the
their back." 3
clearest testimonies of our cause, they walk
round about with eyes darkened, that by
their means those testimonies may be proved,
wherein they themselves are disapproved.
Therefore was it brought to pass, that they
should not be so blotted out, as that this
same sect should altogether exist not: but it
was scattered abroad upon the earth, in order
that, carrying with it the prophecies of the
grace conferred upon us, more surely to convince unbelievers, it might every where profit
And this very thing which I assert, reus.
ceive ye after what manner it was prophesied
of:
lest at any
time they forget Thy law, but scatter them
Therefore they
abroad in Thy might." 4
were not slain, in that they forgot not those
things which were read and heard among

Slay them not," saith He,

"

"

For if they were altogether to forget,
them.
albeit they understand not, the Holy Scriptures, they would be slain in the Jewish ritual
itself; because, when the Jews should know
nothing of the Law and of the Prophets, they
would be unable to
Therefore
they were not slain, but scattered abroad; in
order that, although they should not have in
faith, whence they might be saved; yet they
should retain in their memory, whence we
might be helped; in their books our supporters, in their hearts our enemies, in their
copies our witnesses.

profit

us.

10. Although, even if there went before
no testimonies concerning Christ and the
Church, whom ought it not to move unto
belief, that the Divine brightness hath on a
sudden shone on the human race, when we
see, (the false gods now abandoned, and their
images every where broken in pieces, their
temples overthrown or changed into other
uses, and so many vain rites plucked out by
the roots from the most inveterate usage of
men,) the One True God invoked by all?
And that this hath been brought to pass by
One Man, by men mocked, seized, bound,
scourged, smitten with the palms of the hand,
reviled, crucified, slain: His disciples, (whom
He chose common men, 5 and unlearned, and
fishermen, and publicans, that by their means
His teaching might be set forth,) proclaiming
His Resurrection, His Ascension, which they
asserted that they had seen, and being filled
with the Holy Ghost, sounded forth
this
Gospel, in all tongues which they had not
learned. And of them who heard them, part
believed, part, believing not, fiercely withThus while they
stood them who preached.
were faithful even unto death for the truth,
strove not by returning evil, but by enduring,
overcame not by killing, but by dying; thus
was the world changed unto this religion,
thus unto this Gospel were the hearts of mortals turned, of men and women, of small and
great, of learned and unlearned, of wise and
foolish, of mighty and weak, of noble and
ignoble, of high and low, and throughout all
nations the Church shed abroad so increased,
that even against the Catholic faith
itself
there arises not any perverse sect, any kind
of error, which is found so to oppose itself to
Christian truth, as that it affect not and go
not about to glory in the name of Christ:
which very error would not be suffered to
spring up throughout the earth, were it not
that the very gainsaying exercised an wholesome discipline. How 6 would The Crucified
have availed so greatly, had He not been God

1 Codices.
3 Ps. lxix. 21-23.

2 Luke xxiii. 34.
4 Ps. lix. 11.

5 Idiotas.

6 Lit.

" when.

CONCERNING FAITH OF THINGS NOT SEEN.

that took upon Him Man, even if He had
through the Prophet foretold no such things
But when now this so great mysto come?
tery of godliness hath had its prophets and
heralds going before, by whose divine voices
it was afore proclaimed; and when it hath
come in such manner as it was afore proclaimed, who is there so mad as to assert that
the Apostles lied concerning Christ, of Whom
they preached that He was come in such
manner as the Prophets foretold afore that
He should
come, which Prophets were not
true things to
silent as to
concerning
the Apostles themselves ?
concerning
There is neither speech
these they had said,
nor language, whereof their voices are not
heard; their sound went out into all the earth,
and their words unto the ends of the world." 1
And this at any rate we see fulfilled in the
world, although we have not yet seen Christ
in the flesh. Who therefore, unless blinded
by amazing madness, or hard and steeled by
amazing obstinacy, would be unwilling to put
faith in the sacred Scriptures, which have
foretold the faith of the whole world ?

come
For

"

ii. But you, beloved, who possess this
faith, or who have begun now newly to have
it, let it be nourished and increase in you.
For as things temporal have come, so long

i Ps. xix. 3, 4.

j

before foretold, so will things eternal also
Nor let them
come, which are promised.
deceive you, either the vain heathen, or the
false Jews, or the deceitful heretics, or also
within the Catholic (Church) itself evil Christians, enemies by so much the more hurtful,
as they are the more within us.
For, lest on
this subject also the weak should be troubled,
divine prophecy hath not been silent, where in
the Song of Songs the Bridegroom speaking
unto the Bride, that is, Christ the Lord unto
the Church, saith, "As a lily in the midst of
thorns, so is my best Beloved 2 in the midst of
the daughters." 3 He said not, in the midst
of them that are without; but,
in the midst
of daughters. Whoso hath ears to hear, let
him hear: " 4 and whilst the net which is cast
into the sea, 5 and gathers together all kinds
of fishes, as saith the holy Gospel, is being
drawn unto the shore, that is, unto the end
of the world, let him separate himself from
heart, not in body; by
the evil fishes, in
changing evil habits, not by breaking sacred
nets; lest they who now seem being approved
to be mingled with the reprobate, find, not
6 when they
life, but punishment everlasting,
shall begin on the shore to be separated.

"

- Proximo..
4 Matt. xiii. 9.
6 Some mss.

" that they &c. may find not punishment, but life.

3 Song of Sol. ii. 2.
5 Matt. xiii. 47-50.

ST. AUGUSTIN:

ON

THE PROFIT OF BELIEVING.

[DE UTILITATE CREDENDL]

TRANSLATED BY

REV. C. L. CORNISH. M.A

ON

THE PROFIT OF BELIEVING.
[DE UTILITATE CREDENDL]

,

Retract, i. cap. 14. Moreover now at Hippo-Regius as Presbyter I wrote a book o?i the
Profit of Believing, to a friend of mine who had been taken in by the Manichees, and whom
I knew to be still held in that error, and to deride the Catholic school of Faith, in that men
were bid believe, but not taught what was truth by a most certain method.
In this book I
" Si mihi Honor ate, unum atque idem videretar
said, &c.
"

This book begins thus,

*.

*

*

esse.

St. Augustin enumerates his book on the Profit of Believing first amongst those he
wrote as Presbyter, to which order he was raised at Hippo about the beginning of the year
The person for whom he wrote had been led into error by himself, and appears to
391.
have been recovered from it, at least if he is the same who wrote to St. Augustin from Carthage
about 412, proposing several questions, and to whom St. Augustin wrote his 140th Epistle.
Cassiodorus calls him a Presbyter, though at that time he was not baptized.
In Ep. 83, St.
Towards the end of his
Augustin speaks of the death of another Honoratus, a Presbyter.
life he also wrote his 228th Epistle to a Bishop of Thabenna of the same name.

(Betted. Ed.)

The remarks in the Retractations are given in notes to the passages where they occur.

1. If, Honoratus, a heretic, and a man
trusting heretics seemed to me one and the
same, I should judge it my duty to remain
silent both in tongue and pen in this matter.
But now, whereas there is a very great difference between these two: forasmuch as he, in
my opinion, is an heretic, who, for the sake
of some temporal advantage, and chiefly for
the sake of his own glory and pre-eminence,
either gives birth to, or follows, false and new
opinions; but he, who trusts men of this kind,
is a man deceived by a certain imagination of
This being the case, I have
truth and piety.
not thought it my duty to be silent towards
you, as to my opinions on the finding and
retaining of truth: with great love of which,
as you know, we have burned from our very
earliest youth: but it is a thing far removed
from the minds of vain men, who, having too

far advanced and fallen into these corporeal
things, think that there is nothing else than
what they perceive by those five well-known
reporters of the body; and what impressions 1
and images they have received from these,
they carry over with themselves, even when
they essay to withdraw from the senses; and
by the deadly and most deceitful rule of these
think that they measure most rightly the unNothing is more
speakable recesses of truth.
easy, my dearest friend, than for one not only
to say, but also to think, that he hath found
out the truth; but how difficult it is in reality,
you will perceive, I trust, from this letter of
mine. And that this may profit you, or at
any rate may in no way harm you, and also
all, into whose hands it shall chance to come,

1 Piagas.

4 8

I have both prayed, and do pray, unto God;
and I hope that it will be so, forasmuch as " I
am fully conscious that I have undertaken to
write it, in a pious and friendly spirit, not as
aiming at vain reputation, or trifling display.
2. It is then my purpose to prove to you,
if I can, that the Manichees profanely and
rashly inveigh against those, who, following
the authority of the Catholic Faith, before
that they are able to gaze upon that Truth,
which the pure mind beholds, are by believing forearmed, and prepared for God Who is
about to give them light.
For you know,
Honoratus, that for no other reason we fell
in with such men, than because they used to
say, that, apart from all terror of authority,
by pure and simple reason, they would lead
within to God, and set free from all error
those who were willing to be their hearers.
For what else constrained me, during nearly
nine years, spurning the religion which had
been set in me from a child by my parents,
to be a follower and diligent hearer of those
men, 2 save that they said that we are alarmed
by superstition, and are commanded to have
faith before reason, but that they urge no one
to have faith, without having first discussed
and made clear the truth? Who would not
be enticed by such promises, especially the
mind of a young man desirous of the truth,
and further a proud and talkative mind by
discussions of certain learned men in the
school ? such as they then found me, disdainful forsooth as of old wives' fables, and deto grasp and drink in, what they
sirous
promised, the open and pure Truth ?
But
what reason, on the other hand, recalled me,
not to be altogether joined to them, so that I
continued in that rank which they call of
Hearers, so that I resigned not the hope and
business of this world; save that I noticed
that they also are rather eloquent and full in
refutation of others, than abide firm and sure
But of myself
in proof of what is their own.
what shall I say, who was already a Catholic
Christian ? teats which now, after very long
thirst, I almost exhausted and dry, have returned to with all greediness, and with deeper
weeping and groaning have shaken together
and wrung them out more deeply, that so
there might flow what might be enough to
refresh me affected as I was, and to bring
What then
back hope of life and safety.
You, not yet a Chrisshall I say of myself?
tian, who, through encouragement from me,
execrating them greatly as you did, were
hardly led to believe that you ought to listen
to them and make trial of them, by what else,

I pray you, were you delighted, call to mind,
I entreat you, save by a certain great presumption and promise of reasons ?
But because they disputed long and much with very
great copiousness and vehemence concerning
the errors of unlearned men, a thing which I
learned too lace at length to be most easy for
any moderately educated man; if even of
their own they implanted in us any thing, we
thought that we were obliged to retain it, insomuch as there fell not in our way other
So they did in
things, wherein to acquiesce.
our case what crafty fowlers are wont to do,
who set branches smeared with bird-lime
For
beside water to deceive thirsty birds.
they fill up and cover anyhow the other waters
which are around, or fright them from them
by alarming devices, that they may fall into
their snares, not through choice, but want.

3. But why do I not make answer to myself, that these fair and clever similies, and
charges of this nature may be poured forth
against all who are teachers of any thing by
any adversary, with abundance of wit and
But I thought that I ought to insarcasm ?
sert something of this kind in my letter, in
order to admonish them to give over such
says, apart from
proceedings; so that, as he 3
trifles of common-places, matter may contend
with matter, cause with cause, reason with
Wherefore let them give over that
reason.
saying, which they have in their mouths as
though of necessity, when any one, who hath
been for some long time a hearer, hath left
them; "The Light hath made a passage
For you see, you who are my
through him."
chief care, (for I am not over anxious about
them,) how empty this is, and most easy for
Therefore I leave
any one to find fault with.
this for your own wisdom to consider.
For I
have no fear that you will think me possessed
by indwelling Light, when I was entangled in
the life of this world, having a darkened
hope, of beauty of wife, of pomp of riches, of
emptiness of honors, and of all other hurtful
For all these, as is
and deadly pleasures.
not unknown to you, I ceased not to desire
and hope for, at the time when I was their
attentive hearer. And I do not lay this to
the charge of their teaching; for I also confess that they also carefully advise to shun
But now to say that I am deserted by
these.
light, when I have turned myself from all
these shadows of things, and have determined
to be content with that diet merely which is
necessary for health of body; but that I was
enlightened and shining, at a time when I
loved these things, and was wrapped up in

A".

2 Confess, b. i. c. n; b. v. c. 14.

3 Cicero.

ON THE PROFIT OF BELIEVING.

o 49

them, is the part of a man, to use the mildest
expression, wanting in a keen insight into
matters, on which he loves to speak at length.
But, if you please, let us come to the cause
in hand.

4. For you well know that the Manichees
move the unlearned by finding fault with the
Catholic Faith, and chiefly by rending in
pieces and tearing the Old Testament: and
they are utterly ignorant, how far 1 these things
are to be taken, and how drawn out they descend with profit into the veins and marrows
of souls as yet as it were but able to cry.
And because there are in them certain things
which are some slight offense to minds ignorant and careless of themselves, (and there
are very many such,) they admit of being accused in a popular way: but defended in a
popular way they cannot be, by any great
number of persons, by reason of the mysBut the
teries that are contained in them.
few, who know how to do this, do not love
public and much talked of controversies and
disputes: 3 and on this account are very little
known, save to such as are most earnest in
seeking them out.
Concerning then this
rashness of the Manichees, whereby they find
fault with the Old Testament and the Catholic
Faith, listen, I entreat you, to the considerations which move me.
But I desire and hope
that you will receive them in the same spirit
For God, unto Whom
in which I say them.
are known the
secrets of my conscience,
this discourse I am doing
knows, that in
nothing of evil craft; but, as I think it should
be received, for the sake of proving the truth,
for which one thing we have now long ago
determined to live; and with incredible anxiety, lest it may have been most easy for me
to err with you, but most difficult, to use no
harder term, to hold the right way with you.
But I venture 4 to anticipate that, in this
hope, wherein I hope that you will hold with
us the way of wisdom, He will not fail me,
unto Whom I have been consecrated; Whom
day and night I endeavor to gaze upon: and
since, by reason of my sins, and by reason
of past habit, having the eye of the mind
wounded by strokes' of
feeble opinions, I
know that I am without strength, I often entreat with tears, and as, after long blindness
and darkness the eyes being hardly opened,
and as yet, by frequent throbbing and turning away, refusing the light which yet they
long after; specially if one endeavor to show
to them the very sun; so it has now befallen
me, who do not deny that there is a certain
unspeakable and singular good of the soul,

which the mind sees; and who with tears and
groaning confess that I am not yet worthy of
it. He will not then fail me, if
I feign
nothing, if I am led by duty, if I love truth,
if I esteem friendship, if I fear much lest you
be deceived.

5. All that Scripture therefore, which is
called the Old Testament, is handed down
fourfold to them who desire to know it, according to history, according to aetiology, according to analogy, according to allegory.
Do not think me silly for using Greek words.
In the first place, because I have so received,
nor do I dare to make known to you otherNext you yourwise than I have received.
self perceive, that we have not in use terms
for such things: and had I translated and
made such, I should have been indeed more
but, were I to use circumlocution, I
silly:
should be less free in treating: this only I
pray you to believe, that in whatever way I
err, I am not inflated or swollen in any thing
Thus (for example) it is handed
that I do.
down according to
history, when there is
taught what hath been written, or what hath
been done; what not done, but only written
as though it had been done.
According to
aetiology, when it is shown for what cause any
thing hath been done or said.
According to
analogy, when it is shown that the two Testaments, the Old and the New, are not contrary
the one to the other.
According to allegory,
when it
is taught that certain things which
have been written are not to be taken in the
letter, but are to be understood in a figure.

6. All these ways our Lord Jesus Christ
For when it had been
and His Apostles used.
objected that His disciples had plucked the
ears of corn on the sabbath-day, the instance
" Have ye not read/'
was taken from history;
saith He, "what David did when he was an
hungered, and they that were with him; how
he entered into the house of God, and did
eat the shewbread, which was not lawful for
him to eat, neither for them that were with
" 3 But the inhim, but only for the priests ?
stance pertains to aetiology, that, when Christ
had forbidden a wife to be put away, save for
the cause of fornication, and they, who asked
Him, had alleged that Moses had granted
permission after a writing of divorcement had
" Moses did bebeen given, This, saith He,
" 6 For
cause of the hardness of your heart.
here a reason was given, why that had been
well allowed by Moses for a time; that this
command of Christ might seem to show that
now the times were other.
But it were long
to explain the changes of these times, and

1 Quatenits.
3 Famigerula.

2 Vagientiutn,
4 Priesmiio.

S Matt. xii. 3. 4.

6 Mat. xix. S.

35o

their order arranged and settled by a certain marvellous appointment of Divine Providence.

7. And further, analogy, whereby the agreement of both Testaments is plainly seen, why
shall I say that all have made use of, to whose
authority they yield; whereas it
is in their
power to consider with themselves, how many
things they are wont to say have been inserted
in the divine Scriptures by certain, I know
not who, corrupters of truth ? Which speech
of theirs I always thought to be most weak,
even at the time that I was their hearer: nor
I alone, but you also, (for I well remember,)
and all of us, who essayed to exercise a little
more care in forming a judgment than the
But now, after that many
crowd of hearers.
things have been expounded and made clear
to me, which used chiefly to move me: those,
I mean, wherein their discourse for the most
part boasts itself, and expatiates the more
freely, the more safely it can do so as having
no opponent; it seems to me that there is no
assertion of theirs more shameless, or (to use
a milder phrase) more careless and weak,
than that the divine Scriptures have been corrupted; whereas there are no copies in existence, in a matter of so recent date, whereby
For were they to assert,
they can prove it.
that they thought not that they ought thoroughly to receive them, because they had
been written by persons, who they thought
had not written the truth; any how their refusal * would be more right, or their error
more natural. 2
For this is what they have
clone in the case of the Book which is inscribed the Acts of the Apostles. And this
device of theirs, when I consider with myself,
I cannot enough wonder at.
For it is not the
want of wisdom in the men that I complain
of in this matter, but the want of ordinary
For that book hath so great
understanding. 3
matters, which are li-ke what they receive, that
it seems to me great folly to refuse to receive
this book also, and if any thing offend them
there to call
Or, if
such language is shameless, as it is why in
the Epistles of Paul, why in the four books
of the Gospel, do they think that they 4 are
of any avail, in which I am not sure but that
there are in proportion many more things,
than could be in that book, which they will
have believed to have been interpolated by
But fosooth this is what I believe
falsifiers.
to be the case, and I ask of you to consider
it with me with as calm and serene a judgFor you know that, essayment as possible.
ing to bring the person of their founder

it false and inserted.

1 Tergiversatio.
3 Cor mediocre.

- Hitmanior.
4 Ea.

Manichasus into the number of the Apostles,
they say that the Holy Spirit, Whom the Lord
promised His disciples that He would send,
hath come to us through him.
Therefore,
were they to receive those Acts of the Apostles, in which the coming of the Holy Spirit
is plainly set forth, 5 they could not find how
to say that it was interpolated.
For they will
have it that there were some, I know not who,
falsifiers of the divine Books before the times
of Manichasus himself; and that they were
falsified by persons who wished to combine
the Law of the Jews with the Gospel.
But
this they cannot say concerning the Holy
Spirit, unless haply they assert that those persons divined, and set in their books what
should be brought forward against Manichasus, who should at some future time arise,
and say that the Holy Spirit had been sent
But concerning the Holy Spirit
through him.
we will speak somewhat more plainly in another place. Now let us return to my purpose.
8. For that both history of the Old Testament, and aetiology, and analogy are found in
the New Testament, has been, as I think,
sufficiently proved: it remains to show this of
Our Redeemer Himself in the
allegory.
Gospel uses allegory out of the Old Testament. " This generation," saith He, "seeketh
a sign, and there shall not be given it save the
For as Jonas was
sign of Jonas the prophet.
three days and three nights in the whale's
belly, so also shall the Son of Man be three
days and three nights in the heart of the
earth." 6 For why should I speak of the
Apostle Paul, who in his first Epistle to the
Corinthians shows that even the very history
of the Exodus was an allegory of the future
But I would not that ye
Christian People.
should be ignorant, brethren, how that all
our fathers were under the cloud, and all
passed through the sea, and were all baptized
into Moses, in the cloud, and in the sea, and
did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did
all drink the same spiritual drink; for they
drank of the spiritual Rock that followed with
them; and that Rock was Christ.
But in the
more part of them God was not well pleased:
for they were overthrown in the wilderness.
But these things were figures of us, 7 that we
be not lustful of evil things, as they also lusted.
Neither let us worship idols, as certain of
them; as it is written, The people sat down to
eat and drink, and rose up to play.
Neither
let us commit fornication, as certain of them
committed, and fell in one day three and
twenty thousand men.
Neither let us tempt

"

5 Acts ii. 2, 3, 4.
7 Fieurce nostra tvttoi. yi/jluv Gr. ill fieura facta stint nostri,
Vulg.

6 Matt. xii. 30, 40.

ON THE PROFIT OF BELIEVING.

Christ, as certain of them tempted, and perNeither murmur we, as
ished of serpents.
certain of them murmured, and perished of
But all these things happened
the destroyer.
1 But they were written
unto them in a figure.
for our admonition, upon whom the ends of
There is also in the
the world have come." 2
allegory, which indeed
Apostle a certain
greatly relates to the cause in hand, for this
reason that they themselves are wont to bring
it forward, and make a display of it in disFor the same Paul says to the Galaputing.
tians, "For it is written, that Abraham had
two sons, one of a bond-maid, and one of a
But he who was of the bondfree woman.
maid was born after the flesh: but he who was
of the free woman, by promise: which things
3 For these
were spoken by way of allegory.
are the two Testaments, one of Mount Sinai
gendering unto bondage, which is Agar: for
Sinai is a mount in Arabia, which bordereth 4
upon that Jerusalem which now is, and is in
But that Jerusabondage with her children.
lem which is above is free, which is the mother
of us all. "s

9. Here therefore these men too evil, while
they essay to make void the Law, force us to
For they mark
approve these Scriptures.
what is said, that they who are under the Law
are in bondage, and they keep flying above the
" Ye are made empty 6 of
rest that last saying,
Christ, as many of you as are justified in the
Law; ye have fallen from Grace.'-' 7 We grant
that all these things are true, and we say that
the Law is not necessary, save for them
unto whom bondage is yet profitable: and
that the Law was on this account profitably
enacted, in that men, who could not be recalled from sins by reason, needed to be restrained by such a Law, that is to say, by the
threats and terrors of those punishments
which can be seen by fools: from which when
the Grace of Christ sets us free, it condemns
not that Law, but invites us at length to yield
obedience to its love, not to be slaves to the
fear of the Law.
Itself is Grace, that is free
8 which they understand not to have come
gift,
to them from God, who still desire to be
under the bonds of the Law. Whom Paul
deservedly rebukes as unbelievers, because
they do not believe that now through our
Lord Jesus they have been set free from that
bondage, under which they were placed for a
certain time by the most just appointment of
Hence is that saying of the same
God.
" For the Law was our schoolmaster
Apostle,
in Christ." 9 He therefore gave to men a

1 tvttoi
4 Confinis.
7 Gal. v. 4.

2 i Cor.x. i-ii. (See R.R.) 3 aWriyopov/xeva. Gr.
5 Gal. iv. 22-26.
8 Beneficium.

6 Ventilant.
9 Gal. iii. 24. in Christo.

is,

veil:

Hence it is:

schoolmaster to fear, Who after gave a Master to love. And yet in these precepts and
commands of the Law, which now it is not
allowed Christians to use, such as either the
Sabbath, or Circumcision, or Sacrifices, and
if there be any thing of this kind, so great
mysteries are contained, as that every pious
person may understand, there is nothing more
deadly than that whatever is there be understood to the letter, that is, to the word: 10 and
nothing more healthful than that it be unveiled
" The letter killin the Spirit.
" Hence it
eth, but the Spirit quickeneth."
" That same veil remaineth in the reading
of the Old Testament, which veil is not taken
away; since it is made void in Christ." 12 For
there is made void in Christ, not the Old
Testament, but its
that so through
Christ that may be. understood, and, as it
were, laid bare, which without Christ is obForasmuch as the same
scure and covered.
" But when thou
Apostle straightway adds,
shalt have passed over to Christ, the veil shall
For he saith not, the Law
be taken away." 13
shall be taken away, or, the Old Testament.
Not therefore through the Grace of the Lord,
as though useless things were there hidden,
have they been taken away; but rather the
covering whereby useful things were covered.
In this manner all they are dealt with, who
earnestly and piously, not disorderly and
shamelessly, seek the sense of those Scriptures, and they are carefully shown both the
order of events, and the causes of deeds and
words, and so great agreement of the Old
Testament with the New, that there is left no
14 that agrees not; and so great secrets of
jot
figures, that all the things that are drawn
forth by interpretation force them to confess
that they are wretched, who will to condemn
these before they learn them.

10. But, passing over in the mean while
the depth of knowledge, to deal with you as
I think I ought to deal with my intimate
friend; that is, as I have myself power, not
as I have wondered at the power of very
learned men; there are three kinds of error,
whereby men err, when they read anything.
The first
I will speak of them one by one.
kind is, wherein that which is false is thought
true, whereas the writer thought otherwise.
A second kind, although not so extensive, yet
not less hurtful, when that, which is false, is

10 Ad verbum.
11 Vid. Retr. 1. i. c. 14. n. 1.

" In this book I said,

' in which &c.
but I have otherwise explained those words of the Apostle Paul,
and as far a I can see, or rather as is apparent from the plain
state of the case, much more suitably, in the book entitled De
Spiritii et Literd. though this sense too is not to be utterly
rejected."

2 Cor. iii. 6.

Ia 2 Cor. iii. 14. quoniam, oti Gr." which veil," Ensj. T.
J 3 2 Cor. iii. 16.

*4 - Xpex.

is

as

not

certain;

For this one also

thought true, yet the thought is the same as
that of the writer. A third kind, when from
the writing of another some truth is understood, whereas the writer understood it not.
In which kind there is no little profit, rather,
if you consider carefully, the whole entire
fruit of reading. An instance of the first kind
is, as if any one, for example, should say
and believe that Rhadamanthus hears and
judges the causes of the dead in the realms
below, because he hath so read in the strain
of Maro. 1 For this one errs in two ways: both
in that he believes a thing not to be believed,
and also in that he, whom he reads, is not to
The second
be thought to have believed it.
kind may be thus noticed: if one, because
Lucretius writes that the soul is formed of
atoms, and that after death it
is dissolved
into the same atoms and perishes, were to
think this to be true and what he ought to
believe.
less
wretched, if, in a matter of so great moment,
he hath persuaded himself of that which is
although Lucretius, by
false,
whose books he hath been deceived, held
For what doth it profit this one
this opinion.
to be assured of the meaning of the author,
whereas he hath chosen him to himself not so
as through him to escape error, but so as with
him to err. An instance suited to the third
kind is, if one, after having read in the books
of Epicurus some place wherein he praises
continence, were to assert that he had made
the chief good to consist in virtue, and that
For how is
therefore he is not to be blamed.
this man injured by the error of Epicurus,
what though Epicurus believe that bodily
pleasure is the chief good of man: whereas
he hath not surrendered up himself to so base
and hurtful an opinion, and is pleased with
Epicurus for no other reason, than that he
thinks him not to have held sentiments which
ought not to be holden.
This error is not
onlynatural to man, 2 but often alsomostworthy
of a man.
For what, if word were brought to
me, concerning some one whom I loved, that,
when now he was of bearded age, he had said,
in the hearing of many, that he was so pleased
with boyhood and childhood, as even to swear
that he wished to live after the same fashion,
and that that was so proved to me, as that I
should be shameless to deny it: I should not,
should I, seem worthy of blame, if I thought
that, in saying this, he wished to show, that
he was pleased with the innocence, and with
the temper of mind alien from those desires
in which the race of man is wrapped up, and
from this circumstance should love him yet

Virg. .-En. vi. 566-569.

Humanus.

more and more, than I used to love him
before; although perhaps he had been foolish
enough to love in the age of children a certain freedom in play and food, and an idle
For suppose that he had died after
ease ?
this report had reached me, and that I had
been unable to make any inquiry of him, so
as for him to open his meaning; would there
be any one so shameless as to be angry with
me, for praising the man's purpose and wish,
through those very words which I had heard ?
What, that even a just judge of matters would
not hesitate perhaps to praise my sentiment
and wish, in that both I was pleased with innocence, and, as man of man, in a matter of
doubt, preferred to think well, when it was in
my power also to think ill ?

11. And, this being so, hear also just so
many conditions and differences of the same
For it must be that just so many
Scriptures.
meet us.
For either any one hath written
profitably, and is not profitably understood
by some one: or both take place unprofitably:
or the reader understands profitably, whereas
he, who is read, hath written contrariwise.
Of these the first I blame not, the last I reFor neither can I blame the man,
gard not.
who without any fault of his own hath been ill
understood; nor can I be distressed at any
one being read, who hath failed to see the
truth, when I see that the readers are no way
There is then one kind most apinjured.
proved, and as it were most cleansed, when
both the things written are well, and are taken
in a good sense by the readers. And yet that
still further divided into two: for it
also is
For it
doth not altogether shut out error.
generally comes to pass, that, when a writer
hath held a good sense, the reader also holds
a good sense; still other than he, and often
But when
better, often worse, yet profitably.
both we hold the same sense as he whom we
read, and that is every way suited to right
conduct of life, there is the fullest possible
measure of truth, and there is no place opened
And this
for error from any other quarter.
kind is altogether very rare, when what we
read is matter of extreme obscurity: nor can
it, in my opinion, be clearly known, but only
I so
believed.
gather the will of a man who is absent or
dead, as that I can swear to it: when, even if
he were questioned being present, there might
be many things, which, if he were no ill man,
But I think
he would most carefully hide ?
that it hath nothing to do towards learning
the matter of fact, of what character the writer
was; yet is he most fairly believed good,
whose writings have benefited the human race
and posterity.

For by what proofs shall

ON THE PROFIT OF BELIEVING.

it

Or is

12. Wherefore I would that they would tell
me, in what kind they place the, supposed,
error of the Catholic Church.
If in the first,
is altogether a grave charge; but it needs
not a far-fetched defense: for it is enough to
deny that we so understand, as the persons,
who inveigh against us, suppose.
If in the
second, the charge is not less grave; but they
shall be refuted by the same saying.
If in
Proceed, and
the third, it is no charge at all.
For
next consider the Scriptures themselves.
what objection do they raise against the books
of (what is called) the Old Testament ?
Is it
that they are good, but are understood by us
But they themselves do not
in an ill sense ?
Or is it that they are neither
receive them.
But our degood, nor are well understood ?
fense above is enough to drive them from this
it this that they will say, alposition.
though they are understood by you in a good
sense, yet they are evil ? What is this other
than to acquit living adversaries, with whom
they have to do, and to accuse men long ago
dead, with whom they have no strife?
I indeed believe that both those men profitably
delivered to memory all things, and that they
And that that Law
were great and divine.
was published, and framed by the command
and will of God: and of this, although I have
but very slight knowledge of books of that
kind, yet I can easily persuade any, if there
apply to me a mind fair and no way obstinate:
and this I will do, when you shall grant to
me your ears and mind well disposed: this
however when it shall be in my power: but
now is it not enough for me, however that
matter may stand, not to have been deceived ?
13. I call to witness, Honoratus, my conscience, and God Who hath His dwelling in
pure souls, that I account nothing more prudent, chaste, and religious, than are all those
Scriptures, which under the name of the Old
Testament the Catholic Church retains. You
wonder at this, I am aware.
For I cannot
hide that we were far otherwise persuaded.
But there is indeed nothing more full of rashness, (which at that time, being boys, we had
in us,) than in the case of each several book,
to desert expounders, who profess that they
hold them, and that they can deliver them to
their scholars, and to seek their meaning
from those, who, I know not from what cause
compelling, have proclaimed a most bitter
war against the framers and authors of them.
For who ever thought that the hidden and
dark books of Aristotle were to be expounded
to him by one who was the enemy of Aristotle;
of teaching,
to
wherein a reader may perhaps err without
sacrilege ? Who, in fine, willed to read or

systems

speak

these

of

it ?

learn the geometrical writings of Archimedes,
under Epicurus as a master; against which
Epicurus used to argue with great obstinacy,
so far as I judge, understanding them not at
all ? What are those Scriptures of the law
most plain, against which, as though set forth
in public, these men make their attack in vain
and to no purpose ? And they seem to me to
be like that weak woman, whom these same
men are wont to mock at, who enraged at
the sun being extolled to her, and recommended as an object of worship by a certain
female Manichee, being as she was simpleminded and of a religious spirit, leaped up in
haste, and often striking with her foot that
spot on which the sun through the window
cast light, began to cry out, Lo, I trample on
the sun and your God: altogether after a
foolish and womanish manner; Who denies
But do not those men seem to you to be
such, who, in matters which they understand
not, either wherefore, or altogether of what
kind they are, although like to matters cast
yet to such as understand them
in the way,
exact- and divine, rending them with great
onset of speech and reproaches, think that
they are effecting something, because the unlearned applaud them ?
Believe me, whatever there is in these Scriptures, it is lofty
and divine: there is in them altogether truth,
and a system of teaching most suited to refresh and renew minds: and clearly so ordered
in measure, as that there is no one but may
draw thence, what is enough for himself, if
only he approach to draw with devotion and
piety, as true religion demands. To prove
this to you, needs many reasons and a longer
For first I must so treat with you
discourse.
as that you may not hate the authors themselves; next, so as that you may love them:
and this I must treat in any other way, rather
than by expounding their meanings and words.
For this reason, because in case we hated
Virgil, nay, rather in case we loved him not,
before understanding him, by the commendation of our forefathers, we should never be
satisfied on those questions about him without number, by which grammarians are wont
to be disquieted and troubled; nor should we
listen willingly to one who solved these at the
same time praising him; but should favor
that one who by means of these essayed to
show that he had erred and doated. But now,
whereas many essay to open these, and each
in a different way according to his capacity,
we applaud these in preference, through
whose exposition the poet is found better,
who is believed, even by those who do not

Jacentibus.

' Subtilia.

;54

understand him. not only in nothing to have
offended, but also to have sung nothing but
So that in some
what was worthy of praise.
minute question, we are rather angry with the
master who fails, and has not what to answer,
than think him silent through any fault in
Maro. And now, if, in order to defend himself, he should wish to assert a fault in so
great an author, hardly will his scholars remain with him, even after they have paid his
fee. How great matter were it, that we should
shew like good will towards them, of whom
it hath been confirmed by so long time of
old that the Holy Spirit spake by them ?
But, forsooth, we youths of the greatest understanding, and marvellous searchers out of
reasons, without having at
unrolled
these writings, without having sought teachers,
without having somewhat chided our own dullness, lastly, without having yielded our heart
even in a measure 1 to those who have willed
that writings of this kind be so long read,
kept, and handled through the whole world;
have thought that nothing in them is to be
believed, moved by the speech of those who
are unfriendly and hostile
to them, with
whom, under a false promise of reason, we
should be compelled to believe and cherish
thousands of fables.

least

14. But now I will proceed with what I have
begun, if I can, and I will so treat with you,
as not in the mean while to lay open the
Catholic Faith, but, in order that they may
search out its great mysteries, to show to
those who have a care for their souls, hope
of divine fruit, and of the discerning of truth.
No one doubts of him who seeks true religion,
either that he already believes that there is an
immortal soul for that religion to profit, or
that he also wishes to find that very thing in
this same religion.
Therefore all religion is
for howsoever the
for the sake of the soul;
nature of the body may be, it causes no care
or anxiety, especially
after death, to him,
whose soul possesses
that whereby it
is
For the sake of the soul, therefore,
blessed.
either alone or chiefly, hath true religion, if
there be any such, been appointed.
But this
soul, (I will consider for what reason, and I
confess the matter to be most obscure,) yet
errs, and is foolish, as we see, until it attain
to and perceive wisdom, and perhaps this
I am not, am
very [wisdom] is true religion.
I am not, am I,
I, sending you to fables ?
I say that our
forcing you to believe rashly ?
soul entangled and sunk in error and folly
seeks the way of truth, if there be any such.
If this be not your case, pardon me, I pray,

it

and share with me your wisdom; but if you
recognize in yourself what I say, let us, I
entreat, together seek the truth.

is.

it is

is, if you know with whom it

15. Put the case that we have not as yet
Lo we have
heard a teacher of any religion.
undertaken a new matter and business. We
must seek, I suppose, them who profess this
it have any existence.
Suppose
matter, if
that we have found different persons holding
different opinions, and through their difference of opinions seeking to draw persons each
one to himself: but that, in the mean while,
there are certain pre-eminent from being much
spoken of, and from having possession of
Whether these hold the
nearly all peoples.
truth, is a great question: but ought we not
to make full trial of them first, in order that,
so long as we err, being as we are men, we
may seem to err with the human race itself ?
16. But it will be said, the truth is with
some few; therefore you already know what
Said I
not a little above, that we were in search of
it as unlearned men? But if from the very
force of truth you conjecture that few possess
it, but know not who they are; what if
thus, that there are so few who know the
truth, as that they hold the multitude by their
authority, whence the small number may set
itself free, and, as it were, strain itself 2 forth
into those secrets ? Do we not see how few
attain the highest eloquence, whereas through
the whole world the schools of rhetoricians
are resounding with troops of young men ?
What, do they, as many as desire to turn out
good orators, alarmed at the multitude of the
unlearned, think that they are to bestow their
labor on the orations of Caecilius, or Erucius,
All aim at
rattier than those of Tullius?
these, which are confirmed by authority of
our forefathers. Crowds of unlearned persons
essay to learn the same, which by the few
learned are received as to be learned: yet
very few attain, yet fewer practise, the very
fewest possible become famous.
What, if
true religion be some such thing ? What if a
multitude of unlearned persons attend
the
Churches, and yet that be no proof, that
therefore no one is made perfect by these
And yet, if they who studied
mysteries?
eloquence were as few as the few who are
eloquent, our parents would never believe that
we ought to be committed to such masters.
Whereas, then, we have been called to these
studies by a multitude, which is numerous in
that portion of it which is made up of the
unlearned, so as to become enamored of that
which few can attain unto; why are we unwill-

1 Mediocri corde.

2 Eliqtiare.

ON THE PROFIT OF BELIEVING.

ing to be in the same case in religion, which
perhaps we despise with great danger to our
soul ? For if the truest and purest worship of
God, although it be found with a few, be yet
found with those, with whom a multitude,
albeit wrapped up in lusts, and removed far
from purity of understanding, agrees; (and
who can doubt that this may happen ?)
I ask,
if one were to charge us with rashness and
folly, that we seek not diligently with them
who teach it, that, which we are greatly anxious to discover, what can we answer? [Shall
we say,] I was deterred by numbers ? Why
from the pursuit of liberal arts, which hardly
bring any profit to this present life; why from
search after money? Why from attaining
unto honor; why, in fine, from gaining and
keeping good health; lastly, why from the
very aim at a happy life; whereas all are engaged in these, few excel; were you deterred
by no numbers ?

Is it so ?

17. "Bat they seemed there to make absurd statements." On whose assertion? Forsooth on that of enemies, for whatever cause,
for whatever reason, for this is not now the
Upon reading, I
question, still enemies.
Without
found it so of myself.
having received any instruction in poetry, you
would not dare to essay to read Terentianus
Maurus without a master: Asper, Cornutus,
Donatus, and others without number are
needed, that any poet whatever may be understood, whose strains seem to court even
the applause of the theatre; do you in the
case of those books, which, however they may
be, yet by the confession of well-nigh the
whole human race are commonly reported to
be sacred and full of divine things, rush upon
them without a guide, and dare to deliver an
opinion on them without a teacher; and, if
there meet you any matters, which seem absurd, do not accuse rather your own dullness,
and mind decayed by the corruption of this
world, such as is that of all that are foolish,
than those [books] which haply cannot be
understood by such persons ! You should
seek some one at once pious and learned, or
who by consent of many was said to be such,
that you might be both bettered by his advice,
Was he not
and instructed by his learning.
easy to find ? He should be searched out with
pains. Was there no one. in the country in
which you lived ? What cause could more
profitably force to travel ? Was he quite hidden, or did he not exist on the continent 1
?
One should cross the sea.
If across the sea
he was not found in any place near to us, you
should proceed even as far as those lands, in
which the things related in those books are

said to have taken place.
What, Honoratus,
have we done of this kind ? And yet a religion perhaps the most holy, (for as yet I am
speaking as though it were matter of doubt,)
the opinion whereof hath by this time taken
possession of the whole world, we wretched
boys condemned at our own discretion and
What if those things which in
sentence.
those same Scriptures seem to offend some
unlearned persons, were so set there for this
purpose, that when things were read of such
as are abhorrent from the feeling of ordinary
men, not to say of wise and holy men, we
might with much more earnestness seek the
Perceive you not how the
hidden meaning.
2 for whom the rough
Catamite of the Bucolics,
shepherd gushed forth into tears, men essay
to interpret, and affirm that the boy Alexis,
on whom Plato also is said to have composed
a love strain, hath some great meaning or
other, but escapes the judgment of the unlearned; whereas without any sacrilege a poet
however rich may seem to have published
wanton songs ?

There is nothing of these.

18. But in truth was there either decree of
any law, or power of gainsayers, or vile character of persons consecrated, or shameful
report, or newness of institution, or hidden
profession, to recall us from, and forbid us,
the search ?
All
laws divine and human allow us to seek the
Catholic Faith; but to hold and exercise it is
allowed us at any rate by human law, even if
so long as we are in error there be a doubt
concerning divine law; no enemy alarms our
weakness, (although truth and the salvation
of the soul, in case being diligently sought it
be not found where it may with most safety,
ought to be sought at any risk); the degrees
of all ranks and powers most devotedly minister to this divine worship; the name of religion
is most honorable and most famous.
What,
I pray, hinders to search out and discuss with
pious and careful enquiry, whether there be
here that which it must needs be few know
and guard in entire purity, although the goodwill and affection of all nations conspire in its
favor ?

19. The case standing thus, suppose, as I
said, that we are now for the first time seeking unto what religion we shall deliver up our
souls, for it to cleanse and renew them; without doubt we must begin with the Catholic
For by this time there are more
Church.
Christians, than if the Jews and idolaters be
But of these same Chrisadded together.
tians, whereas there are several heresies, and
all wish to appear Catholics, and call all others
is one
besides themselves

heretics, there

1 Continenti.

; Virg. Eel. ii.

if you consider the
Church, as all allow:
whole world, more full filled in number; but,
as they who know affirm, more pure also in
But the question of
truth than all the rest.
truth is another; but, what is enough for such
as are in search, there is one Catholic, to
which different heresies give different names,
whereas they themselves are called each by
names of their own, which they dare not
From which may be understood, by
deny.
judgment of umpires who are hindered by no
favor, to which is to be assigned the name
But, that no one
Catholic, which all covet.
may suppose that it is to be made matter of
over garrulous or unnecessary discussion,
this is at any rate one, in which human laws
themselves also are in a certain way ChrisI do not wish any prejudgment to be
tian.
formed from this fact, but I account it a most
favorable commencement for enquiry.
For
we are not to fear lest the true worship of
God, resting on no strength of its own, seem
to need to be supported by them whom it
ought to support: but, at any rate, it is perfect happiness, if the truth may be there
found, where it is most safe both to search
for it and to hold it:
in case it cannot, then
at length, at whatever risk, we must go and
search some other where.

20. Having then laid down these principles,
which, as I think, are so just that I ought to
win this cause before you, let who will be my
adversary, I will set forth to you, as I am able,
what way I followed, when I was searching
after true religion in that spirit, in which I
have now set forth that it ought to be sought.
For upon leaving you and crossing the sea,
now delaying and hesitating, what I ought to
hold, what to let go; which delay rose upon
me every day the more, from the time that I
was a hearer of that man, 1 whose coming was
promised to us, as you know, as if from
heaven, to explain all things which moved us,
and found him, with the exception of a certain eloquence, such as the rest; being now
settled in Italy, I reasoned and deliberated
greatly with myself, not whether I should
continue in that sect, into which I was sorry
that I had fallen, but in what way I was to
find the truth, my sighs through love of which
are known to no one better than to yourself.
Often it seemed to me that it could not be
found, and huge waves of my thoughts would
roll toward deciding in favor of the AcadeOften again, with what power I had,
mics.
looking into the human soul, with so much
life, with so much intelligence, with so much
clearness, I thought that the truth lay not

hid, save that in it the way of search lay hid,
and that this same way must be taken from
some divine authority.
It remained to enquire what was that authority, where in so
great dissensions each promised that he would
Thus there met me a wood, out
deliver it.
of which there was no way, which I was very
loath to be involved in: and amid these
things, without any rest, my mind was agitated through desire of finding the truth.
However, I continued to unsew myself more
and more from those whom now I had proBut there remained nothing
posed to leave.
else, in so great dangers, than with words full
of tears and sorrow to entreat the Divine
Providence to help me. And this I was content to do: and now certain disputations of
the Bishop of Milan 2 had almost moved me
to desire, not without some hope, to enquire
into many things concerning the Old Testament itself, which, as you know, we used to
view as accursed, having been ill commended
And I had decided to be a Catechuto us.
men in the Church, unto which I had been
delivered by my parents, until such time as
I should either find what I wished, or should
persuade myself that it needed not to be
Therefore had there been one who
sought.
could teach me, he would find me at a very
critical moment most fervently disposed and
If you see that you too
very apt to learn.
have been long affected in this way, therefore,
and with a like care for thy soul, and if now
you seem to yourself to have been tossed to
and fro enough, and wish to put an end to
labors of this kind, follow the pathway of
Catholic teaching, which hath flowed down
from Christ Himself through the Apostles
even unto us, and will hereafter flow down to
posterity.

the

charge

account chiefly

2 1 . This, you will say, is ridiculous, whereas
all profess to hold and teach this: all heretics make this profession, I cannot deny it;
but so, as that they promise to those whom
they entice, that they will give them a reason
concerning matters the most obscure: and on
Catholic
this
[Church], that they who come to her are enjoined to believe; but they make it their
boast, that they impose not a yoke of believYou aning, but open a fount of teaching.
swer, What could be said, that should pertain
more to their praise ?
For this
they do, without being endued with any
strength, but in order to conciliate to themselves a crowd by the name of reason: on the
promise of which the human soul naturally
is pleased, and, without considering its own

It is not so.

i. e. Faustus. v. Conf. b. v. c. vi.

10.

2 i. e. S. Ambrose, v. Conf. b. v. c. xiii. xiv.

23, 24, 25

ON THE PROFIT OF BELIEVING.

strength and state of health, by seeking the
food of the sound, which is ill entrusted save
to such as are in health, rushes upon the
poisons of them who deceive.
For true religion, unless those things be believed, which
each one after, if he shall conduct himself
well and shall be worthy, attains unto and understands, and altogether without a certain
weighty power of authority, can in no way be
rightly entered upon.

praise.

Wherefore observe,

22. But perhaps you seek to have some
reason given you on this very point, such as
may persuade you, that you ought not to be
Which may
taught by reason before faith.
easily be done, if only you make yourself a
But, in order that it may be
fair hearer.
done suitably, I wish you as it were to answer
my questions; and, first, to tell me, why you
think that one ought not to believe.
Because,
you say, credulity, from which men are called
credulous, in itself, seems to me to be a certain fault: otherwise we should not use to
For if a suscast this as a term of reproach.
picious man is in fault, in that he suspects
things not ascertained; how much more a
credulous man, who herein differs from a suspicious man, that the one allows some doubt,
the other none, in matters which he knows
In the mean while I accept this opinion
riot.
But you know that we are
and distinction.
not wont to call a person even curious without
some reproach; but we call him studious even
with
you
please, what seems to you to be the difference between these two.
This surely, you
answer, that, although both be led by great
desire to know, yet the curious man seeks
after things that no way pertain to him, but
the studious man, on the contrary, seeks after
But, because we deny
what pertain to him.
not that a man's wife and children, and their
health, pertain unto him; if any one, being
settled abroad, were to be careful to ask all
comers, how his wife and children are and
fare, he is surely led by great desire to know,
and yet we call not this man studious, who
both exceedingly wishes to know, and that
(in) matters which very greatly pertain unto
Wherefore you now understand that
him.
the definition of a studious person falters in
this point, that every studious person wishes
to know what pertain to himself, and yet not
every one, who' makes this his business, is to
but he who with all
be called
earnestness seeks those things which pertain
unto the liberal culture and adornment of the
Yet we rightly call him one who
mind.
especially if we add what he studies

studious;

studies,

if

1 Studentem.

For we may call him even studious
to hear.
of his own (family) if he love only his own
(family), we do not however, without some
addition, think him worthy of the common
name of the studious.
But one who was desirous to hear how his family were I should
not call studious of hearing, unless taking
pleasure in the good report, he should wish to
hear it again and again: but one who studied,
even if only once. Now return to the curious
person, and tell me, if any one should be
willing to listen to some tale, such as would
no way profit him, that is, of matters that
pertain not to him: and that not in an offensive way and frequently, but very seldom and
with great moderation, either at a feast, or in
some company, or meeting of any kind;
would he seem to you curious?
I think not:
but at any rate he would certainly seem to
have a care for that matter, to which he was
Wherefore the definition of
willing to listen.
a curious person also must be corrected by
the same rule as that of a studious person.
Consider therefore whether the former statements also do not need to be corrected.
For
why should not both he, who at some time
suspects something, be unworthy the name of
a suspicious person; and he who at some time
believes something, of a credulous person ?
Thus as there is very great difference between one who studies any matter, and the
absolutely studious; and again between him
who hath a care and the curious; so is there
between him who believes and the credulous.
23. But you will say, consider now whether
we ought to believe in religion.
For, although
we grant that it is one thing to believe, another to be credulous, it does not follow that
it is no fault to believe in matters of religion.
For what if it be a fault both to believe and
to be credulous, as (it is) both to be drunk
and to be a drunkard ? Now he who thinks
this certain, it seems to me can have no friend;
for, if it is base to believe any thing, either
he acts basely who believes a friend, or in
nothing believing a friend I see not how he
can call either him or himself a friend. Here
perhaps you may say, 1 grant that we must
believe something at some time; now make
plain, how in the case of religion it be not
base to believe before one knows.
I will do
Wherefore I ask of you, which
so, if I can.
you esteem the graver fault, to deliver religion to one unworthy, or to believe what is
said by them who deliver it.
If you understand not whom I call unworthy, I call him,
who approaches with feigned breast. You
grant, as I suppose, that it is more blameable
to unfold unto such an one whatever holy
secrets there are, than to believe religious

men affirming any thing on the matter of reFor it would be unbecoming
ligion itself.
you to make any other answer.
Wherefore
now suppose him present, who is about to deliver to you a religion, in what way shall you
assure him, that you approach with a true
mind, and that, so far as this matter is concerned, there is in you no fraud or feigning ?
You will say, your own good conscience that
you are no way feigning, asserting this with
words as strong as you can, but yet with
For you cannot lay open man to
words.
man the hiding places of your soul, so that
But if he
you may be thoroughly known.
shall say, Lo, I believe you, but is it not more
fair that you also believe me, when, if I hold
any truth, you are about to receive, I about
to give, a benefit ? what will you answer, save
that you must believe ?

24. But you say, Were it not better that
you should give me a reason, that, wherever
that shall lead me, I may follow without any
Perhaps it were: but, it being so
rashness?
great a matter, that you are by reason to
come to the knowledge of God, do you think
that all are qualified to understand the reasons, by which the human soul is led to know
God, or many, or few ? Few I think, you
say. Do you believe that you are in the
number of these?
It is not for me, you say,
Therefore you think it is for
to answer this.
him to believe you in this also: and this indeed he does: only do you remember, that
he hath already twice believed you saying
things uncertain; that you are unwilling to
believe him even once admonishing you in a
But suppose that it is so,
religious spirit.
and that you approach with a true mind to
receive religion, and that you are one of few
men in such sense as to be able to take in the
reasons by which the Divine Power * is brought
into certain knowledge; what? do you think
that other men, who are not endued with so
serene a disposition, are to be denied religion ?
or do you think that they are to be led gradually by certain steps unto those highest inner
recesses? You see clearly which is the more
For you cannot think that any one
religious.
whatever in a case where he desires so great
a thing, ought by any means to be abandoned
But do you not think, that, unor rejected.
less he do first believe that he shall attain
unto that which he purposes; and do yield
his mind as a suppliant; and, submitting to
certain great and necessary precepts, do by
a certain course of life thoroughly cleanse it,
that he will not otherwise attain the things
Certainly you think
that are purely true ?

so.

I think not.

What, then, is the case of those, (of
whom I already believe you to be one,) who
are able most easily to receive divine secrets
by sure reason, will it, I ask, be to them any
hindrance at all, if they so come as they who
But yet,
at the first believe?
you say, what need to delay them ? . Because
although they will in no way harm themselves
by what is clone, yet they will harm the rest
For there is hardly one
by the precedent.
who has a just notion of his own power: but
he who has a less notion must be roused; he
who has a greater notion must be checked:
that neither the one be broken by despair,
nor the other carried headlong by rashness.
And this is easily done, if even they, who are
able to fly, (that they be not alluring the occasion of any into danger,) are forced for a
short time to walk where the rest also may
walk with safety.
This is the forethought of
true religion: this the command of God: this
what hath been handed down from our blessed
forefathers, this what hath been preserved
even unto us: to wish to distrust and overthrow this, is nothing else than to seek a
And
sacrilegious way unto true religion.
whoso do this, not even if what they wish be
granted to them are they able to arrive at the
For whatever kind
point at which they aim.
of excellent genius they have, unless God be
But He
present, they creep on the ground.
is then present, if they, who are aiming at
God, have a regard for their fellow men.
Than which step there can be found nothing
more sure Heavenward.
I for my part cannot resist this reasoning, for how can I say
that we are to believe nothing without certain
knowledge ? whereas both there can be no
friendship at all, unless there be believed
something which cannot be proved by some
reason, and often stewards, who are slaves,
are trusted by their masters without any fault
But in religion what can there
on their part.
be more unfair than that the ministers 2 of
God believe us when we promise an unfeigned
mind, and we are unwilling to believe them
when they enjoin us any thing.
Lastly, what
way can there be more healthful, than for a
man to become fitted to receive the truth by
believing those things, which have been appointed by God to serve for the previous culture and treatment of the mind ?
Or, if you
' rather to make
be already altogether fitted,
some little circuit where it is safest to tread,
than both to cause yourself danger, and to be
a precedent for rashness to other men ?

25. Wherefore it now remains to consider,
in what manner we ought not to follow these,

1 Vis divina.

2 A ntistites.

ON THE PROFIT OF BELIEVING.

who profess that they will lead by reason.
For how we may without fault follow those
who bid us to believe, hath been already said:
but unto these who make promises of reason
certain think that they come, not only without
blame, but also with some praise: but it is
For there are two (classes of) pernot so.
sons, praiseworthy in religion; one of those
who have already found, whom also we must
needs judge most blessed; another of those
who are seeking with all earnestness and in
The first, therefore, are althe right way.
ready in very possession, the other on the
way, yet on that way whereby they are most
There are three other kinds
sure to arrive. 1
of men altogether to be disapproved of and detested. One is of those who hold an opinion,
that is, of those who think that they know
what they know not.
Another is of those
who are indeed aware that they know not, but
do not so seek as to be able to find. A third
is of those who neither think that they know,
nor wish to seek. There are also three things,
as it were bordering upon one another, in the
minds of men well worth distinguishing; unAnd, if these
derstanding, belief, opinion.
be considered b)^ themselves, the first is always without fault, the second sometimes
For
with fault, the third never without fault.
the understanding of matters great, and
honorable, and even divine, is most blessed. 3
But the understanding of things unnecessary
is no injury, but perhaps the learning was an
injury, in that it took up the time of necesBut on the matters themselves
sary matters.

"

1 cf. Retract, b. i. ch. xiv. 2.
In these words of mine if

I also said, 'For there are two
' those who have already found"
&c.'
whom we have said to be ' now in possession,' are in such sort
understood to be ' most happy,' as that they are so not in this life,
but in that we hope for, and aim at by the path of faith, the
meaning is free from error: for they are to be judged to have found
that which is to be sought, who are now there, whither we by
seeking and believing, that is by keeping the path of faith, do
But if they are thought to be or to have been such
seek to come.
in this life, that seems to me not to be true: not that in this life no
truth at all can be found that can be discerned by the mind, not
believed on faith; but because it is but so much, what there is of
it, as not to make men ' most blessed.'
For neither is that which
the Apostle says, We see now through a glass in a riddle and
now I know in part (1 Cor. xiii. 12), incapable of being discerned
It is discerned, clearly, but does not yet make us
by the mind.
For that makes men most blessed which he saith,
most blessed.
but thenface to/ace, and, tlien I shall know even as Iam known.
They that have found this, they are to be said to stand in possession
to which leads that path of faith which we keep, and
of bliss,
But who are those
whither we desire to arrive at by believing.
most blessed, who are already in that possession whither this path
leads, is a great question. And for the holy Angels indeed, there
is no question but they be there. But of holy men already departed,
whether so much may yet be said of them as that they stand
already in that possession, is fairly made a question.
For they are
already freed from the corruptible body that weigheth down the
soul (Wisd. 9.), but they still wait for the redemption of their body
( Rom. 8.), and their flesh resteth in hope, nor is yet glorified in the
But whether for all that
incorruption that is to come.
(Ps. 16.)
they are none the less qualified to contemplate the truth with the
eyes of the heart, as it is said, Face to face, there is not space to
discuss here."

2 Opinantium.
3 cf. Retract, b. i. ch. 14. 2.

' for to know
great and noble and even divine things,' we should refer to the
same blessedness.
For in this life whatsoever there be of it known
amounts not to perfect bliss, because that part of it which remains
unknown is far more without all comparison."

" Also what I said,

that are injurious, it is not the understanding,
but the doing or suffering them, that is
For not, in case any understand
wretched.
how an enemy may be slain without danger
to himself, is he guilty from the mere understanding, not the wish; and, if the wish be
absent, what can be called more innocent ?
But belief is then worthy of blame, when
either any thing is believed of God which is
unworthy of Him, or any thing is over easily
believed of man.
But in all other matters if
any believe aught, provided he understand
that he knows it not, there is no fault.
For
I believe that very wicked conspirators were
formerly put to death by the virtue of Cicero;
but this I not only know not, but also I know
for certain that I can by no means know.
But opinion is on two accounts very base; in
that both he who hath persuaded himself that
he already knows, cannot learn;
provided
only it may be learnt; and in itself rashness
is a sign of a mind not well disposed.
For
even if any suppose that he know what I said
of Cicero, (although it be no hindrance to
him from learning, in that the matter itself is
incapable of being grasped by any knowledge;)
yet, (in that he understands not that there is
a great difference, whether any thing be
grasped by sure reason of mind, which we
call understanding, or whether for practical
purposes it be entrusted to common fame or
writing, for posterity to believe it,) he assuredly errs, and no error is without what is
What then we understand, we owe to
base.
reason; what we believe, to authority; what
we have an opinion on, to error. 4
But every
one who understands also believes, and also
every one who has an opinion believes; not
every one who believes understands, no one
who has an opinion understands.
Therefore
if these three things be referred unto the five
kinds of men, which we mentioned a little
above; that is, two kinds to be approved,
which we set first, and three that remain
faulty; we find that the first kind, that of the
blessed, believe the truth itself;
but the
second kind, that of such as are earnest after,
and lovers of, the truth, believe authority.
In which kinds, of the two, the act of belief
is praiseworthy. But in the first of the faulty

" And what I said,

4 cf. Retract, b. i. ch. xiv. 3.

' that there
is a great difference whether anything be grasped by sure reason
of mind, which we call knowing, or whether for practical purposes
it be entrusted to common fame or writing, for posterity to believe
it, and presently after, 'what therefore we know, we owe to reason;
what we believe to authority;' is not to be so taken as that in
conversation we should fear to say we ' know' what we believe of
suitable witnesses. For when we speak strictly we are said to know
that only which by the mind's own firm reason we comprehend.
But when we speak in words more suited to common use, as also
Divine Scripture speaketh, we should not hesitate to say we know
both what we have perceived with our bodily senses, and what we
believe of trustworthy witnesses, whilst however between one and
the other we are aware what difference exists."

kinds, that is, of those who have an opinion
that they know what they know not, there is
The other
an altogether faulty credulity.
two kinds that are to be disapproved believe
nothing, both they who seek the truth despairing of finding it, and they who seek it
And this only in matters which
not at all.
For in
pertain unto any system of teaching.
the other business of life, I am utterly ignorant by what means a man can believe
Although in the case of those also,
nothing.
they who say that m practical matters they
follow probabilities, would seem rather to be
unable to know than unable to believe.
For
who believes not what he approves ?
x or how
is what they follow probable, if it be not apWherefore there may be two kinds
proved ?
of such as oppose the truth: one of those
who assail knowledge alone, not faith;
the
other of those who condemn both: and yet
again, I am ignorant whether these can be
found in matters of human life. These things
have been said, in order that we might understand, that, in retaining faith, even of those
things which as yet we comprehend not, we
are set free from the rashness of such as have
For they, who say that we are
an opinion.
to believe nothing but what we know, are on
their guard against that one name "
opining,"
which must be confessed to be base and very
wretched, but, if they consider carefully that
there is a very great difference, whether one
think that he knows, or moved by some authority believe that which he understands that
he knows not, surely he will escape the charge
of error, and inhumanity, and pride.

26. For I ask, if what is not known must
not be believed, in what way may children do
service to their parents, and love with mutual
affection those whom they believe not to be
For it cannot, by any means,
their parents ?
be known by reason.
But the authority of
the mother comes in, that it be believed of
the father; but of the mother it is usually not
the mother that is believed, but midwives,
For she, from whom a son
nurses, servants.
may be stolen and another put in his place,
Yet
may she not being deceived deceive ?
we believe, and believe without any doubt,
what we confess we. cannot know.
For who
but must see, that unless it be so, filial affection, the most sacred bond of the human race,
is violated by extreme pride of wickedness ?
For what madman even would think him to be
blamed who discharged the duties that were
due to those whom he believed to be his
parents, although they were not so ? Who, on
the other hand, would not judge him to

1 Probat.

2 Opinationis,

deserve banishment, who failed to love- those
who were perhaps his true parents, through
fear lest he should love pretended. Many
things may be alleged, whereby to show that
nothing at all of human society remains safe,
if we shall determine to believe
nothing,
which we cannot grasp by full apprehension. 3
27. But now hear, what I trust I shall by
this time more easily persuade you of.
In a
matter of religion, that is, of the worship and
knowledge of God, they are less to be followed, who forbid us to believe, making most
For no one
ready professions of reason.
doubts that all men are either fools or wise.*
But now I call wise, not clever and gifted
men, but those, in whom there is, so much as
may be in man, the knowledge of man himself and of God most surely received, and a
life and manners suitable to that knowledge;
but all others, whatever be their skill or want
of skill, whatever their manner of life, whether
to be approved or disapproved, I would account in the number of fools.
And, this
being so, who of moderate understanding but
is more useful and
will clearly see, that it
more healthful for fools to obey the precepts
of the wise, than to live by their own judgment ?
For everything that is done, if it be
not rightly done, is a sin, nor can that any
how be rightly done which proceeds not from
Further, right reason is very
right reason.
But to whom of men is virtue at
virtue.
hand, save to the mind of the wise ?
Therefore the wise man alone sins not.
Therefore
every fool sins, save in those actions, in which
he hath obeyed a wise man: for all such
actions proceed from right reason, and, so to
say, the fool is not to be accounted master
of his own action, he being, as it were, the
instrument and that which ministers 5 to the
wise man.
Wherefore, if it be better for all
men not to sin than to sin; assuredly all fools
would live better, if they could be slaves of
And, if no one doubts that this is
the wise.
better in lesser matters, as in buying and
selling, and cultivating the ground, in taking

3 Tenere perceptum.
4 cf . Retract, b. i. ch. 14.4. "Also what I said, 'No one
doubts that all men are either fools or wise,' may seem contrary to
what is read in my third book On Free Will, (c. 24.) 'as though
human nature admitted of no middle state between folly and wisBut that is said when the question was about the first
dom.'
man, whether he was made wise, or foolish, or neither : since we
could in no wise call him foolish, who was made without fault,
since folly is a great fault ; and how we could call him wise, who
was capable of being led astray, did not appear.
' So for shortness
' as though human nature admitted of no
I thought well to say,
middle state between folly and wisdom.'
I also had infants in
view, whom though we confess to bear with them original sin, yet
we cannot properly call either wise or foolish, not as yet using
But now I said that men were either
free will either well or ill.
wise or foolish, meaning those to be understood who are already
using reason, by which they are distinguished from cattle, so as to
be men ; as we say that ' all men wish to be happy.
For can ire.
in so true and manifest a statement be in fear of beiny supposed to
mean infants, who have not vet the power of so wishing?

5 Ministerium.

ON THE PROFIT OF BELIEVING.

a wife, in undertaking and bringing
1 up children, lastly, in the management of household
property, much more in religion.
For both
human matters are more easy to distinguish
between, than divine; and in all matters of
greater sacredness and excellence, the greater
obedience and service we owe them, the more
wicked and the more dangerous is it to sin.
Therefore you see henceforth 2 that nothing
else is left us, so long as we are fools, if our
heart be set on an excellent and religious life,
but to seek wise men, by obeying whom we
may be enabled both to lessen the great feeling of the rule of folly, whilst it is in us, and
at the last to escape from it.

28. Here again arises a very difficult quesFor in what way shall we fools be able
tion.
to find a wise man, whereas this name, although hardly any one dare openly, yet most
men lay claim to indirectly: so disagreeing
one with another in the very matters, in the
knowledge of which wisdom consists, as that
it must needs be that either none of them, or
But when the
but some certain one be wise ?
fool enquires, who is that wise man? I do
not at all see, in what way he can be distinFor by no signs
guished and perceived.
whatever can one recognize any thing, unless
he shall have known that thing, whereof these
But the fool is ignorant of wisare signs.
dom.
For not, as, in the case of gold and
silver and other things of that kind, it is allowed both to know them when you see them,
and not to have them, thus may wisdom be
seen by the mind's eye of him who hath it
For whatever things we come into connot.
tact with by bodily sense, are presented to us
from without; and therefore we may perceive
by the eyes what belong to others, when we
ourselves possess not any of them or of that
But what is perceived by the underkind.
standing is within in the mind, and to have it
But the fool is
is nothing else than to see.
void of wisdom, therefore he knows not wisdom.
For he could not see it with the eyes:
but he cannot see it and not have it, nor have
it and be a fool.
Therefore he knoweth it
not, and, so long as he knoweth it not, he
cannot recognize it in another place. No one,
so long as he is a fool, can by most sure knowledge find out a wise man, by obeying whom
he may be set free from so great evil of folly.
29. Therefore this so vast difficulty, since
our enquiry is about religion, God alone can
remedy: nor indeed, unless we believe both
that He is, and that He helps men's minds,
ought we even to enquire after true religion
For what I ask do we with so great
itself.

1 Or "begetting-"
2 Ben. ed. a modo.Mss. admodum.

sitscipiendis.

endeavor desire to search out? What do we
Whither do we long to
wish to attain unto ?
Is it at that which we believe not
arrive ?
Nothing is more
exists or pertains to us?
perverse than such a state of mind.
Then,
when you would not dare to ask of me a kindness, or at any rate would be shameless in
daring, come you to demand the discovery of
religion, when you think that God neither
exists, nor, if He exist, hath any care for us ?
What, if it be so great a matter, as that it
cannot be found out, unless it be sought carefully and with all our might?
What, if the
very extreme difficulty of discovery be an exercise for the mind of the inquirer, in order
to receive what shall be discovered ?
For
what more pleasant and familiar to our eyes
than this light ? And yet men are unable
after long darkness to hear and endure it.
What more suited to the body exhausted by
sickness than meat and drink ? And yet we
see that persons who are recovering are restrained and checked, lest they dare to commit themselves to the fullness of persons in
health, and so bring to pass by means of their
very food their return to that disease which
I speak of persons who are
used to reject it.
What, the very sick, do we not
recovering.
urge them to take something?
Wherein assuredly they would not with so great discomfort obey us, if they believed not that they
would recover from that disease. When then
will you give yourself up to a search very
full of pains and labor? When will you have
the heart to impose upon yourself so great
care and trouble as the matter deserves, when
you believe not in the existence of that which
you are in search of ?
Rightly therefore
hath it been ordained by the majesty of the
Catholic system of teaching, that they who
approach unto religion be before all things
persuaded to have faith.

30. Wherefore that heretic, (inasmuch as
our discourse is of those who wish to be called
Christians,) I ask you, what reason he alleges
to me ? What is there whereby for him to
call me back from believing, as if from rashIf he bid me believe nothing; I beness?
lieve not that this very true religion hath any
existence in human affairs; and what I beBut He, as I
lieve not to exist, I seek not.
suppose, will show it to me seeking it: for so
" He that seeketh shall find." 3
it is written,
Therefore I should not come unto him, who
forbids me to believe, unless I believed someIs there any greater madness, than
thing.
that I should displease him by faith alone,
which is founded on no knowledge, which
faith alone led me to him ?

3 Matt. vii. 8.

3 62

31. What, that all heretics exhort us to beCan they possibly be more
lieve in Christ ?
opposed to themselves ? And in this matter
they are to be pressed in a twofold way.
In
the first place we must ask of them, where is
the reason which they used to promise, where
the reproof of rashness, where the assumpFor, if it be disgraceful
tion of knowledge ?
to believe any without reason, what do you
wait for, what are you busied about, that I
believe some one without reason, in order that
I may the more easily be led by your reason ?
What, will your reason raise any firm superstructure on the foundation of rashness?
speak after their manner, whom we displease
For I not only judge it most
by believing.
healthful to believe before reason, when you
are not qualified to receive reason, and by
the very act of faith thoroughly to cultivate
the mind to receive the seeds of truth, but altogether a thing of such sort as that without
it health cannot return to sick souls.
And,
in that this seems to them matter for mockery
and full of rashness, surely they are shameless in making it their business that we believe
Next, I confess that I have alin Christ.
ready believed in Christ, and have convinced
myself that what He hath said is true, although it be supported by no reason; is this,
heretic, what you will teach me in the first
Suffer me to consider a little with
place ?
myself, (since I have not seen Christ Himself, as He willed to appear unto men, Who
is said to have been seen by them, even by
common eyes,) who they are that I have believed concerning Him, in order that I may
approach you already furnished beforehand
I see that there are none
with such a faith.
that I have believed, save the confirmed
opinion and widely extended report of peoples
and nations: and that the mysteries of the
Church Catholic have in all times and places
had possession of these peoples. Why therefore shall I not of these, in preference to
others, inquire with all care, what Christ
commanded, by whose authority I have been
moved already to believe that Christ hath
commanded something that
profitable ?
Are you likely to be a better expounder to
me of what He said, Whose past or present
existence I should not believe, if by you I
were to be recommended to believe thus ?
This therefore I have believed, as I said,
trusting to report strengthened by numbers,
But you, who are both
agreement, antiquity.
so few, and so turbulent, and so new, no one
doubts that ye bring forward nothing worthy
What then is that so great
of authority.
madness ?
Believe them, that you are to believe in Christ, and learn from us what He

is

Why, I pray you ?

For were they t
said.
fail and to be unable to teach me any thing
with much greater ease could I persuade my
self, that I am not to believe in Christ, than
that I am to learn any thing concerning Him,
save from those through whom I had believed
in Him. O vast confidence, or rather abI teach you what Christ, in Whom
surdity !
you believe, commanded.
What, in case I
believed not in Him ? You could not, could
you, teach me any thing concerning Him ?
But, says he, it behoves you to believe. You
do not mean, do you, that I am (to believe)
you when you commend Him to my faith ?
No, saith he, for we lead by reason them who
believe in Him. Why then should I believe
in Him ? Because report hath been grounded.
Whether is it through you, or through others ?
Shall I then beThrough others, saith he.
lieve them, in order that you may teach me ?
Perhaps I ought to do so, were it not that
they gave me this chief charge, that I should
not approach you at all;
for they say that
You will answer,
you have deadly doctrines.
They lie. How then shall I believe them
concerning Christ, Whom they have not seen,
(and) not believe them concerning you, whom
Believe the Scripthey are unwilling to see ?
if it be
tures, saith he.
brought forward new and unheard of, or be
commended by few, with no reason to confirm
it, it is not it that is believed, but they who
bring it forward. Wherefore, for those Scriptures, if you are they who bring them forward,
you so few and unknown, I am not pleased to
believe them. At the same time also you are
acting contrary to your promise, in enforcing
faith rather than giving a reason. You will
recall me again to numbers and (common)
Curb, I pray you, your obstinacy,
report.
and that untamed lust, I know not what, of
spreading your name: and advise me rather
to seek the chief men of this multitude, and
to seek with all care and pains rather to learn
something concerning these writings from
these men, but for whose existence, I should
not know that I had to learn at all. But do you
return into your dens, and lay not any snares
under the name of truth, which you endeavor
to take from those, to whom you yourself
grant authority.

But every writing,

32. But if they say that we are not even to
believe in Christ, unless undoubted reason
shall be given us, they are not Christians.
For this is what certain pagans say against
us, foolishly indeed, yet not contrary to, or
But who can
inconsistent with, themselves.
endure that these profess to belong to Christ,

1 Scripture.

ON THE PROFIT OF BELIEVING.

teaches,

themselves

who contend that they are to believe nothing,
unless they shall bring forward to fools most
open reason concerning God ?
But we see
that He Himself, so far as that history, which
willed
they
believe,
nothing before, or more strongly than, that
He should be believed in: whereas they, with
whom He had to do, were not yet qualified
to receive the secret things of God.
For, for
what other purpose are so great and so many
miracles, He Himself also saying, that they
are done for no other cause, than that He
may be believed in ? He used to lead fools
by faith, you lead by reason. He used to
cry out, that He should be believed in, ye
cry out against it. He used to praise such as
believe in Him, ye blame them.
But unless
either Fie should change water into wine, J to
omit other (miracles), if men would follow
Him, doing no such, but (only) teaching;
either we must make no account of that say-
" - or
Believe ye God, believe also Me;
ing,
we must charge him with rashness, who willed
not that He should come into his house, believing that the disease of his servant would
Therefore He
depart at His mere command. 3
bringing to us a medicine such as should heal
our utterly corrupt manners, by miracles procured to Himself authority,' by authority obtained Himself belief, by belief drew together
a multitude, by a multitude possessed antiquity, by antiquity strengthened religion:
so that not only the utterly foolish novelty
of heretics dealing deceitfully, but also the
inveterate error of the nations opposing with
violence, should be unable on any side to
rend it asunder.

"

33. Wherefore, although I am not able to
teach, yet I cease not to advise, that, (whereas
many wish to appear wise, and it
is no easy
matter to discern whether they be fools,) with
all earnestness, and with all prayers, and
lastly with groans, or even, if so it may be,
with tears, you entreat of God to set you free
from the evil of error; if your heart be set on
a happy life. And this will take place the
more easily, if you obey with a willing mind
His commands, which He hath willed should
be confirmed by so great authority of the
For whereas the wise man
Catholic Church.
is so joined to God in mind, as that there is
nothing set between to separate; for God is
Truth; and no one is by any means wise,
unless his mind come into contact with the
Truth; we cannot deny that between the
folly of man, and the most pure Truth of
God, the wisdom of man is set, as something
For the wise man, so far as
in the middle.

1 John ii. 7-9.

2 John xiv. 1.

3 Matt. via. 8, 9.

4 Meruit.

it is given unto him, imitates God; but for a
man who is a fool, there is nothing nearer to
him, than a man who is wise, for him to
imitate with profit: and since, as has been
said, it is not easy to understand this one by
reason, it behoved that certain miracles be
brought near to the very eyes, which fools use
with much greater readiness than the mind,
that, men being moved by authority, their life
and habits might first be cleansed, and they
thus rendered capable of receiving reason.
Whereas, therefore, it needed both that man
be imitated, and that our hope be not set in
man, what could be done on the part of God
more full of kindness and grace, than that
the very pure, eternal, unchangeable Wisdom
of God, unto Whom it behoves us to cleave,
should deign to take upon Him (the nature
That not only He might do what
of) man ?
should invite us to follow God, but also
might suffer what used to deter us from
For, whereas no one can
following God.
attain unto the most sure and chief good,
unless he shall fully and perfectly love it;
which will by no means take place, so long
as the evils of the body and of fortune are
dreaded; He by being born after a miraculous manner and working caused Himself to
be loved; and by dying and rising again shut
And, further, in all other matters,
out fear.
which it were long to go through, He shewed
Himself such, as that we might perceive unto
what the clemency of God could be reached
forth, and unto what the weakness of man be
lifted up.

It is

34. This is, believe me, a most wholesome
authority, this a lifting up first of our mind
from dwelling on the earth, this a turning
from the love of this world unto the True
authority alone which moves
God.
So long as we
fools to hasten unto wisdom.
cannot understand p^ure (truths), it is indeed
wretched to be deceived by authority, but
surely more wretched not to be moved.
For,
if the Providence of God preside not over
human affairs, we have no need to busy ourBut if both the outselves about religion.
ward form of all things, which we must believe assuredly flows from some fountain of
truest beauty, and some, I know not what,
it were, in
inward conscience exhorts, as
public and in private, all the better order of
minds to seek God, and to serve God; we
must not give up all hope that the same God
appointed some authority,
Himself
whereon, resting as on a sure step, we may
But this, setting aside
be lifted up unto God.
reason, which (as we have often said) it is
very hard for fools to understand pure, moves
us two ways; in part by miracles, in part by

hath

6 4

multitude of followers: no one of these is
necessary to the wise man; who denies it?
But this is now the business in hand, that we
may be able to be wise, that is, to cleave to
the truth; which the filthy soul is utterly unable to do: but the filth of the soul, to say
shortly what I mean, is the love of any things
whatsoever save God and the soul: from
which filth the more any one is cleansed, the
more easily he sees the truth.
Therefore to
wish to see the truth, in order to purge your
soul, when as it is purged for the very purpose that you may see, is surely perverse and
Therefore to man unable to
preposterous.
see the truth, authority is at hand, in order
that he may be made fitted for it, and may
allow himself to be cleansed; and, as I said
a little above, no one doubts that this prevails, in part by miracles, in part by multiBut I call that a miracle, whatever
tude.
appears that is difficult or unusual above the
hope or power of them who wonder.
Of
which kind there is nothing more suited for
the people, and in general for foolish men,
than what is brought near to the senses.
But
these, again, are divided into two kinds; for
there are certain, which cause only wonder,
but certain others procure also great favor
For, if one were to see a man
and good-will.
flying, inasmuch as that matter brings no advantage to the spectator, beside the spectacle
But if any affected
itself, he only wonders.
with grievous and hopeless disease were to
recover straightway, upon being bidden, his
affection for him who heals, will go beyond
even his wonder at his healing.
Such were
done at that time at which God in True Man
appeared unto men, as much as was enough.
The sick were
lepers were
healed,
cleansed; walking was restored to the lame,
The
sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf.
men of that time saw water turned into wine,
five thousand filled with five
loaves, seas
passed on foot, dead rising again: thus certain provided for the good of the body by
more open benefit, certain again for the good
of the soul by more hidden sign, and all for
the good of men by their witness to Majesty:
thus, at that time, was the divine authority
moving towards Itself the wandering souls of
Why, say you, do not those
mortal men.
things take place now? because they would
not move, unless they were wonderful, and,
if they were usual, they would not be wonderFor the interchanges of day and night,
ful. 1

the

1 cf. Retract, b. i. c. 14. 5.

" In another place, where I had
made mention of the miracles, which our Lord Jesus did, while
He was here in the Flesh, I added, saying,
' Why, say you, do not
those things take place now?' and I answered, 'Because they
would not move unless they were wonderful, and if they were
usual they would not be wonderful.'
But this I said because not

and the settled order of things in Heaven, the
revolution of years divided into four parts,
the fall and return of leaves to trees, the
boundless power of seeds, the beauty of light,
the varieties of colors, sounds, tastes, and
scents, let there be some one who shall see
and perceive them for the first time, and yet
such an one as we may converse with; he is
stupified and overwhelmed with miracles: but
we contemn all these, not because they are
easy to understand, (for what more obscure
than the causes of these ?) but surely because
they constantly meet our senses.
Therefore
they were done at a very suitable time, in
order that, by these a multitude of believers
having been gathered together and spread
abroad, authority might be turned with effect
upon habits.

35. But any habits whatever have so great
power to hold possession of men's minds,
that even what in them are evil, which usually
takes place through excess of lusts, we can
sooner disapprove of and hate, than desert or
change. Do you think that little hath been
done for the benefit of man, that not some
few very learned men maintain by argument,
but also an unlearned crowd of males and
females in so many and different nations both
believe and set forth, that we are to worship
as God nothing of earth, nothing of fire,
nothing, lastly, which comes into contact with
the senses of the body, but that we are to
seek to approach Him by the understanding
only? that abstinence is extended even unto
the slenderest food of bread and water, and
2 but also confastings not only for the day,
tinued through several days together;
that
chastity is carried even unto the contempt of
marriage and family; that patience even unto
the setting light by crosses and flames; that
liberality even unto the distribution of estates
unto the poor; that, lastly, the contempt of
this whole world even unto the desire of
death ? Few do these things, yet fewer do
them well and wisely: but whole nations approve, nations hear, nations favor, nations,
Nations accuse their own weaklastly, love.
ness that they cannot do these things, and
that not without the mind being carried forward unto God, nor without certain sparks of
This hath been brought to pass by
virtue.
the Divine Providence, through the prophecies
of the Prophets, through the manhood and
teaching of Christ, through the journeys of
the Apostles, through the insults, crosses,
blood, of the Martyrs, through the praiseworthy life of the Saints, and, in all these,

so great miracles, nor all take place now, not because there are
none wrought even now."

2 Quotidiana, i. e. each day till evening.

ON THE PROFIT OF BELIEVING.

-

according as times were seasonable, through
miracles worthy of so great matters and virtues. When therefore we see so great help
of God, so great progress and fruit, shall we
doubt to hide ourselves in the bosom of that
Church, which even unto the confession of
the human race from [the] apostolic chair 1
through successions of Bishops,
(heretics in
vain lurking around her and being condemned,
partly by the judgment of the very people,
partly by the weight of councils, partly also
by the majesty of miracles,) hath held the
To be unwilling to
summit of authority.
grant to her the first place,
3 is either surely
the height of impiety, or is headlong arroFor, if there be no sure way unto
gance.
wisdom and health of souls, unless where
faith prepare them for reason, what else is it
to be ungrateful for the Divine help and aid,
authority furnished
than to wish to resist
with so great labor? 4 And if every system
of teaching, however mean and easy, requires,
in order to its being received, a teacher or
master, what more full of rash pride, than, in
the case of books of divine mysteries, 5 both
to be unwilling to learn from such as interpret
them, and to wish to condemn them unlearned ?

36. Wherefore, if either our reasoning or
our discourse hath in any way moved you,
and if you have, as I believe, a true care for
yourself, I would you would listen to me,
and with pious faith, lively hope, and simple
charity, entrust yourself to good teachers of
Catholic Christianity; and cease not to pray
unto God Himself, by Whose goodness alone
we were created, and suffer punishment by His
justice, and are set free by His mercy. Thus
there will be wanting to you neither precepts
and treatises of most learned and truly Christian men, nor books, nor calm thoughts themselves, whereby you may easily find what you
For do you abandon utterly
are seeking.
those wordy and wretched men, (for what
other milder name can I use?) who, whilst
evil, find
they
And on this question they
nothing but evil.
but
often rouse their hearers to inquire;
after that they have been roused, they teach
them such lessons as that it were preferable
even to sleep for ever, than thus to be awake.
For in place of lethargic they make them
frantic, between which diseases, both being
usually fatal, there is still this difference, that
lethargic persons die without doing violence

seek to excess whence is

1 He clearly means the Apostolic office and presidency in general. For illustration, see St. Cyprian on the Unity of the Church,
8. 3 and 4. vid. Oxf. Tr. p. 134, and note.

successioncs." Compare Con. Faustus, b. xiii.

"

2 The plural
13, xxxii.

3 Primas.

, 19, xxxiii.

6, 9.
4 al. strength.

5 Sacramentorum.

have

What then

censuring these.

to others; but the frantic person many who
are sound, and specially they who wish to
For neither
help him, have reason to fear.
is God the author of evil, nor hath it ever repented Him that He hath done aught, nor is
He troubled by storm of any passion of soul,
nor is a small part of earth His Kingdom:
He neither approves nor commands any sins
or wickedness, He never lies.
For these and
such like used to move us, when they used
them to make great and threatening assaults,
and charged this as being the system of
teaching of the Old Testament, which is most
Thus then I allow that they do right
false.

in
learnt? What think you, save that, when
these are censured, the Catholic system of
Thus what I had
teaching is not censured.
learnt among them that is true, I hold, what
is false that I had thought I reject.
But the
Catholic Church hath taught me many other
things also, which those men of bloodless
bodies, but coarse minds, cannot aspire unto;
that is to say, that God is not corporeal, that
no part of Him can be perceived by corporeal
eyes, that nothing of His Substance or Nature
can any way suffer violence or change, or is
compounded or formed; and if you grant me
these, (for we may not think otherwise contheir devices are overcerning God,) all
is, that neither God
thrown.
begot or created evil, nor yet is there, or hath
there been ever, any nature and substance,
which God either begot not or created not,
and yet that He setteth us free from evil, is
proved by reasons so necessary, that it cannot
at all be matter of doubt; especially to you
and such as you; that is, if to a good disposition there be added piety and a certain peace
of mind, without which nothing at all can be
understood concerning so great matters. And
here there is no rumor concerning smoke, and
I know not what Persian vain fable, unto
which it is enough to lend an ear, and soul
Far alnot subtile, but absolutely childish.
together, far otherwise is the truth, than as
But since this discourse
the Mancihees dote.
of ours hath gone much further than I thought,
here let us end the book; in which I wish you
to remember, that I have not yet begun to
refute the Manichees, and that I have not yet
assailed that nonsense; and that neither have
I unfolded any thing great concerning the
Catholic Church itself, but that I have only
wished to root out of you, if I could, a false
notion concerning true Christians that was
maliciously or ignorantly suggested to us,
and to arouse you to learn certain great and
Wherefore let this volume be
divine things.
as it is; but when your soul becomes more

But how it

3 66

calmed, I shall perhaps be more ready in
what remains. 1

1 cf. Retr. b. i. ch. 14. 6.

" But in the end of the book I say,
' But since this discourse of ours, &c.'
This I did not say in such
sort as though I had not hitherto written anything against the

Manichaeans, or had not committed to writing anything at all
about Catholic doctrine, when so many volumes before published
were witnesses that I had not been silent on either subject ; but in
this book written to him I had not yet begun to refute the Manichaeans, and had not yet attacked those follies, nor had I as yet
opened anything great concerning the Catholic Church itself
; because I hoped that after that beginning made, 1 should write to
that same person what I had not yet here written."

ST. AUGUSTIN:

ON

THE CREED:

A SERMON TO THE CATECHUMENS.

>

[DE SYMBOLO AD CATECHUMENOS.]

TRANSLATED BY THE

REV. C.

L. CORNISH, M.A.,

OF EXETER COLLEGE, OXFORD.

ON THE CREED:
A SERMON TO THE CATECHUMENS.
[DE SYMBOLO AD CATECHUMENOS.]

i. Receive, my children, the Rule of Faith,
which is called the Symbol (or Creed *). And
when ye have received it, write it in your
heart, and be daily saying it to yourselves;
before ye sleep, before ye go forth, arm you
The Creed no man writes
with your Creed.
so as it may be able to be read: but for rehearsal of it, lest haply forgetfulness obliterate what care hath delivered, let your memory be your record-roil: 2 what ye are about to
hear, that are ye to believe; and what ye
shall have believed, that are about to give
back with your tongue.
For the Apostle
says, "With the heart man believeth unto
righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation." 3
For this is
the Creed which ye are to rehearse and to
These words which ye
repeat in answer.
have heard are in the Divine Scriptures scattered up and down: but thence gathered and
reduced into one, that the memory of slow
persons might not be distressed; that every
person may be able to say, able to hold, what
For have ye now merely heard
he believes.
that God is Almighty ? But ye begin to have
him for your father, when ye have been born
by the church as your Mother.

2. Of this, then, ye have now received,
have meditated, and having meditated have
"
I believe in God
held, that ye should say,
God is Almighty,
the Father Almighty."
and yet, though Almighty, He cannot die,
cannot be deceived, cannot lie; and, as the
' ' cannot deny Himself. " 4 How
Apostle says,
many things that He cannot do, and yet is
Almighty! yea therefore is Almighty, because
He cannot do these things.
For if He could
die, He were not Almighty; if to lie, if to be
deceived, if to do unjustly, were possible for
Him, He were not Almighty: because if this

were in Him, He should not be worthy to be
Almighty. To our Almighty Father, it is quite
impossible to sin. He does whatsoever He
will: that is Omnipotence. He does whatsoever He rightly will, whatsoever He justly
will: but whatsoever is evil to do, He wills
There is no resisting one who is Alnot.
mighty, that He should not do what He will.
It was He Who made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, invisible and
Invisible such
as are in heaven,
visible.
dominions, principalities, powers,
thrones,
archangels, angels: all, if we shall live aright,
our fellow-citizens. He made in heaven the
things visible; the sun, the moon, the stars.
With its terrestrial animals He adorned the
earth, filled the air with things that fly, the
land with them that walk and creep, the sea
with them that swim: all He filled with their
own proper creatures. He made also man
after His own image and likeness, in the mind:
This is the
for in that is the image of God.
reason why the mind cannot be comprehended even by itself, because in it
is the
image of God. To this end were we made,
that over the other creatures we should bear
rule: but through sin in the first man we fell,
and are all come into an inheritance of death.
We were brought low, became mortal, were
filled with fears, with errors: this by desert
of sin: with which desert and guilt is every
man born. 5
This is the reason why, as ye
have seen to-day, as ye know, even little children undergo exsufflation, exorcism; to drive
away from them the power of the devil their
enemy, which deceived man that it might
It is not then the creature
possess mankind.
of God that in infants undergoes exorcism or
exsufflation: but he under whom are all that
6 of sinare born with sin; for he is the first
And for this cause by reason of one
ners.

1 Symbolum.
3 Rom. x. io.

2 2 Codex.
4 2 Tim. ii. 13.

5 Gen. i-iii.

6 Princeps.

3/0

who fell and brought all into death, there
was sent One without sin, Who should bring
unto life, by delivering them from sin,
that believe on Him.

all

3. For this reason we believe also in His
that is to say, God the Father AlSon,
" His Only Son, our Lord." When
mighty's,
thou hearest of the Only Son of God, acknowledge Him God.
For it could not be that
God's Only Son should not be God. What
He is, the same did He beget, though He is
not that Person Whom He begot.
If He be
truly Son, He is that which the Father is; if
He be not that which the Father is, He is not
Observe mortal and earthly creatruly Son.
what each is, that it engendereth.
tures:
Man begets not an ox, sheep begets not dog,
Whatever it be that begetnor dog sheep.
Hold ye
teth, that which it is, it begetteth.
therefore boldly, firmly, faithfully, that the
Begotten of God the Father is what Himself
These mortal creatures engenis, Almighty.
Does God so beget ? He
der by corruption.
that is begotten mortal generates that which
himself is; the Immortal generates what He
is: corruptible begets corruptible, Incorrupthe corruptible
tible begets Incorruptible:
begets corruptibly, Incorruptible, Incorruptibly: yea, so begetteth what Itself is, that One
Ye know,
begets One, and therefore Only.
that when I pronounced to you the Creed, so
I said, and so ye are boundento believe; that
we "
believe in God the Father Almighty,
Here
and in Jesus Christ His Only Son."
too, when thou believest that He is the Only,
believe Him Almighty: for it
is not to be
thought that God the Father does what He
will, and God the Son does not what He will.
One Will of Father and Son, because one
For it is impossible for the will of
Nature.
the Son to be any whit parted from the
God and God; both one God:
Father's will.
Almighty and Almighty; both One Almighty.
4. We do not bring in two Gods as some
" God the Father and God the
do, who say,
Son, but greater God the Father and lesser
They both are what? Two
God the Son.''
Gods? Thou blushest to speak it, blush to
Lord God the Father, thou saybelieve it.
est, and Lord God the Son: and the Son Him-
" No man can serve two Lords." *
self saith,
In His family shall we be in such wise, that,
like as in a great house where there is the
father of a family and he hath a son, so we
should say, the greater Lord, the lesser
Lord ?
Shrink from such a thought.
If ye
make to yourselves such-like in your heart,
ye setup idols in the "one soul "
Utterly re-

Dost thou marvel ?

First believe, then understand. Now
pel it.
to whom God gives that when he has believed
he soon understands; that is God's gift, not
human frailness.
Still, if ye do not yet understand, believe: One God the Father, God
Both are what? One
Christ the Son of God.
God. And how are both said to be One
God ? How ?
In the
Acts of the Apostles, "There was," it says,
"
in the believers, one soul and one heart." 2
There were many souls, faith had made them
So many thousands of souls were there;
one.
they loved each other, and many are one:
they loved God in the fire of charity, and from
being many they are come to the oneness of
If all those many souls the dearness
beauty.
of love 3 made one soul, what must be the
dearness of love in God, where is no diversity,
If on earth and among
but entire equality !
men there could be so great charity as of so
many souls to make one soul, where Father
from Son, Son from Father, hath been ever
inseparable, could They both be other than
One God ?
Only, those souls might be called
both many souls and one soul; but God, in
Whom is ineffable and highest conjunction,
may be called One God, not two Gods.

Son.

5 . The Father doeth what He will, and what
He will doeth the Son. Do not imagine an
Almighty Father and a not Almighty Son: it
is error, blot it out within you, let it not cleave
in your memory, let it not be drunk into your
faith, and if haply any of you shall have drunk
it in, let him vomit it up.
Almighty is the
Father, Almighty the
If Almighty
begat not Almighty, He begat not very Son.
For what say we, brethren, if
the Father
being greater begat a Son less than He?
What said I, begat ? Man engenders, being
greater, a son being less: it is true: but that
is because the one grows old, the other grows
up, and by very growing attains to the form
The Son of God, if He growof his father.
eth not because neither can God wax old, was
And being begotten perbegotten perfect.
fect, if He groweth not, and remained not
less, He is equal.
For that ye may know
Almighty begotten of Almighty, hear Him
Who is Truth.
That which of Itself Truth
saith, is true. What saith Truth? What saith
" Whatsoever things
the Son, Who is Truth ?
the Father doeth, these also the Son likewise
doeth." 4 The Son is Almighty, in doing all
things that He willeth to do.
For if the
Father doeth some things which the Son
doeth not, the Son said falsely, "Whatsoever
things the Father doeth, these also the Son
doeth likewise." But because the Son spake

1 Matt. vi. 24.

2 Acts iv. 32.

3 Charitas.

4 John v. 19.

ON THE CREED.

o/

"Whatsoever things the
truly, believe it:
Father doeth, these also the Son doeth likewise," and ye have believed in the Son that
He is Almighty.
Which word although ye
said not in the Creed, yet this is it that ye
expressed when ye believed in the Only Son,
Hath the Father aught that
Himself God.
the Son hath not ?
This Arian heretic blasphemers say, not I.
If the
Father hath aught that the Son hath not, the
in saying, "All things
Son lieth
the
Father hath, are Mine." ' Many and innumerable are the testimonies by which it
proved that the Son is Very Son of God the
Father, and the Father God hath His Verybegotten Son God, and Father and Son is One
God.

But what say I ?

that

is

us.

Christ's

"Born of

6. But this Only Son of God, the Father
Almighty, let us see what He did for us,
what He suffered for
the
"
Holy Ghost and of the Virgin Mary.
He, so great God, equal with the Father,
born of the Holy Ghost and of the Virgin
Mary, born lowly, that thereby He might
heal the proud. Man exalted himself and
fell; God humbled Himself and raised him
it ? God
up.
hath stretched out an hand to man laid low.
We fell, He descended: we lay low, He
Let us lay hold and rise, that we
stooped.
So then His stoopfall not into punishment.
" Born of the Holy Ghost
ing to us is this,
and of the Virgin Mary."
His very Nativity
too as man, it is lowly, and it is lofty. Whence
That as man He was born of men.
lowly?
That He was born of a virWhence lofty ?
gin, A virgin conceived, a virgin bore, and
after the birth was a virgin still.

lowliness, what is

7. What next?

"Suffered under Pontius
Pilate." He was in office as governor and
was the judge, this same Pontius Pilate, what
In the name of the
time as Christ suffered.
judge there is a mark of the times, when He
suffered under Pontius Pilate: when He suffered, "was crucified, dead, and buried."
Who ? what ?
for whom ? Who ? God's Only
Crucified, dead, and
Son, our Lord.
buried. For whom ? for ungodly and sinners.
" What
Great condescension, great grace !
shall I render unto the Lord for all that He
hath bestowed on me ?

What ?

" -
8. He was begotten

Begotten before."

times,
Bebefore all worlds.
fore what, He in Whom is no before? Do
not in the least imagine any time before
Christ whereby He was
that Nativity of
begotten of the Father; of
that Nativity
I am speaking by which He is Son of

before all

"

beginning.

with His

Of eternal, coeternal.

God Almighty, His Only Son our Lord; of
Do not imagine in
that am I first speaking.
this Nativity a beginning of time; do not
imagine any space of eternity in which the
Father was and the Son was not.
Since when
the Father was, since then the Son. And
what is that "
since," where is no beginning ?
Therefore ever Father without be<nnnimr,
And how,
ever Son without
thou wilt say, was He begotten, if He have
At
no beginning?
no time was the Father, and the Son not, and
Whence is
yet Son of Father was begotten.
any manner of similitude to be had ? We are
among things of earth, we are in the visible
Let the earth give me a similitude:
creature.
Let the element of the waters
it gives none.
give me some similitude: it hath not whereof
Some animal give me a similitude:
to give.
neither can this do it. An animal indeed engenders, both what engenders and what is
engendered: but first is the father, and then is
born the son.
Let us find the coeval and
If we shall be able
imagine it coeternal.
to find a father coeval with his son, and
son coeval with his father, let us believe
God the Father
coeval
Son,
and God the Son coeternal with His Father.
On earth we can find some coeval, we
Let us stretch 3
cannot find any coeternal.
Some
the coeval and imagine it coeternal.
one, it may be, will put you on the stretch,
by saying, "When is
for a
father to be found coeval with his son, or
That the father
son coeval with his father ?
may beget he goes before in age; that the son
may be begotten, he comes after in age: but
this father coeval with son, or son with father,
how can it be ?
Imagine to yourselves fire
as father, its shining as son; see, we have found
From the instant that the fire
the coevals.
begins to be, that instant it begets the shining: neither fire before shining, nor shining
fire. And if we ask, which begets
after
which ? the fire the shining, or the shining the
Immediately ye conceive by natural
fire?
sense, by the innate wit of your minds ye all
cry out, The fire the shining, not the shining
Lo, here you have a father beginthe fire.
ning; lo, a son at the same time, neither going before nor coming after.
Lo, here then
is a father beginning, lo, a son at the same time
If I have shown you a father bebeginning.
ginning, and a son at the same time beginning, believe the Father not beginning, and
with Him the Son not beginning either; the
one eternal, the other coeternal.
If ye get
on with your learning, ye understand: take

possible

"

it

1 John xvi. 15.

2 Ps. cxvi. 12.

3 Intendamus.

4 Intentos.

7'

" x

The being born, ye have;
pains to get on.
but also the growing, ye ought to have; beAs
cause no man begins with being perfect.
for the Son of God, indeed, He could be born
perfect, because He was begotten without
time, coeternal with the Father, long before
all things, not in age, but in eternity. He
then was begotten coeternal, of which genera-
" His generation who
tion the Prophet said,
begotten of the Father withshall declare ?
out time, He was born of the Virgin in the
This nativity had times
fullness of times.
In opportunity of time, when
going before it.
He would, when He knew, then was He born:
for He was not born without His will.
None
of us is born because he will, and none of us
dies when he will: He, when He would, was
born; when He would, He died: how He
would, He was born of a Virgin: how He
would, He died; on the cross.
Whatever
He would, He did: because He was in such
2 He was God; God
wise Man that, unseen,
assuming, Man assumed; 3 One Christ, God
and Man.

9. Of His cross what shall I speak, what
say ? This extremest kind of death He chose,
that not any kind of death might make His
The doctrine He shewed
Martyrs afraid.
in His life as Man, the example of patience
Fie demonstrated in His Cross.
There, you
have the work, that He was crucified; example of the work, the Cross; reward of the work,
Resurrection. He shewed us in the Cross
what we ought to endure, He shewed in the
Resurrection what we have to hope.
Just like
a consummate task-master in the matches of
the arena, He said, Do, and bear; do the
work and receive the prize; strive in the match
What is the
and thou shalt be crowned.
work? Obedience. What the prize ? Resurrection
add,
"without death?"
Because Lazarus rose,
and died: Christ rose again,
dieth no more,
death will no longer have dominion over
Him.*' 4
" Ye have heard of the
patience of Job, and have seen the end of the
Lord." 5 When we read what great trials Job
endured, it makes one shudder, it makes one
And what did
shrink, it makes one quake.
he receive ? The double of what he had lost.
Let not a man therefore with an eye to temporal rewards be willing to have patience, and
Let me endure loss, God
say to himself,
will give me back sons twice as many; Job
received double of all, and begat as many
sons as he had buried." Then is this not the

10. Scripture saith,

Why did

without

death.

"

"

For if

but avarice.

double ?
Yes, precisely the double, because
Let none say,
the former sons still lived.
"
Let me bear evils, and God will repay me
" that it be now no longer
as He repaid Job:
it was not
patience
patience which that Saint had, nor a brave
enduring of all that came upon him; the testimony which the Lord gave, whence should
" Hast thou observed," saith the
he have it?
Lord, "my servant Job?
For there is not
like him any on the earth, a man without
6 a true worshipper of God." What a
fault,
testimony, my brethren, did this holy man
And yet him a bad
deserve of the Lord !
woman sought by her persuasion to deceive,
she too representing that serpent, who, like
as in Paradise he deceived the man whom
God first made, so likewise here by suggesting blasphemy thought to be able to deceive
a man who pleased God.
What things he
suffered, my brethren ! Who can have so
much to suffer in his estate, his house, his sons,
his flesh, yea in his very wife who was left to
But even her who was left,
be his tempter !
the devil would have taken away long ago,
but that he kept her to be his helper: because by Eve he had mastered the first man,
What things,
therefore had he kept an Eve.
then, he suffered ! He lost all that he had;
his house fell; would that were all ! it crushed
And, to see that patience had
his sons also.
great place in him, hear what he answered;
' The Lord gave, the Lord hath taken away;
as it pleased the Lord, so hath it been done; 7
He
blessed be the name of the Lord." 8
hath taken what He gave, is He lost Who
gave ? He hath taken what He gave.
As if
he should say, He hath taken away all, let
Him take all, send me away naked, and let
me keep Him.
What shall I lack if I have
God ? or what is the good of all else to me,
I have not God ? Then it came to his
flesh, he was stricken with a wound from
head to foot; he was one running sore, one
mass of crawling worms: and showed himself
The
immovable in his God, stood fixed.
woman wanted, devil's helper as she was not
husband's comforter, to put him up to blas-
" How long," said she, "dost
pheme God.
thou suffer" so and so; "speak some word
So then, beagainst the Lord, 9 and die." 10
cause he had been brought low, he was to
And this the Lord did, in order
be exalted.
to show it to men; as for His servant, He
kept greater things for him in heaven.
So
then Job who was brought low, He exalted;
the devil who was lifted up, He brought low:

if

1 Is. liii. 8.
3 Susceptor susceptus.

[See R. V.]

2 Ut lateret Deus.
4 Rom. vi. 9.

S James v. 11.

6 Querela.
9 Lat. from LXX.

7 Lat. from LXX.
10 Job ii. 9.

8 Job i. 21.

ON THE CREED.

O/O

" He putteth down one and setteth up anfor
But let not any man, my beloved
other.'' 1
brethren, when he suffers any such-like tribulations, look for a reward here: for instance,
if he suffer any losses, let him not peradven-
" The Lord gave, the Lord hath
ture say,
taken away; as it pleased the Lord, so is it
done: blessed be the name of the Lord;"
only with the mind to receive twice as much
Let patience praise God, not avarice.
again.
If what thou hast lost thou seekest to receive
back twofold, and therefore praisest God, it
is of covetousness thou praisest, not of love.
Do not imagine this to be the example of
that holy man; thou deceivest thyself. When
Job was enduring all, he was not hoping for
to have twice as much again.
Both in his
first confession when he bore up under his
losses, and bore out to the grave the dead
bodies of his sons, and in the second when
he was now suffering torments of sores in his
flesh, ye may observe what I am saying.
Of
his former confession the words run thus:
" The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken
away: as it pleased the Lord, so is it done:
blessed be the name of the Lord." 2 He
" The Lord gave, and the
might have said,
Lord hath taken away; He that took away
can once more give ; can bring back more
" As
than He took." He said not this, but,
it pleased the Lord," said
done: " because it pleases Him, let it please
me: let not that which hath pleased the good
Lord misplease His submissive servant; what
pleased the Physician, not misplease the sick
Hear his other confession: "Thou
man.
hast spoken," said he to his wife,
like one of
the foolish women. If we have received TOod
at the hand of the Lord, why shall we not
He did not add, what, if he
bear evil ?
had said it, would have been true. "The
Lord is able both to bring back my flesh into
its former condition, and that which He hath
taken away from us, to make manifold more:"
lest he should seem to have endured in hope
This was not what he said, not what
of this.
But, that we might be taught,
he hoped.
did the Lord that for him, not hoping for it,
by which we should be taught, that God was
with him: because if He had not also restored
to him those things, there was the crown
indeed, but hidden, and we could not see it.
And therefore what says the divine Scripture
in exhorting to patience and hope of things
future, not reward of things present? "Ye
have heard of the patience of Job, and have
seen the end of the Lord." Why is it,
the
patience of Job," and not, Ye have seen the

he, "so is

" 3

"

"

it

1 Ps. Ixxv. 7.

- Job i. xxi.

3 Job ii. 10.

Thou wouldest open
end of Job himself ?
thy mouth for the "twice as much;" would-
" Thanks be to God; let me bear up:
est say,
I receive twice as much again, like Job."
The
"Patience of Job, end of the Lord."
patience of Job we know, and the end of the
What end of the Lord ?
Lord we know. 4
" My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken
Me?"
They are the words of the Lord
hanging on the cross. He did as it were
leave Him for present felicity, not leave Him
the end
for eternal immortality.
The Jews hold Him, the
of the Lord."
Jews insult, the Jews bind Him, crown Him
thorns, dishonor Him with spitting,
with
scourge Him, overwhelm Him with revilings,
hang Him upon the tree, pierce Him with a
spear, last of all bury Him. He was as it
were left: but by whom ? By those insulting
Therefore thou shalt but to this end
ones.
have patience, that thou mayest rise again
and not die, that is, never die, even as Christ.
For so we read,
Christ rising from the dead
henceforth dieth not." 5

In this is

"

"

"

11.

" He ascended into heaven:" believe.
" He sitteth at the right hand of the Father: ' '
By sitting, understand dwelling: as
believe.
[in Latin] we say of any person,
In that
The
country he dwelt (sedit) three years."
Scripture also has that expression, that such
an one dwelt (sedissc) in a city for such a
Not meaning that he sat and never
time. 6
rose up? On this account the dwellings of
7 Where people
men are called seats (sedes).
are seated (in this sense), are they always sitIs there no rising, no walking, no lyting?
ing down ? And yet they are called seats
In this way, then, believe an in-
(sedes).
habiting of Christ on the right hand of God
the Father: He is there. And let not your
heart say to you, What is He doing? Do
not want to seek what is not permitted to
He is
find: He is there;
blessed, and from blessedness which is called
the right hand of the Father, of very blessedness the name is, right hand of the Father.
For if we shall take it carnally, then because
He sitteth on the right hand of the Father,
the Father will be on His left hand.
Is it
consistent with piety so to put Them together,
the Son on the right, the Father on the left ?
There it is all right-hand, because no misery
is there.

it suffices you.

12. "Thence He shall come to judge the
quick and dead." The quick, who shall be
alive and remain; the dead, who shall have
It may also be understood thus:
gone before.

4 Ps. xxii. 1.
5 Rom. vi. 9. The Article of the descent into Hell appears not

to have been included in this Creed.

6 1 Kings ii. 38. LXX.

7 Cf. Serra. 214, n. 8. Ben.

13.

The living, the just;
the dead, the unjust.
For He judges both, rendering unto each his
To the just He will say in the judgown.
"
Come, ye blessed of My Father, rement,
ceive the kingdom prepared for you from the
For this prepare
beginning of the world." 1
yourselves, for these things hope, for this
live, and so live, for this believe, for this be
" Come
baptized, that it may be said to you,
ye blessed of My Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
To them on the left hand,
of the world."
" Go into everlasting fire prepared for
what?
Thus will they
the devil and his angels/'
be judged by Christ, the quick and the dead.
We have spoken of Christ's first nativity,
which is without time; spoken of the other in
the fullness of time, Christ's nativity of the
Virgin; spoken of the passion of Christ;
spoken of the coming of Christ to judgment.
The whole is spoken, that was to be spoken
But
of Christ, God's Only Son, our Lord.
not yet is the Trinity perfect.

It follows in the Creed, "And in the
This Trinity, one God, one
Holy Ghost."
nature, one substance, one power; highest
equality, no division, no diversity, perpetual
dearness of love. 3 Would ye know the Holy
Ghost, that He is God ?
Be baptized, and
The Apostle says,
ye will be His temple.
" Know ye not that your bodies are the temple within you of the Holy Ghost, Whom ye
have of God ?" 4 A temple is for God: thus
also Solomon, king and prophet, was bidden
If he had built a
to build a temple for God.
temple for the sun or moon or some star or
some angel, would not God condemn him ?
Because therefore he built a temple for God,
he showed that he worshipped God. And of
Of wood and stone, bewhat did he build ?
cause God deigned to make unto Himself by
His servant an house on earth, where He
might be asked, where He might be had in
mind.
Stephen says,
"Solomon built Him an house; howbeit the
Most High dwelleth not in temples made by
hand." 5
If then our bodies are the temple
of the Holy Ghost, what manner of God is it
that built a temple for the Holy Ghost ? But
For if our bodies be a temple of
it was God.
the Holy Ghost, the same built this temple
for the Holy Ghost, that built our bodies.
Listen to the Apostle saying, "God hath
tempered the body, giving unto that which
" 6 when he was
lacked the greater honor;
speaking of the different members that there
God
should be no schisms in the body.

Of which

blessed

And the

The grass, God created;
created our body.
our body Who created ? How do we prove
that the grass is God's creating? He that
Read the Gospel,
clothes, the same creates.
"If then the grass of the field," saith it,
"
which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into
the oven, God so clotheth." 7
He, then,
creates Who clothes.
Apostle:
" Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not
quickened except it die; and that which thou
sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall
be, but a bare grain, as perchance of wheat,
or of some other corn; but God giveth it a
body as He would, and to each one of seeds
If then it be God that
its proper body." 8
builds our bodies, God that
builds our
members, and our bodies are the temple
of the Holy Ghost, doubt not that
the
Holy Ghost is God. And do not add as it
were a third God; because Father and Son
and Holy Ghost is One God.
So believe ye.
14. It follows after commendation of the
Trinity, "The Holy Church."
God is
" For the
pointed out, and His temple.
temple of God is holy," says the Apostle,
"
which (temple) are ye." 9 This same is the
Church, the one Church, the
true
holy
Church, the catholic Church, fighting against
all heresies: fight, it can: be fought down, it
As for heresies, they went all out
cannot.
of it, like as unprofitable branches pruned
from the vine: but itself abideth in its root,
*' The gates of
in its Vine, in its charity.
hell shall not prevail against it."

15.

Let none say,

Forgiveness of sins." Ye have [this
article of] the Creed perfectly in you when
" I have
ye receive Baptism.
done this or that sin: perchance that is not
forgiven me." What hast thou done? How
great a sin hast thou done ? Name any heinous thing thou hast committed, heavy, horrible, which thou shudderest even to think of:
have done what thou wilt: hast thou killed
There is not than that deed any
Christ ?
worse, because also than Christ there
What a dreadful thing is it
nothing better.
to kill Christ ! Yet the Jews killed Him, and
many afterwards believed on Him and drank
His blood: they are forgiven the sin which
they committed. When ye have been baptized, hold fast a good life in the commandments of God, that ye may guard your BapI do not tell you
tism even unto the end.
that ye will live here without sin; but they
are venial, without which this life
is not.
For the sake of all sins was Baptism provided;
for the sake of light sins, without which we
What hath
cannot be, was prayer provided."

is

"

1 Matt. xxv. 34.
3 Charitas.
5 Acts vii. 47, 48

2 Matt. xxv. 41.
4 1 Cor. vi. 19.
6 1 Cor. xii. 24.

7 Matt. vi. 30.
10 Matt. xvi. 18.

8 1 Cor. xv.

36-38.

[See R.V.]

9 1 Cor. iii. 17.
11 Inventus.

ON THE CREED.

"Forgive us our debts, as we
the Prayer?
also forgive our debtors." x Once for all we
have washing in Baptism, every day we have
Only, do not commit
washing in prayer.
those things for which ye must needs be
separated from Christ's body: which be far
For those whom ye have seen
from you !
committed
heinous
doing
things, either adulteries or some enormous
crimes: for these they do penance.
Because
if theirs had been light sins, to blot out these
daily prayer would suffice.

penance,

2 have

1 6. In three ways then are sins remitted
in the Church; by Baptism, by prayer, by
the greater humility of penance; yet God
The
doth not remit sins but to the baptized.
very sins which He remits first, He remits
not but to the baptized. When? when they
The sins which are after reare baptized.
mitted upon prayer, upon penance, to whom
He remits, it is to the baptized that He reFor how can they say, "Our
mitteth.
Father," who are not yet born sons? The
Catechumens, so long as they be such, have
upon them all their sins.
If Catechumens,

how much more Pagans ? how much more
But to heretics we do not change
heretics ?
Why? because they have
their baptism.
baptism in the same way as a deserter has
the soldier's mark: 3
just so these also have
Baptism; they have it, but to be condemned
thereby, not crowned. And yet if the deserter himself, being amended, begin to do
duty as a soldier, does any man dare to
change his mark ?

17. We believe also "the resurrection of
the flesh," which went before in Christ: that
the body too may have hope of that which
The Head of the
went before in its Head.
the Church, the body of
Church, Christ:
Our Head is risen, ascended into
Christ.
heaven: where the Head, there also the memIn what way the resurrection of the
bers.
Lest any should chance to think it
flesh ?
like as Lazarus's resurrection, that thou mayest know it to be not so, it is added,
Into
life everlasting." God regenerate you ! God
preserve and keep you ! God bring you safe
unto Himself, Who is the Life Everlasting.
Amen.

"

i Matt. vi. 12.

[See R.V.]

2 "

Agere poenitentiam.

3 " Characterem"

ST. AUGUSTIN:

ON CONTINENCE.

[DE CONTINENTIA.]

TRANSLATED BY

REV. C.

L. CORNISH, MA,

OF EXETER COLLEGE, OXFORD.

ON CONTINENCE.

[DE CONTINENTIA.]

St. Augustin speaks of his work On Continence in Ep. 231, Ad Darium Comitcm.

[See
Possidius, Ind. c. 10, mentions it, and it is cited in
vol. I. of this edition, p. 584.
the Collectanea of Bede or Florus, and by Eugypius.
Erasmus is therefore wrong in ascribing it to Hugo on the ground of the style, which is not unlike that of the earlier discourses.
It is evidently a discourse, and probably for that reason unnoticed in the Retractations. The
Manichasan heresy is impugned after the manner of his early works.
{Abridged from Benedictine ed. vol. vi.)

P. S.]

1. It is difficult to treat of the virtue of
the soul, which is called Continence, in a
manner fully suitable and worthy; but He,
whose great gift this virtue is, will help our
littleness under the burden of so great a
For He, who bestows it upon His
weight.
faithful ones when they are continent, Himself gives discourse of it to His ministers when
Lastly, of so great a matter
they speak.
purposing to speak what Himself shall grant,
in the first place we say and prove that Continence is the gift of God. 1 We have it
written in the Book of Wisdom, that no one
can be continent, unless God grant it.
But
the Lord, concerning that greater and more
glorious Continence itself, whereby there is
continence from the marriage bond, says,
" Not all can receive this saying, but they to
whom it is given."
2 And since marriage chastity also itself cannot be guarded, unless there
be Continence from unlawful intercourse, the
Apostle declared both to be the gift of God,
when He spake of both lives, that is, both
that of marriage and that without marriage,
I would that all men were so as
saying,
myself; but each hath his own gift from

"

God; one in this manner, another in that
manner." 3

" mouth "

2. And lest it should seem that necessary
Continence was to be hoped for from the
Lord only in respect of the lust of the lower
parts of the flesh, it is also sung in the Psalm;
"
Set, O Lord, a watch to my mouth, and a
door of Continence around my lips."
But
in this witness of the divine speech, if we unas we ought to understand
derstand
it, we perceive how great a gift of God ConForsooth it is little to
tinence there set is.
contain the mouth of the body, lest any thing
burst forth thence, which is not for the better,
For there
through the sound of the voice.
is, within, the mouth of the heart, where he,
who spake these words, and wrote them for
us to speak, desired of the Lord that the
watch and door of Continence should be set
For many things we say not with
for him.
the mouth of the body, and cry aloud with
the heart: but there goes forth from the
mouth of the body no word of any thing,
Therewhereof there is silence in the heart.
fore what flows not forth thence, sounds not
abroad: but what flows forth thence, if it be

1 Wis. viii. 2i.

2 Matt. xix. 11.

3 1 Cor. vii. 7.

4 Ps. cxli. 3.

38o

evil, although it move not the tongue, defiles
Therefore Continence must be set
the soul.
there, where the conscience even of them
who are silent speaks.
For it is brought to
pass by means of the door of Continence,
that there go not forth thence that, which,
even when the lips of the flesh are closed,
pollutes the life of him that hath the thought.
3. Lastly, to show more plainly the inner
mouth, which by these words he meant, after
having said, "Set a watch, O Lord, to my
mouth, and a door of Continence around my
lips," he added straightway, "Cause not my
heart to fall aside into evil words." 1 The
falling aside of the heart, what is it but the
For he hath not yet spoken, whoconsent ?
soever in his heart hath with no falling aside
of the heart consented unto suggestions that
meet him of each several thing that is seen.
But, if he hath consented, he hath already
spoken in his heart, although he hath not
uttered sound by the mouth; although he
hath not done with hand or any part whatever
of the body, yet hath he done what in his
thought he hath already determined that he
is to do: guilty by the divine laws, although
hidden to human senses; the word having
been spoken in the heart, no deed having
been committed through the body.
But in
no case would he have moved the limb without, in a deed, the beginning of which deed
had not gone before within in word.
For it
is no lie that is written, that "the beginning
Forsooth men
of every work is a word." 2
do many things with mouth closed, tongue
quiet, voice bridled; but yet they do nothing
by work of the body, which they have not
And through
before spoken in the heart.
this since there are many sins in inward sayings which are not in outward deeds, whereas
there are none in outward deeds, which do
not go before in inward sayings, there will be
purity of innocence from both, if the door of
Continence be set around the inward lips.

4. For which cause our Lord Himself also
with His own mouth saith, "Cleanse what
are within, and what are without will be
clean. " 3
And, also, in another place, when
He was refuting the foolish speeches of the
Jews, in that they spake evil against His dis-
" Not
ciples, eating with unwashen hands;
"
what entereth into the mouth/' said He,
defileth the man: but what cometh forth out of
the mouth, that defileth the man." 4 Which
sentence, if the whole of it be taken of the
mouth of the body, is absurd.
For neither
doth vomit defile him, whom food defileth
Forsooth food entereth into the mouth,
not.

IPs. cxli. 4. [See R.V.]
3 Matt, xxiii. 26.

- Ecclus. xxxvii. 16. LXX.
4 Matt. xv. 11.

"

"

"

vomit proceedeth forth out of the mouth.
But wituout doubt the former words relate to
" Not
the mouth of the flesh, where He says,
what entereth into the mouth defileth the
man,'' but the latter words to the mouth of
the heart, where He saith, "But what proceedeth forth out of the mouth, this defileth
the man." 5
Lastly, when the Apostle Peter
sought of Him an explanation of this as of a
parable, He answered, "Are ye also yet without understanding? understand ye not, that
whatsoever entereth into the mouth, goeth
into the belly, and is cast out into the
Here surely we perceive the
draught ?
mouth of the flesh, into which the food enBut in what He next adds, in order
ters.
that we might recognize the mouth of the
heart, the slowness of our heart would not
follow, did not the Truth deign to walk even
For He saith, "But what
with the slow.
things go forth from the mouth, go out of the
as though He should say, When
heart;"
from the mouth,'* underyou hear it said
from the heart.'* I say both, but I set
stand
The inner man hath
forth one by the other.
an inner mouth, and this the inner ear discerns: what things go forth from this mouth,
go out of the heart, and they defile the man.
Then having left the term mouth, which may
be understood also of the body, He shows
more openly what He is saying.
"For from
"
the heart go out," saith He,
evil thoughts,
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false
witness, blasphemies; these are what defile
There is surely no one of those
the man.'*
evils, which can be committed also by the
members of the body, but that the
evil
thoughts go before and defile the man, alsinful and
though something hinder
wicked deeds of the body from following.
For if, because power is not given, the hand
is free from the murder of a man, is the
heart of the murderer forsooth
therefore
clean from sin? Or if she be chaste, whom
one unchaste wishes to commit adultery with,
hath he on that account failed to commit
adultery with her in his heart? Or if the
harlot be not found in the brothel, doth he,
who seeks her, on that account fail to commit
fornication in his heart ? Or if time and place
be wanting to one who wishes to hurt his
neighbor by a lie, hath he on that account
failed already to speak false witness with his
inner mouth ? Or if any one fearing men,
dare not utter aloud blasphemy with tongue
of flesh, is he on this account guiltless of this
" There is no
crime, who saith in his heart,
God." 6 Thus all the other evil deeds of

the

5 Matt. xv. 17-20.

6 Ps. xiv. 1.

ON CONTINENCE.

38l

men, which no motion of the body performs,
of which no sense of the body is conscious,
have their own secret criminals, who are also
polluted by consent alone in thought, that is,
by evil words of the inner mouth.
Into
which he (the Psalmist) fearing lest his heart
should fall aside, asks of the Lord that the
door of Continence be set around the lips of
this mouth, to contain the heart, that it fall
not aside into evil words: but contain it, by
not suffering thought to proceed to consent:
for thus, according to the precept of the
Apostle, sin reigneth not in our mortal body,
nor do we yield our members as weapons of
From fulfilling
unrighteousness unto sin. 1
which precept they are surely far removed,
who on this account turn not their members
to sin, because no power is allowed them; and
if this be present, straightway by the motions
of their members, as of weapons, they show,
who reigneth in them within.
Wherefore,
so far as is in themselves, they yield their
members weapons of unrighteousness unto sin;
because this is what they wish, which for this
reason they yield not, because they are not
able.

"

5. And on this account that, which, the
parts that beget being bridled by modesty,
is most chiefly and properly to be called Continence, is violated by no transgression, if
the higher Continence, concerning which we
have been some time speaking, be preserved in
For this reason the Lord, after
the heart.
" For from the heart go forth
He had said,
evil thoughts," then went on to add what it
is that belongs to evil thoughts,
murders,
adulteries," and the rest. He spake not of
all; but, having named certain by way of instance, He taught that we are to understand
Of which there is no one that
others also.
can take place, unless an evil thought have
gone before, whereby that is prepared within,
which is done without, and going forth out
of the mouth of the heart already defiles the
no power being
man, although,
through
granted, it be not done without by means of
the members of the body. When therefore
a door of Continence hath been set in the
mouth of the heart, whence go out all that
defile the man, if nothing such be permitted
to go out thence, there followeth a purity,
wherein now the conscience may rejoice; although there be not as yet that perfection,
wherein Continence
strive with
the flesh lusteth
vice.
against the spirit, and the spirit against the
is enough for us not to consent
flesh,"
But, when
unto the evils which we feel in us.

But now, so long as

shall not
"

it

that consent fakes place, then there goeth out
of the mouth of the heart what defileth the
But when through Continence consent
man.
is withheld, the evil of the lust of the flesh,
against which the lust of the spirit fights, is
not suffered to harm.

6. But it is one thing to fight well, which
now is, when the strife 3 of death is resisted;
another thing not to have an adversary, which
will then be, when death, "the last enemy," +
For Continence also
shall be destroyed.
itself, when it curbs and restrains lusts, at
once both seeks the good unto the immortality
of which we aim, and rejects the evil with
which in this mortality we contend.
Of the
one it is forsooth the lover and beholder, but
of the other both the enemy and witness: both
seeking what becomes, and fleeing what misAssuredly Continence would not
becomes.
labor in curbing lusts, if we had no wishes
contrary to what is becoming, if there were
no opposition on the part of evil lust unto
The Apostle cries aloud, "I
our good will.
know," saith he, "that there dwelleth not in
For to
me, that
will lieth near to me, but to accomplish good
For now good can be done, so
I find not." 5
far as that- there be no assent given unto evil
lust: but good will be accomplished, when the
evil lust itself shall come to an end. And
also the same teacher of the Gentiles cries
I take pleasure together with the law
aloud,
of God after the inner man: but I see another
law in my members, warring against the law
of my mind.'' 6

in my flesh, good.

"

is

7. This conflict none experience in themselves, save such as war on the side of the
virtues, and war down the vices: nor doth any
thing storm the evil of lust, save the good of
But there are, who, being utContinence.
terly ignorant of the law of God, account not
evil lusts among their enemies, and through
wretched blindness being slaves to them, over
and above think themselves also blessed, by
satisfying them rather than taming them.
But whoso through the Law have come to
know them, ("For through the Law is the
Lust," saith he, "I
knowledge of sin," 7 and,
knew not, unless the Law should say, Thou
) and yet are overcome
shalt not lust after,"
by their assault, because they live under the
Law, whereby what is good is commanded, but
not also given: they live not under Grace,
which gives through the Holy Spirit what is
commanded through the Law: unto these the
Law therefore entered, that in them the ofThe prohibition infense might abound.

"

1 Rom. vi. 12, 13.

Gal. v. 17.

3 (Reading velicos.)
6 Rom.vii. 22, 23.
8 Rom. vii. 7. [see R.V.]

4 1 Cor. xv. 55; ib. 26.
7 Rom. iii. 20.

5 Rom. vii. iS.

?82

'

there transgression."

creased the lust, and made it unconquered: 1
that there might be transgression also, which
without the Law was not, although there was
' For where there is not Law, neither
sin,
Thus the Law,
is
Grace not helping, forbidding sin, became
over. and above the strength of sin; whence
the Apostle saith, "The Law is the strength
of sin." 3 Nor is it to be wondered at, that
man's weakness even from the good Law
added strength to evil, whilst it trusts to fulfill the Law itself of its own strength.
Forsooth being ignorant of the righteousness of
God, 4 which He gives unto the weak, and
wishing to establish his own, of which the
weak is void, he was not made subject to the
righteousness of God, reprobate and proud.
But if the Law, as a schoolmaster, lead unto
Grace one made an offender, as though for
this purpose more grievously wounded, that
he may desire a Physician; against the baneful sweetness, whereby lust prevailed, the
Lord gives a sweetness that worketh good,
that by it Continence may the more delight,
and
our land giveth her fruit," 5 whereby the
soldier is fed, who by the help of the Lord
wars down sin.

"

8. Such soldiers the Apostolic tfumpet enkindles for battle with that sound, "There-
"
sin reign in your morfore let not," saith he,
tal body to obey its lusts; nor yield your
members weapons of unrighteousness unto sin;
but yield yourselves unto God, as living in
place of dead, and your members weapons of
For sin shall not
righteousness unto God.
For ye are not under the
rule over you.
And in another
law, but under Grace." 6
place, "Therefore," saith he, "brethren, we
are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the
For if ye shall live after the flesh, ye
flesh.
shall die; but if by the Spirit ye shall mortify
For as
the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live.
many as are led by the Spirit of God, these
This therefore is the
are sons of God.'' 7
business in hand, so long as this our mortal
life under Grace lasts, that sin, that is the
lust of sin, (for this he in this place calls by
the name of sin,) reign not in this our mortal
if
body.
obedience be yielded to its desires.
There
is therefore in us lust of sin, which must not
be suffered to reign: there are its desires,
which we must not obey, lest obeying it reign
Wherefore let not lust usurp our
over us.
members, but let Continence claim them for
herself; that they be weapons of righteousness unto God, that they be not weapons of

is then shown to

But it

reign,

unrighteousness unto sin;
for thus sin shall
For we are not under the
not rule over us.
Law, which indeed commandeth what is good
yet giveth it not: but we are under Grace,
which, making us to love that which the Law
commands, is able to rule over the free.

9. And also, when he exhorts us, that we
live not after the flesh, lest we die, but that
by the Spirit we mortify the deeds of the
flesh, that we may live; surely the trumpet
which sounds, shows the war in which we are
engaged, and enkindles us to contend keenly,
8 that we be
and to do our enemies to death,
But who those
not done to death by them.
enemies are, it hath set forth plainly enough.
For those are they, whom it willed should be
done to death by us, that is to say, the works
" But if by the
For so it saith,
of the flesh.
Spirit ye shall mortify the deeds of the flesh,
ye shall live." And in order that we may
know what these are, let us hear the same in
like manner writing unto the Galatians, and
" But the works of the flesh are manisaying,
fest, which are, fornications, uncleannesses,
luxuries, idolatry, witchcrafts, hatreds, contentions, emulations, wraths, strifes, heresies,
envyings, drunkennesses, revellings, and such
like; of which I foretell to you, as I have
foretold, that they who do such things shall
not possess the kingdom of God." 9
For the
very war there also was he showing, that he
should speak of these, and unto the deathdoing of these enemies was he calling up the
soldiers of Christ by the same heavenly and
For he had said above,
spiritual trumpet.
"But I say, walk in the Spirit, and perform
For the flesh
ye not the lusts of the flesh.
lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit
For these are opposed
against the flesh.
one to the other, that ye do not what ye
But if ye are led by the Spirit, ye
would.
are not under the Law.
Therefore being
set under Grace, he would have them have
that conflict against the works of the flesh.
And in order to point out these works of the
flesh, he added what I have mentioned above.
' But the works of the flesh are manifest, which
are, fornications/' and the rest, whether what
he mentioned, or whether what he admonished
were to be understood, chiefly as he added,
"and such like."
battle,
against what is in a manner the carnal army
leading forth as it were another spiritual line,
"But the fruit of the Spirit is," saith he,
"charity, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness,
goodness, faith, gentleness, continence; against
such there is no law." " He saith not "against

Lastly, in this

" I0

'

1 Rom. v. 20.
4 Rom. x. 3.
7 Rom. viii. 12, 13, 14.

- Rom. iv. 15.
5 Ps. Ixxxv. 12.

3 1 Cor. xv. 56.
6 Rom. vi. 12, 13, 14.

8 Mortificare.
10 Gal. v. 16-18. [See R. V.]

9 Gal. v. ig-21.
11 Gal. v. 22, 23.

ON CONTINENCE.

these," lest they should be thought to be
alone: although even were he to say this, we
ought to understand all, whatever goods of
the same kind we could think of: but he
saith, "against such,'' that is to say, both these
and whatsoever are such like.
However, in
that among the goods of which he made mention, he set Continence in the last 1
place,
(concerning which we have now undertaken
to treat, and on account of which we have
already said much,) he willed that it should
in an especial manner cleave to our minds.
Forsooth this same is of great avail in this
case, wherein th*e Spirit lusteth against the
flesh; forasmuch as in a certain way it crucifies the lusts of the flesh.
Whence, after
he added
the Apostle had thus
straightway, "But they
are
Jesus
Christ's have crucified their own flesh, with
the passions and lusts." 2
This is the acting
of Continence: thus the works of the flesh are
done to death.
But they do to death those,
whom falling away from Continence lust
draweth into consent to do such works.

spoken,
who

"

10. But in order that we fall not away from
Continence, we ought to watch specially
against those snares of the suggestions of the
devil, that we presume not of our own
For, "Cursed is every one that
strength.
setteth his hope in man." 3 And who is he,
but man ? We cannot therefore truly say
that he setteth not his hope in man, who setFor this also, to "live
teth it in himself.
after man," what is it but to
live after the
flesh ?" Whoso therefore is tempted by such
a suggestion, let him hear, and, if he have
any Christian feeling, let him tremble.
Let
him hear, I say, "If ye shall live after the
flesh, ye shall die."

11. But some one will say to me that it
one thing to live after man, another thing to
live after the flesh; because man forsooth is
a rational creature, and there is in him a rational soul, whereby he differs from the beast:
but the flesh is the lowest and earthly part of
man, and thus to live after it is faulty: and
for this reason, he who lives after man, assuredly lives not after the flesh, but rather
after that part of man, whereby he is man,
that is, after the spirit of the mind whereby
But this discussion is
he excels the beasts.
perhaps of some force in the schools of philosophers: but we, in order to understand the
Apostle of Christ, ought to observe in what
manner the Christian books are
used to
speak; at any rate it is the belief of all of us,
to whom to live is Christ, that Man was taken

is

"

unto Himself by the Word of God, not surely
without a rational soul, as certain heretics will
have it; and yet we read, "The Word was
made flesh." 4 What is to be here understood
flesh," but Man? " And all flesh shall
by
see the salvation of God." 5 What can be
" Unto Thee shall
understood, but all men ?
all flesh come." 6 What is
it, but all men?
"Thou hast given unto Him power over all
" Of the
flesh." * What is it, but all men ?
works of the Law shall no flesh be justified."
it, but no man shall be justified ?
What is
And this the same Apostle in another place
" Man shall
confessing more plainly saith,
not be justified of the works of the Law." 9
The Corinthians also he rebukes, saying,
"
" IO
Are ye not carnal, and walk after man ?
After he had called them carnal, he saith
not, ye walk after the flesh, but after man,
forasmuch as by this also what would he have
understood, but after the flesh ?
For surely
if to walk, that is, to live, after the flesh deserved blame, but after man deserved praise,
he would not say by way of rebuke, "ye walk
after man." Let man recognize the reproach;
let him change his purpose, let him shun deHear thou man: walk not thou
struction.
after man, but after Him Who made man.
Fall not thou away from Him Who made thee,
For a man said, who yet
even unto thyself.
" Not that we are suffilived not after man,
cient to think any thing from ourselves, as
though of ourselves: but our sufficiency is
of God." "
Consider if he lived after man,
who spake these things with truth.
Therefore
the Apostle, admonishing man not to live
after man, restores man to God.
But whoso
liveth not after man, but after God, assuredly
liveth not even after himself, because himself
But he is therefore said also
also is a man.
to live after the flesh, when he so lives; because also when the flesh alone hath been
named, man is understood, as we have already shown: just as when the soul alone hath
been named, man is understood: whence it is
said, "Let every soul be subject unto the
12 that is, every man; and,
higher powers,"
Seventy-five souls went down into Egypt
with
is, seventy-five men.
Therefore live thou not after thyself, O man:
thou hadst thence perished, but thou wast
Live not then, I say, after thyself,
sought.
O man; thou hadst thence perished, but thou
Accuse not thou the nature of
wast found.
the flesh, when you hear it said,
If ye shall
live after the flesh, ye shall die." I4 For thus

Jacob," 13

that

"

'

1 Vulg. adds,
- Gal. v. 24.

"

patientia, modest'/a, castMas."

3 Jer. xvii. 5.

4 John i. 14.
7 John xvii. 2.
10 1 Cor. iii. 3.
3 Gen. xlvi. 27.

5 Luke iii. 6.
8 Kom. iii. 20.
11 Cor. iii. 5.
J 4 Rom. viii. 13.

6 Ps. Ixv. 2.
9 Gal. ii. 16.
12 Rom. xiii. 1.

could it be said, and most truly could it, If ye
For
shall live after yourselves ye shall die.
the devil hath not flesh, and yet, because he
would live after himself, "he abode not in
the truth." 1 What wonder therefore, if, living after himself, "when he speaketh a lie,
he speaketh of his own," which the Truth
spake truly of him.

12. When, therefore, you

hear it said,
"Sin shall not reign over you;" 2 have not
thou confidence of thyself, that sin reign not
over thee, but of Him, unto Whom a certain
"
Direct my paths after
Saint saith in prayer,
Thy Word, and let no iniquity have dominion over me." 3
For lest haply, after that we
had heard, "sin shall not reign over you," we
should lift up ourselves, and lay this to our
own strength, straightway the Apostle saw
" For ye are not under the
this, and added,
Taw, but under Grace."
Therefore, Grace
causeth that sin reign not over you. Do not
thou, therefore, have confidence of thyself,
lest it thence reign much more over thee.
And, when we hear it said," If by the Spirit
ye shall mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye
shall live," * let us not lay this so great good
unto our own spirit, as though of itself it can
For, in order that we should not
do this.
entertain that carnal sense, the spirit being
dead rather than that which putteth others
For as
to death, straightway he added,
many as are led by the Spirit of God, these
are sons of God." 5
Therefore that by our
spirit we may mortify the works of the flesh,
we are led by the Spirit of God, Who gives
Continence, whereby to curb, tame, overcome
lust.

"

"

Forgive us our debts: " 6

13. In this so great conflict, wherein man
under Grace lives, and when, being aided,
he fights well, rejoices in the Lord with trembling, there yet are not wanting even to valiant
warriors, and mortifiers however unconquered
of the works of the flesh, some wounds of
sins, for the healing of which they may say
against the
daily,
same vices, and against the devil the prince
and king of vices, striving with much greater
watchfulness and keenness by the very prayer,
that his deadly suggestions avail not aught,
whereby he further urges the sinner to excuse
rather than accuse his own sins; and thus
those wounds not only be not healed, but
also, although they were not deadly, yet may
be pressed home to grievous and fatal harm.
And here therefore there is need of a more
cautious Continence, whereby to restrain the
proud appetite of man; whereby he is self-

1 John viii. 44.
3 Ps. cxix. 133.
5 Rom. viii. 14.

2 Rom. vi. 14.
4 Rom. viii. 13.
6 Matt. vi. 12.

"

pleased, and unwilling to be found worthy of
blame, and disdains, when he sins, to be convicted that he himself has sinned; not with
healthful humility taking upon him to accuse
himself, but rather with fatal arrogance seeking to find an excuse.
In order to restrain
this pride, he, whose words I have already set
down above, and, as I could, commended,
sought Continence from the Lord.
For, after
"
Set, O Lord, a watch to my
that he had said,
mouth, and a door of Continence around my
Make not my heart to fall aside unto
lips.
evil words;" 7 explaining more clearly whereof
to make excuses in
he spake this, he saith,
For what more evil than these words,
sins."
whereby the evil man denies that he is evil,
although convicted of an evil work, which he
cannot deny. And since he cannot hide the
is well done, and still
deed, or say that it
sees that it is clear that it was done by him,
he seeks to refer to another what he hath
done, as though he could remove thence what
Being unwilling that himhe hath deserved.
self be guilty, he rather adds to his guilt, and
by excusing, not accusing, his own sins, he
knows not that he is putting from him, not
For before human
punishment, but pardon.
judges, forasmuch as they may be deceived,
it seems to profit somewhat for the time, to
cleanse as it were what hath been done amiss
by any deceit whatever; but before God,
Who cannot be deceived, we are to use, not
a deceitful defense, but a true confession of
sins.

14. And some indeed, who are used to excuse their own sins, complain that they are
driven to sin by fate, as though the stars had
decreed this, and heaven had first sinned by
decreeing such, in order that man should
after sin by committing such, and thus had
rather impute their sin to fortune: who think
that all things are driven to and fro by chance
accidents, and yet contend that this their wisdom and assertion is not of chance rashness,
What madness
but of ascertained reason.
then is it, to lay to reason their discussions,
and to make their actions subject to acciOthers refer to the devil the whole
dents !
of what they do ill: and will not have even a
share with him, whereas they may suspect
whether he by hidden suggestions hath persuaded them to evil, and on the other hand
cannot doubt that they have consented to
those suggestions, from whatever source they
There are also they who extend
have come.
their defense of self unto an accusation of
God, wretched by the divine judgment, but
blasphemers by their own madness.
For

7 Ps. cxli. 3, 4.

ON CONTINENCE.

against Him they bring in from a contraryprinciple a substance of evil rebelling, which
He could not have resisted, had He not
blended with that same that was rebelling a
portion of His own Substance and Nature,
for it to contaminate and corrupt; and they
say that they then sin when the nature of evil
This is that
prevails over the nature of God.
most unclean madness of the Manichseans,
whose devilish devices the undoubted truth
most easily overthrows; which confesses that
the nature of God is incapable of contamination and corruption. But what wicked contamination and corruption do they not deserve to have believed of them, by whom
God, Who is good in the very highest degree,
and in a way that admits not of comparison,
is believed to be capable of contamination
and corruption ?

15. And there are also they who in excuse
of their sins so accuse God, as to say that
sins are pleasing to Him.
For, if they were
displeasing, say they, surely by His most
Almighty power He would by no means suffer
As though indeed God
them to take place.
suffered sins to be unpunished, even in the
case of those whom by remission of sins He
frees from eternal punishment ! No one forsooth receives pardon of more grievous punishment due, unless he hath suffered some
punishment, be it what it may, although far
less than what was due: and the fullness of
mercy is so conveyed, as that the justice also
For also sin,
of discipline is not abandoned.
which seems unavenged, hath its own attendant punishment, so that there is no one but
by reason of what he hath done either suffers
pain from bitterness, or suffers not through
As therefore you say, Why doth
blindness.
He permit those things, if they are displeasing? so I say, Why doth He punish them, if
they are pleasing? And thus, as I confess
that those things would not take place at all,
unless they were permitted by the Almighty,
so confess thou that what are punished by
the Just- One ought not to be done; in order
that, by not doing what He punishes, we may
deserve to learn of Him, why He permits to
exist what He punishes.
For, as it is written,
"
* wherein they
who have made good progress already understand, that it pertained rather unto the Almighty power of God, to allow the existence
of evils coming from the free choice of the
So great forsooth is His Almighty
will
goodness, as that even of evil He can make
good, either by pardoning, or by healing, or
by fitting and turning unto the profit of the

solid food is for the perfect/'

"

Forgive us our debts;

pious, or even by most justly taking venFor all these are good, and most
geance.
worthy a good and Almighty God: and yet
they are not made save of evils. What therefore better, what more Almighty, than He,
Who, whereas He maketh no evil, even of
evils maketh well ? They who have done ill
" 2 He
cry unto Him,
hears, He pardons.
Their own evils have
hurt the sinners; He helps and heals their
sicknesses. The enemies of His people rage;
of their rage He makes martyrs. Lastly, also,
He condemns those, whom He judges worthy
of condemnation; although they suffer their
own evils, yet He doeth what is good.
For
what is just cannot but be good, and assuredly
as sin is unjust, so the punishment of sin is
just.

16. But God wanted not power to make
man such as that he should not be able to
sin: but He chose rather to make him such,
as that it should lie in his power 3 to sin, if he
would; not to sin, if he would not; forbidding the one, enjoining the other;
that it
might be to him first a good desert not to sin,
and after a just reward not to be able to sin.
For such also at the last will He makes His
Saints, as to be without all power to sin.
Such forsooth even now hath He His angels,
whom in -Him we so love, as to have no fear
for any of them, lest by sinning he become a
devil. And this we presume not of any just
man in this mortal life.
But we trust that
all will be such in that immortal life.
For
Almighty God Who worketh good even of our
evils, what good will He give, when He shall
have set us free from all evils ? Much may
be said more fully and more subtilely on the
is not what we
good use of evil; but this
have undertaken in our present discourse, and
we must avoid in it excess of length.

17. Now therefore let us return to that,
wherefore we have said what we have. We
have need of Continence, and we know it to
be a divine gift, that our heart fall not away
unto evil words, to make excuses in
sins.
But what sin is there but that we have need
of Continence, to restrain it from being committed, since it is this very Continence which,
in case it have been committed, restrains it
from being defended by wicked pride ?
Universally therefore we have need of Continence,
in order to turn away from evil.
But to do
good seems to pertain to another virtue, that
This the sacred Psalm
is, to righteousness. 4
"
admonishes us, where we read,
Turn away
from evil, and do good."
But with what
end we do this, it adds bye and bye, saying,

1 Heb. v. 14.

2 Matt. vi. 12.

3 Cut adjaceret.

4 Justitiajn.

3 86

For we shall
"Seek peace, and ensue it." 1
then have perfect peace, when, our nature
cleaving inseparably to its Creator, we shall
have nothing of ourselves opposed to ourThis our Saviour also Himself would
selves.
have us to understand, so far as seems to me,
when He said, "Let your loins be girt, and
2 What is
it, to gird
your lamps burning."
To restrain lusts, which is the
the loins ?
But to have lamps burnwork of continence.
ing is to shine and glow with good works,
Nor was
which is the work of righteousness.
He here silent with what end we do these
things, adding and saying, "And you like
unto men waiting for their Lord, when He
But, when He
cometh from the marriage." 3
shall have come, He will reward us, who have
kept ourselves from those things which lust,
and have done those things which charity
that we may reign in His
hath bidden us:
perfect and eternal peace, without any strife
of evil, and with the highest delight of good.
1 8. All we therefore, who believe in the
Living and True God, Whose Nature, being
in the highest sense good and incapable of
change, neither doth any evil, nor suffers any
evil, from Whom is every good, even that
which admits of decrease, and Who admits not
at all of decrease in His own Good, Which is
Himself, when we hear the Apostle saying,
" Walk in the Spirit, and perform ye not the
For the flesh lusteth
lusts of the flesh.
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh: For these are opposed one to another,
Far be it
that ye do not what ye would." 4
from us to believe, what the madness of the
Manichees believes, that there are here shown
two natures or principles contrary one to another at strife, the one nature of good, the
Altogether these two are both
other of evil.
good; both the Spirit is a good, and the flesh
a good: and man, who is composed of both,
one ruling, the other obeying, is assuredly a
good, but a good capable of change, which
yet could not be made save by a Good incapable of change, by Whom was created
every good, whether small or great; but how
small soever, yet made by What is Great; and
how great soever, yet no way to be compared
But in this,
with the greatness of the Maker.
nature of man, that is good, and well formed
and ordered by One That is Good, there is
Let
now war, since there is not yet health.
But
the sickness be healed, there is peace.
that sickness fault hath deserved, not nature
And this fault indeed through the
hath had.
laver of regeneration the grace of God hath
already remitted unto the faithful; but under

1 Ps. xxxiv. 14.
4 Gal. v. 16, i7.

- Luke xii. 35.

3 Luke xii. 36.

it.

arise

after

the hands of the same Physician nature as yet
But in such a constriveth with its sickness.
flict victory will be entire soundness; and
that, soundness not for a time, but for ever:
wherein not only this sickness is to come to
an end, but also none to
Wherefore the just man addresseth his soul
and saith, "Bless the Lord, O my soul, and
forget not all His returns: Who becometh
propitious to all thy iniquities, Who healeth
all thy sicknesses. ' ' 5 He becometh propitious
to our iniquities, when He pardons sins: He
heals sicknesses when He restrains evil desires. He becometh propitious unto iniquities
by the grant of forgiveness: He heals sickThe one
nesses, by the grant of continence.
was done in Baptism to persons confessing:
the other is done in the strife to persons contending; wherein through His help we are to
Even now the one is
overcome our disease.
done, when we are heard, saying,
Forgive
us our debts;" 6 but the other, when we are
" Lead us not into temptation.
heard, saying,
For every one is tempted," saith the Apostle
James, "being drawn away and enticed by
And against this fault there
his own lust." 7
is sought the help of medicine from Him,
Who can heal all such sicknesses, not by the
removal of a nature that is alien from us, but
Whence
in the renewal of our own nature.
also the above-mentioned Apostle saith not,
by lust, but added,
"Everyone is tempted
"by his own:" that he who hears this may understand, how he ought to cry,
I said, Lord,
have mercy upon me, heal my soul, for I
have sinned against Thee." 8
For it would not
have needed healing, had it not corrupted 9
itself by sinning, so that its own flesh should
lust against it, that is, itself should be opposed
to itself, on that side, wherein in the flesh it
was made sick.

"

"

"

19. For the flesh lusts after nothing save
through the soul, but the flesh is said to lust
against the spirit, when the soul with fleshly
This whole
lust wrestles against the spirit.
are we: and the flesh itself, which on the departure of the soul dies, the lowest part of
us is not put away as what we are to flee
from, but is laid aside as what we are to receive again, and, after having received it,
there is sown an
never again to leave.
animal body, there shall rise again a spiritual
10 Then from that time the flesh will
body."
not lust after any thing against the spirit,
when as itself also shall be called spiritual,
forasmuch as not only without any opposition,
but also without any need of bodily aliment,

But "

5 Ps. ciii. 2, 3.
7 James i. 14.
9 Vitiasset.

6 Matt. vi. 12, 13.
8 Ps. xii. 4.
10 1 Cor. xv. 44.

ON CONTINENCE.

"

it shall be for ever made subject unto the
Therefore
spirit, to be quickened by Christ.
these two things, which are now opposed the
one to the other within us, since we exist in
both, let us pray and endeavor that they may
For we ought not to think the one of
agree.
them an enemy, but the fault, whereby the
flesh lusteth against the spirit: and this, when
healed, will itself cease to exist, and either
substance will be safe, and no strife between
Let us hear the Apostle; "I know,"
either.
saith he, "that there dwelleth not in me, that
1 This certainly he
is, in my flesh, any good."
saith; that the fault of the flesh, in a good
thing, is not good; and, when this shall have
ceased to exist, it will be flesh, but it will not
2 flesh. And yet
be now corrupted or faulty
that this pertains to our nature the same
I know that
teacher shows, by saying, first,
there dwelleth not in me," in order to exthat is, in my flesh,
pound which, he added,
Therefore he saith that his flesh
any good."
It is not then itself that is our
is himself.
enemy: and when its
faults are resisted,
is cared for;
itself
"For no one ever hated his own flesh," 3 as
the Apostle himself saith. And in another
So then I myself with the
place he saith,
mind serve the Law of God, but with the flesh
the Law of sin."
Let them hear that have
"So then
I with the
ears.
I myself;"
with the mind I
mind, I with the flesh, but
serve the Law of God, but with the flesh the
law of sin." 4 How "with the flesh the law
of sin?" was it at all by consenting unto
Far be it ! but by having there
fleshly lust?
motions of desires which he would not have,
and yet had.
But, by not consenting to
them, with the mind he served the Law of
God, and kept his members from becoming
weapons of sins.

is loved, because itself

"

"

"

20. There are therefore in us evil desires,
by consenting not unto which we live not ill :
there are in us lusts of sins, by obeying not
which we perfect not evil, but by having them
The Apostle
do not as yet perfect good.
shows both, that neither is good here perfected, where evil is so lusted after, nor evil
here perfected, whereas such lust
is not
The one forsooth he shows, where
obeyed.
" To will is present with me, but to
he says,
perfect good is not;" 5 the other, where he
" Walk in the Spirit, and perfect not the
says,
"6 For neither in the former
lusts of the flesh.
place doth he say that to do good is not with
him, but "to perfect,'' nor here doth he say,
Have not
perfect

lusts of the flesh," but

"

"

1 Rom. vii. 18.
3 Eph. v 29.
S Rom. vii. 18.

2 Vitiata velvitiosa.
4 Rom. vii. 25.
6 Gal. v. 16.

Therefore there take place in us evil
not."
lusts, when that pleases which is not lawful;
but they are not perfected, when evil lusts
are restrained by the mind serving the Law of
And good takes place, when that, which
God.
wrongly pleases, takes not place through the
But the perfection
good delight prevailing.
of good is not fulfilled, so long as by the flesh
serving the law of sin, evil lust entices, and,
although it be restrained, is yet moved.
For
there would be no need for it to be restrained,
There will be at some
were it not moved.
time also the perfection of good, when the
destruction of evil: the one will be highest,
the other will be no more. And if we think
that this is to be hoped for in this mortal
state, we are deceived.
For it shall be then,
when death shall not be; and it shall be
there, where shall be life eternal.
For in that
world, 7 and in that kingdom, there shall be
highest geod, no evil: when there shall be,
and where there shall be, highest love of wisdom, no labor of continence.
Therefore the
flesh is not evil, if it be void of evil, that is,
of fault, whereby man was rendered faulty,
not made ill, but himself making.
For on
either part, that is, both soul and body, being
made good by the good God, himself made
the evil, whereby he was made evil.
From
the guilt of which evil being already also set
8 that he may not
free through forgiveness,
think what he hath done to be light, he yet
wars with his own fault through continence.
But far be it that there be any faults in such as
reign in that peace which shall be hereafter;
since in this state of war there are lessened
daily in such as make progress, not sins only,
but the very lusts also, with which, by not
consenting, we strive, and b)r consenting unto
which we sin.

21. That, therefore, the flesh lusteth against
the Spirit, that there dwelleth not in our flesh
good, that the law in our members is opposed
to the law of the mind, is not a mingling of
two natures caused of contrary principles,
but a division of one against itself caused
through desert of sin. We were not so in
Adam, before that nature, having listened to
and followed its deceiver, had despised and
offended its Creator: that is, not the former
life of man created, but the latter punishment of man condemned.
From which condemnation when set free by Grace, through
Jesus Christ, being free they contend with
their punishment, having received not as yet
full salvation, but already a pledge of salvation: but when not set free, they are both
guilty by reason of sins, and involved in punBut after this life for the guilty
ishments.

7 S&culo.

8 Indtilgentiam.

3 88

there will remain for ever punishment for
their crime: for the free there will no more
remain for ever either crime or punishment:
but the good substances, spirit and flesh, will
continue for ever, which God, Who is good,
and incapable of change, created good alBut they will
though capable of change.
continue having been changed for the better,
never from this time to be changed for the
worse: all evil being utterly destroyed, both
what man hath unjustly done, and what he
And, these two kinds
hath justly suffered.
of evil perishing utterly, whereof the one is
of iniquity going before, the other of unhappiness following after, the will of man
There
will be upright without any depravity.
it will be clear and plain to all, what now many
of the faithful believe, few understand, that
evil is not a substance: but that, as a wound
in a body, so in a substance, which hath made
itself faulty, it hath begun to exist, when the
disease hath commenced, and ceaseth to exist in it, when the healing hath been perhaving arisen
fected.
from us, and having been destroyed in us,
our good also having been increased and perfected unto the height of most happy incorruption and immortality, of what kind shall
either of our substances be ? forasmuch as
now, in this corruption and mortality, when
as yet "the corruptible body weigheth down
and, what the Apostle saith,
the soul;" 1
"the body is dead by reason of sin;" 2
yet
the same himself beareth such witness unto
our flesh, that is, to our lowest and earthly
part, as to say, what I made mention of a
little above, "No one ever hated his own
flesh." 3 And to add straightway,
but nourisheth and cherisheth it, as also Christ the
Church."

Therefore, all

evil

"

"

22. I say not, therefore, with what error,
but with what utter madness, do the Manichees attribute our flesh to some, I know not
race of darkness," 4 which they
what, fabled
will have hath had its own nature without any
beginning ever evil: whereas the true teacher
exhorts men to love their own wives by the
pattern of their own flesh, and exhorts them
unto this very thing by the pattern also of
Lastly, we must call
Christ and the Church.
to mind the whole place itself of the Epistle
of the Apostle, relating greatly unto the mat-
"Husbands," saith he, "love
ter in hand.
your wives, as Christ also loved the Church,
and delivered Himself up for it, that He
might sanctify it, cleansing it by the laver of
the water in the word: that He might set forth
unto Himself a glorious Church, not having

i Wisd. ix. 15.
4 See De Ag. Christ.

- Rom. viii. 10.

3 Eph. v. 29.

4.

Christ

as also

spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that
it may be holy and unspotted. So," saith he,
" husbands also ought to love their own wives,
Whoso loveth his own
as their own bodies.
wife, loveth himself." s Then he added, what
" For no
we have already made mention of,
man ever hated his own flesh, but nourisheth
it, and cherisheth
the
it;
Church." 6 What saith the madness of most
impure impiety in answer to these things?
What say ye in answer to these things, ye
Manichees; ye who wish to bring in upon us,
as if out of the Epistles of the Apostles, two
natures without beginning, one of good, the
other of evil: and will not listen to the Epistles of the Apostles, that they may correct
you from that sacrilegious perverseness ? As
ye read, "The flesh
the
against
spirit," 7 and, "There dwelleth not in my
" No one ever
flesh any good;" 8 so read ye,
hated his own flesh, but nourisheth and cherisheth it, as also Christ the Church." 9 As
I see another law in my members,
ye read,
opposed to the law of my mind;" ,0 so read ye,
" As Christ loved the Church, so also ought
men to love their own wives, as their own
Be not ye crafty in the former
bodies."
witnesses of Holy Scripture, and deaf in this
latter, and ye shall be correct in both.
For,
if ye receive the latter as right is, ye will endeavor to understand the former also as truth

lusteth

"

is.

former.

23. The Apostle has made known to us
certain three unions, Christ and the Church,
Of these
husband and wife, spirit and flesh.
the former consult for the good of the latter,
All the
the latter wait upon the
things are good, when, in them, certain set
over by way of pre-eminence, certain made
subject in a becoming manner, observe the
Husband and wife receive
beauty of order.
command and pattern how they ought to be
The command is, "Let
one with another.
wives be subject unto their own husbands,
as unto the Lord; because the husband is the
head of the wife;"" and, "Husbands, love
But there is given a pattern,
your wives."
unto wives from the Church, unto husbands
from Christ: "As the Church," saith
he,
"
is subject unto Christ, so also wives unto
their own husbands in all things."
In like
manner also, having given command to husbands to love their own wives, he added a
pattern, "As Christ loved the Church."
But
husbands he exhorted to it from a lower matter also, that is, from their own body: not
only from a higher, that is, from their Lord.

S Eph. v. 25-28.
8 Rom. vii. 18.
11 Eph. v. 22-28.

6 Eph v. 2Q.
9 Eph. v. 29.

7 Gal. v. 17.
10 Rom. vii. 23.

ON CONTINENCE.

\Sg

"

For he not only saith,
Husbands, love your
loved the Church,"
as Christ also
wives,
which is from an higher: but he said also,
" Husbands ought to love their own wives,
as their own bodies," which is from a lower:
because both higher and lower are all good.
And yet the woman received not pattern from
the body, or flesh, to be so subject to the husband as the flesh to the spirit; but either the
Apostle would have understood by consequence, what he omitted to state: or haply
because the flesh lusteth against the spirit in
the mortal and sick estate of this life, therefore he would not set the woman a pattern of
But the men he would
subjection from it.
for this reason, because, although the spirit
lusteth against the flesh, even in this it consults for the good of the flesh: not like as the
flesh lusting against the spirit, by such opposition consulteth neither for the good of the
Yet the good spirit
spirit, nor for its own.
would not consult for its good, whether by
nourishing and cherishing its nature by forethought, or by resisting its faults by continence, were it not that each substance showeth
God to be the Creator of each, even by the
seemliness of this its order. What is it, therefore, that with true madness ye both boast
yourselves to be Christians, and with so great
perverseness contend against the Christian
Scriptures, with eyes closed, or rather put
out, asserting both that Christ hath appeared
false flesh, and that the
unto mortals
Church in the soul pertains to Christ, in the
body to the devil, and that the male and
female sex are works of the devil, not of God,
and that the flesh is joined unto the spirit,
as an evil substance unto a good substance ?
24. If what we have made mention of out
of the Apostolic Epistles seem to you to fall
short of an answer, hear yet others, if ye have
utterly mad Manithe
ears.
That it was
chaean of the Flesh of Christ ?
What saith the blessed
not true, but false.
"Remember that Christ
Apostle to this?
Jesus rose again from the dead of the seed of
David, according to my Gospel." ' And Christ
"
Jesus Himself saith,
Handle and see, that
a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see
me to have." 2 How is there truth in their
doctrine, which asserts that in the Flesh of
Christ there was falsehood ? How was there
in Christ no evil, in Whom was so great a
lie ? Because forsooth to men over-clean true
flesh is an evil, and false flesh instead of true
is not an evil: it
is an evil, true flesh of one
born of the seed of David, and it
is no evil,
Handle, and
false tongue of one saying,

What saith

in

"

1 2 Tim. ii.

2 Luke xxiv. 39.

see, that a spirit hath not flesh and bones,
as ye see me to have."
Of the Church what
saith the deceiver of men with deadly error?
That on the side of souls it pertains unto
Christ, on the side of bodies unto the devil?
What to this saith the Teacher of the Gentiles
" Know ye not," saith he,
in faith and truth ?
"
" 3
that your bodies are members of Christ ?
Of the sex of male and female what saith the
That either sex is not of
son of perdition ?
God, but of the devil. What to this saith the
Vessel of Election? "As," saith he, "the
woman from out the man, so also the man
through the woman: but all things of God." 4
Of the flesh what saith the unclean spirit
That it is an evil
through the Manichsean ?
substance, and not the creation of God, but
What to this saith the Holy
of an enemy.
"For as the body is
Spirit through Paul?
one," saith he, "and hath many members,
but all the members of the body, being many,
are one body: so also is Christ." 5 And a little
after; "God hath set/' saith he, "the members,
each one of them in the body, as He willed." *
Also a little after; "God," saith he, "hath
tempered the body, giving greater honor unto
that to which it was wanting, that there should
be no schisms in the body, but that the members have the self-same care one for another:
and whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it: or one member be glorified, all the members rejoice with it." 7 How
is the flesh evil, when the souls themselves
are admonished to imitate the peace of its
members ? How is it the creation of the enemy, when the souls themselves, which rule
the bodies, take pattern from the members
of the body, not to have schisms of enmities
among themselves, in order that, what God
hath granted unto the body by nature, this
themselves also may iove to have by grace ?
With good cause, writing to the Romans,
beseech you," saith he, "brethren, by the
mercy of God, that ye present your bodies a
holy, pleasing to God." 8
sacrifice,
Without reason we contend that darkness is
not light, nor light darkness, if we present a
sacrifice, living, holy, pleasing to God, of the
bodies of the

nation of darkness/'

living,

"

"

25. But, say they, how is the flesh by a
certain likeness compared unto the Church ?
What ! doth the Church lust against Christ ?
" The Church
whereas the same Apostle said,
Clearly the Church
is subject unto Christ." 9
is subject unto Christ; because the spirit
therefore lusteth against the flesh, that on
every side the Church may be made subject

3 1 Cor. vi. 15.
6 1 Cor. xii. 18.
8 Rom. xii. 1.

4 1 Cor. xi. 12.
7 1 Cor. xii. 24,
9 Eph. v. 24.

5 1 Cor. xii.

25, 26.

to Christ; but the flesh lusteth against the
spirit, because not as yet hath the Church
received that peace which was promised perfect. And for this reason the Church is made
subject unto Christ for the pledge of salvation, and the flesh lusteth against the spirit
For neither
from the weakness of sickness.
were those other than members of the Church,
" Walk in the spirit,
unto whom he thus spake,
For the
and fulfill not the lusts of the flesh.
flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh; for these are opposed the
one to the other; that ye do not what we
would." 1 These things were assuredly spoken
unto the Church, which if it were not made
subject unto Christ, the spirit would not in it
lust against the flesh through continence. By
reason of which they were indeed able not to
perfect the lusts of the flesh, but through the
flesh lusting against the Spirit they were not
able to do the things which they would, that
is, not even to have the very lusts of the flesh.
Lastly, why should we not confess that in
spiritual men the Church is subject
unto
Christ, but in carnal men yet lusteth against
Did not they lust against Christ
Christ?
"
unto whom it was said,
Is Christ divided ?" 2
and, "I could not speak unto you as unto
spiritual, but as unto carnal.
I have given
unto you milk to drink as unto babes in
Christ, not meat, for ye were not as yet able;
but not even now are ye able: for ye are still
For whereas there is among you emcarnal.
ulation, and strife, are ye not carnal?" 3
Against whom doth emulation and strife lust,
For these lusts of the
but against Christ ?
flesh Christ healeth in His own, but loveth in
none. Whence the holy Church, so long as
it hath such members, is not yet without spot
To these are added those other
or wrinkle.
sins also, for which the daily cry of the whole
Church is, "Forgive us our debts:" 4 and,
that we should not think spiritual persons exempt from these, not any one soever of carnal persons, nor any one soever of spiritual
persons themselves, but he, who lay on the
breast of the Lord, 5 and whom He loved before others, saith, "If we shall say that we
have not sin, we deceive ourselves, and the
But in every sin, more
truth is not in us." 6
in what is greater, less in what is less, there
And
is an act of lust against righteousness.
" Who was made unto
of Christ it is written:
us by God, Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Sanctification, and Redemption." 7
In every
sin therefore without doubt there is an act of
But when He, Who
lust

against

Christ.

"

healeth all our sicknesses,''

8 shall have led
His Church unto the promised healing of sickness, then in none of its members shall there
be any, even the very least spot or wrinkle.
Then in no way shall the flesh lust against
the spirit, and therefore there shall be no
cause why the spirit also lust against the flesh.
Then all this conflict shall come to an end,
then there shall be the highest concord of
both substances; then to such a degree shall
no one there be carnal, that even the flesh
What therefore each
itself shall be spiritual.
one living after Christ doth with his flesh,
whereas he both lusts against its evil lust,
which he restrains, hereafter to be healed,
which he holds, not yet healed; and yet nourlsheth and cherisheth its good nature, since
"
no one ever hated his own flesh," 9 this also
Christ doth with the Church, so far as it is
lawful to compare lesser with greater matters.
For He both represses it with rebukes, that it
burst not being puffed up with impunity; and
raises it up with consolations, that it sink not
being weighed down with infirmity.
Hence
"
For if we would judge
is that of the Apostle,
ourselves, we should not be judged; but when
we are judged, we are rebuked of the Lord,
that we be not condemned with this world." 10
And that in the Psalm,
After the multitude
of my griefs in my heart, Thy consolations
have gladdened my soul." 11 We are therefore then to hope for perfect soundness of
our flesh without any opposition, when there
shall be sure security of the Church of Christ
without any fear.

"

lest

continent,

26. Thus much will suffice to have treated
on behalf of true Continence against the
Manichees deceitfully
the
fruitful and glorious labor of
Continence,
when it restrains and curbs the lowest part of
us, that is, the body, from immoderate and
unlawful pleasures, be believed not healthfully
Forto chasten, but hostilely to persecute.
sooth the body is indeed different from the
nature of the soul, yet is it not alien from the
nature of man: for the soul is not made up
of body, but yet man is made up of soul and
body: and assuredly, whom God frees, He
Whence our Saviour
frees the whole man.
Himself also took upon Him the whole man,
having deigned to free in us all that He made.
They who hold contrary to this truth, what
doth it profit them to restrain lusts ?
if, that*
is, they restrain any. What in them can be
made clean through Continence, whose such
Continence is unclean ? and which ought not
Forsooth to hold
to be called Continence.

1 Gal. v. 16, 17.
4 Matt. vi. 12.
7 1 Cor. i. 30.

2 1 Cor. i. 13.
S John xiii. 23.

3 1 Cor. iii. 1, 2,
6 1 John i. 8.

8 Ps. ciii. 3.
10 1 Cor. xi. 31, 3

9 Eph. v. 29.
11 Ps. xciv. 19.

ON CONTINENCE.

what they hold is the poison of the devil; but
But as not
Continence is the gift of God.
every one who suffers any thing, or with the
greatest endurance suffers any pain whatever,
possesses that virtue, which in like manner is
the gift of God, and is called Patience; for
many endure many torments, in order not to
betray either such as are wickedly privy with
them in their crimes, or themselves; many in
order to satiate glowing lusts, and to obtain,
or not to abandon those things, whereunto
they are bound by chain of evil love; many
on behalf of different and destructive errors,
strongly held: of all of
whereby they are
whom far be it from us to say that they have
true patience: thus not every one, who contains in any thing, or who marvellously retrains even the very lusts of the flesh, or mind,
is to be said to possess that continence, of the
profit and beauty of which we are treating.
For certain, what may seem marvellous to
say, through incontinence contain themselves:
as if a woman were to contain herself from
her husband, because she hath sworn this to
an adulterer.
Certain through injustice, as if
spouse yield not to spouse the due of sexual
intercourse, because he or she is already able
to overcome such appetite of the body.
Also
certain contain deceived by false faith, and
hoping what is vain, and following after what
is vain: among whom are all heretics, and
whosoever under the name of religion are deceived by any error: whose continence would
be true, if their faith also were true: but,
whereas that is not to be called faith, on this
is false; without doubt
account, because it
that also is unworthy the name of continence.
For what ? are we prepared to call continence,
which we must truly say is the gift of God,
Far be from our hearts so hateful madsin?
But the blessed Apostle saith
ness.
Every
sin." * What
thing that is not of faith
therefore hath not faith, is not to be called
continence.

"

is

27. There are also they who, in doing open
service to evil demons, contain from pleasures
of the body, that, through their means, they
may satisfy unlawful pleasures, the violence
and glow whereof they contain not. Whence
also, (to name one case, and pass over the rest
in silence by reason of the length of the discourse,) certain come not near even unto
% their own wives, whilst, as though clean, they
essay through magic arts to gain access unto
O marvellous contithe wives of others.
nence, nay rather, singular wickedness and
For, if it were true continence,
uncleanness !
the lust of the flesh ought rather to contain

from adultery, than, in order to commit adultery, from marriage. Forsooth marriage continence is wont to ease this lust of the flesh, and to
check its curb but thus far, that neither in marriage itself it run riot by immoderate license,
but that a measure be observed, either such
as is due to the weakness of the spouse, unto
whom the Apostle enjoins not this, as of command, but yields it as of permission;
2 or such
as is suited for the begetting of sons, which
was formerly the one alone occasion of sexual
intercourse to both holy fathers and mothers.
But continence doing this, that is, moderating,
and in a certain way limiting in married persons the lust of the flesh, and ordering in a
certain way within fixed limits its unquiet and
inordinate motion, uses well the evil of man,
whom it makes and wills to make perfect
good: as God uses even evil men, for their
sake whom He perfects in goodness.

28. Far be it therefore that we say of continence, of which Scripture saith. "And this
very thing was wisdom, to know whose gift
it was," 3 that even they possess it, who, by containing, either serve errors, or overcome any
lesser desires for this purpose, that they may
fulfill others, by the greatness of which they
But that continence which is
are overcome.
true, coming from above, wills not to repress
some evils by other evils, but to heal all evils
And, briefly to comprehend its
by goods.
mode of action, it is the place of continence
to keep watch to restrain and heal all delights
whatsoever of lust, which are opposed to the
Whence without doubt
delight of wisdom.
they set it within too narrow bounds, who
limit it to restraining the lusts of the body
alone: certainly they speak better, who say
that it pertains to Continence to rule in genWhich desire is set down
eral lust or desire.
as a fault, nor is it only of the body, but also
For, if the desire of the body
of the soul.
be in fornications and drunkennesses; have
enmities, strifes, emulations, lastly, hatreds,
their exercise in the pleasure of the body, and
not rather in the motion and troubled states of
Yet the Apostle called all these
the soul?
"
works of the flesh," whether what pertained
to the soul, or what pertained properly to the
flesh, calling forsooth the man himself by the
nameof the flesh. 4 Forsooth they are the works
of man, whatsoever are not called works of
God; forasmuch as man, who does these, lives
after himself, not after God, so far as he does
But there are other works of man,
these.
which are rather to be called works of God.
"For it is God," 5 saith '.he Apostle, "Who

1 Rom. xiv. 23.

2 1 Cor. vii. 6.
4 Gal. v. 19, 20, 21.

3 >visd. viii. 21.
5 Phil. ii. 13.

39 2

worketh in you both to will and to do, acWhence
cording to His good pleasure."
" For as many as are led by the
also is that,
spirit of God, these are sons of God." '

29. Thus the spirit of man, cleaving unto
the Spirit of God, lusts against the flesh, that
is, against itself: but for itself, in order that
those motions, whether in the flesh or in the
soul, after man, not after God, which as yet
exist through the sickness man hath gotten,
may be restrained by continence, that so
health may be gotten; and man, not living
"
after man, may now be able to say,
But I
in me
live, now not I, but there liveth
For where not I, there more hapChrist." -
pily I: and, when any evil motion after man
arises, unto which he, who with the mind
serves the Law of God, consents not, let him
" Now it is not I that do this." 3
say that also,
To such forsooth are said those words, which
we, as partners and sharers with them, ought
to listen to. 4 "If ye have risen together with
Christ, seek the things that are above, where
Christ is sitting at the Right Hand of God:
mind 5 the things that are above, not what are
For ye are dead, and your life
upon earth.
is hid with Christ in God: when Christ your
life shall have appeared, then ye also shall
appear with Him in glory."
Let us understand unto whom he is speaking, yea, rather,
let us listen with more attention.
For what
more plain than this ? what more clear ? He
is certainly speaking unto those, who had risen
again with Christ, not yet surely in the flesh,
but in the mind: whom he calls dead, and on
this account the more living: for
your life,"
saith he, "is hid with Christ in God." Of such
" But I live, now not I,
dead the speech is:
but there liveth in me Christ."
They therefore, whose life was hidden in God, are admonished and exhorted to mortify their memFor this
bers, which are upon the earth.
Mortify, therefore, your members,
follows,
which are upon the earth.''
And, lest any
through excess of dullness should think that
such are to mortify the members of the body
that are seen, straightway opening what it
is
he saith, "Fornication," saith he, "uncleanlust, and covetousness,
ness, passion, evil
But is it so to be bewhich is idolatry.''
lieved, that they, who were already dead, and
their life hidden with Christ in God, were still
committing fornication, were still living in
unclean habits and works, were still slaves to
passions of evil lust and covetousness ? What
madman would thus think of such ?
What,
therefore, would he that they mortify, save
the motions themselves still living in a certain

"

"

intrusion 7 of their own, without the consent
of our mind, without the action of the members of the body ? And how are they mortified by the work of continence, save when
we consent not to them with the mind, nor
are the members of the body yielded to them
as weapons; and, what is greater, and to be
looked to with yet greater watchfulness of
continence, our very thought itself, although
in a certain way it be touched by their suggestion, and as it were, whisper, yet turns
away from these, that it receive not delight
from them, and turns to more delightful
thoughts of things above: on this account
naming them in discourse, that men abide
And this
not in them, but flee from them.
is brought to pass, if we listen effectually,
with His help, Who, through His Apostle
gives this command, "Seek things that are
above, where Christ is sitting at the Right
Hand of God.
Mind the things that are
above, not what are on earth." 8

"

30. But, after that he had made mention
of these evils, he added and said, "On account of which cometh the wrath of God on
the sons of unbelief." 9 Surely it was a wholesome alarm that believers might not think
that they could be saved on account of their
faith alone, even although they should live in
these evils: the Apostle James with most
clear speech crying out against that notion,
and saying,
If any say that he have faith,
and have not works, shall his faith be able to
" I0 Whence also here the Teacher
save him ?
of the Gentiles said, that on account of these
evils the wrath of God cometh on the sons of
But when he saith, "Wherein ye
unbelief.
also walked sometime, when ye were living
Ml1 he shows sufficiently that now they
therein;
were not living therein.
Forsooth unto these
they had died, that their life might be hidden
in God with Christ. When then they were
now not living in them, they were now bidden to mortify such.
Forsooth, themselves
not living in the same, the things were living,
as I have already shown a little above, and
were called their members, that is to say,
those faults which dwelt in their members; by
a way of speech, that which is contained
through that which contains; as it
is said,
The whole Forum talks of it, when men talk
who are in the Forum.
In this very way of
Let all the
speech it is sung in the Psalm,
earth worship Thee:" 12 that is, all men who
are in the earth.
" But now do ye also," saith he,
put
down all;" 13 and he makes mention of several

31.

"

"

1 Rom. viii. 14.
4 Col. iii. 1-4.

" Gal. ii. 20.
5 Sapite.

3 Rom. vii. 17.
6 Col. iii. 5.

7 Interpellatione.
10 James ii. 14.
12 Ps. lxvi. 4'

8 Col. iii. 1, 2.
11 Col. iii. 7.
'3 Col. iii. 8.

9 Col. iii. 6.

ON CONTINENCE.

more evils of that sort.
But what is it, that
" Do ye put
it is not enough for him to say,
down all," but that he added the conjunction
and said, "ye also?" save that lest they
should not think that they did those evils and
lived in them with impunity on this account,
because their faith set them free from wrath,
which cometh upon the sons of unbelief, doing these things, and living in them without
faith. Do ye also, saith he, put down those
evils, on account of which cometh the wrath
of God on the children of unbelief; nor promise yourselves impunity of them on account
But he would not say,
of merit of faith.
"
put ye down," unto those who had already
laid down so far as that they consented not to
such faults, nor were yielding their members
to them as weapons of sin, save that the life
of Saints stands in this past deed, and is still
engaged in this work, so long as we are morFor, so long as the Spirit lusteth against
tal.
the flesh, this business proceeds with great
earnestness, resistance is offered unto evil delights, unclean lusts, carnal and shameful
motions, by the sweetness of holiness, by the
love of chastity, by spiritual vigor, and by the
beauty of continence; thus they are laid down
by them who are dead to them, and who live
not in them by consenting. Thus, I say, they
are put down, whilst they are weighed down
by continued continence, that they rise not
Whosoever, as though secure, shall
again.
cease from this laying aside of them, straightway they will assault the Citadel of the mind,
and will themselves put it down thence, and
will reduce it into slavery to them, captive
after a base and unseemly fashion. Then sin
will reign in the mortal body of man to obey

it yield its members
its desires; then will
weapons of unrighteousness unto sin: 1 and
the last state of that man shall be worse than
For it is much more tolerable
the former. 2
not to have begun a contest of this kind, than
after one hath begun to have left the conflict,
and to have become in place of a good warrior, or even in place of a conqueror, a capWhence the Lord saith not, whoso
tive.
" Whoso shall persevere unto
shall begin, but
the end, he shall be saved." 3

"

32. But whether keenly contending, that
we be not overcome, or overcoming divers
times, or even with unhoped and unlooked
for ease, let us give the glory unto Him Who
Let us remember
giveth continence unto us.
that a certain just man said,
I shall never
be moved:" and that it was showed him how
rashly he had said this, attributing as though
to his own strength, what was given to him
But this we have learnt from
from above.
his own confession: for soon after he added,
"
Lord, in Thy will Thou hast given strength
to my beauty; but Thou hast turned away
Thy Face, and I was troubled." 4 Through a
remedial Providence he was for a short time
deserted by his Ruler, in order that he might
not himself through deadly pride desert his
Therefore, whether here, where we
Ruler.
engage with our faults in order to subdue and
make them less, or there, as it shall be in the
end, where we shall be void of every enemy,
because of all infection, 5
it is for our health
that we are thus dealt with, in order that,
" whoso glorieth. he may glory in the Lord.'* 6

1 Rom. vi. 12, 13.
4 Ps. xxx. 6, 7.

2 Matt. xii. 45.
S^Peste."

3 Matt. x. 22.
6 1 Cor. i. 31.

ST. AUGUSTIN:

ON

THE GOOD OF MARRIAGE.

[DE BONO CONJUGALI.]

TRANSLATED BY

REV. C. L CORNISH, M.A.,

OF EXETER COLLEGE, OXFORD.

ON THE GOOD OF MARRIAGE.
[DE BONO CONJUGAL!.]

S. Aug. mentions this error in b. ii.

And in his book on Heresies, c. 82.

the heresy of Jovinian.
"
Jovinianus," he says,

This treatise, and the following, were written against somewhat that still remained oi
c. 23, de Nuptiis et Cone.
" who a few years since tried to found a new heresy, said that the
Catholics favored the Manichaeans, because in opposition to him they preferred holy Vir-
" That heresy took its rise from
ginity to Marriage.
one Jovinianus, a Monk, in our own time, when we were yet young." And he adds that it was
soon overborne and extinguished, say about A.D. 390, having been condemned first at Rome,
then at Milan. There are letters of Pope Siricius on the subject to the Church of Milan, and the
answer sent him by the Synod of Milan, at which St. Ambrose presided.
Jerome had refuted Jovinian, but was said to have attempted the defense of the excellency of the virgin
That Augustin might not be subject to any
state, at the expense of condemning marriage.
such complaint or calumny, before speaking of the superiority of Virginity, he thought it
well to write on the Good of Marriage.

year.

This work we learn to have been finished about the year 401, not only from the order
of his Retractations, but also from his books on Genesis after the Letter, begun about that
For in b. ix. on Genesis, c. 7, where he commends the Good of Marriage, he says:
" Now this is threefold, faithfulness, offspring, and the Sacrament.
For faithfulness, it is
observed, that there be no lying with other man or woman, out of the bond of wedlock:
for the offspring, that it be lovingly welcomed, kindly nourished, religiously brought up:
for the Sacrament, that marriage be not severed, and that man or woman divorced be not
joined to another even for the sake of offspring.
This is as it were the rule of Marriage,
by which rule either fruitfulness is made seemly, or the perverseness of incontinence is
brought to order. Upon which since we have sufficiently discoursed in that book, which we
lately published, on the Good of Marriage, where we have also distinguished the Widow's continence and the Virgin's excellency, according to the worthiness of their degrees, our pen is
not to be now longer occupied."
This very work is referred to in Book I. on the Deserts
and Remission 0/ Sins, c. 29.

Bcned. Ed.

The Editors are, of course, aware of the danger there is in reading a treatise like the
following in a spirit of idle curiosity, and they beg any reader who has not well assured

NOTICE.

At the same time it
himself that his aim is right and holy to abstain from perusing it.
must not be forgotten, that something far other than a mere shrinking from subjects offensive to modern delicacy is needed, in order to purify the thoughts with respect to the holy
The mind that will but seriously attend to it in that light, will cerestate of Matrimony.
tainly be strengthened against evil suggestions by seeing in the whole subject a field of
Christian duty.

It seemed further requisite to bring forward a work calculated to remove the imputation
so falsely cast on the holy Fathers, that they regarded Matrimony as unholy, and almost
agreed with the Manichean view of it, as a defilement and degradation to the Christian.
They did, it is true, prefer Virginity to Marriage, but, as St. Augustin expressly states, as
the

better of two good things," not as though one were good, and the other evil.

"

In estimating the work and the writer, the age in which it was written must be kept in
view, and what that age required must not be imputed as a fault to him or to his religion.
And perhaps what was written for another age may serve the more safely towards our improvement and guidance from the very circumstance that the style and manner of antiquity
has become a kind of veil, which takes off somewhat from the strength and vividness of first
impressions, and leaves the mind more at liberty to use what is laid before it as it will, than
a more modern way of speaking would be likely to do.
Let that liberty be used rightly and
conscientiously, and the effect of reading will be good.
Eds. of the Oxford Library,

ON THE GOOD OF MARRIAGE.
[DE BONO CONJUGAL!.]

i. Forasmuch as each man is a part of the
human race, and human nature is something
social, and hath for a great and natural good,
the power also of friendship; on this account
God willed to create all men out of one, in
order that they might be held in their society
not only by likeness of kind, but also by bond
Therefore the first natural bond
of kindred.
of human society is man and wife.
Nor did
God create these each by himself, and join
them together as alien by birth: but He
created the one out of the other, setting a sign
also of the power of the union in the side,
whence she was drawn, was formed. 1
For
they are joined one to another side by side,
who walk together, and look together whither
Then follows the connexion of
they walk.
fellowship in children, which is the one alone
worthy fruit, not of the union of male and
For
female, but of the sexual intercourse.
it were possible that there should exist in
either sex, even without such intercourse, a
certain friendly and true union of the one
ruling, and the other obeying.

2. Nor is it now necessary that we enquire,
and put forth a definite opinion on that question, whence could exist the progeny of the
first men, whom God had blessed, saying,
"
Increase, and be ye multiplied, and fill the
if they had not sinned, whereas their
earth;
bodies by sinning deserved the condition of
death, and there can be no sexual intercourse
For there have exsave of mortal bodies.
isted several and different opinions on this
matter; and if we must examine, which of
them be rather agreeable to the truth of Divine Scriptures, there is matter for a lengthened discussion. 3
Whether, therefore, without intercourse, in some other way, had they
not sinned, they would have had sons, from
the gift of the Almighty Creator, Who was

" 2

is

able to create themselves also without parents,
Who was able to form the Flesh of Christ in
a virgin womb, and (to speak even to unbelievers themselves) Who was able to bestow
on bees a progeny without sexual intercourse;
or whether many things there were spoken
by way of mystery and figure, and we are to
understand in another sense what is written,
'Fill the earth, and rule over it;" that is,
thgt it should come to pass by fullness and
perfection of life and power, so that the very
increase and multiplication, whereby it
said, "Increase, and be ye multiplied," be
understood to be by advance of mind, and
abundance of virtue, as it is set in the Psalm,
" Thou shall multiply me in my soul by virtue;" 4 and that succession of progeny was
not given unto man, save after that, by reason
of sin, there was to be hereafter departure in
death: or whether the body was not made
spiritual in the case of these men, but at the
first animal, in order that by merit of obedience it might after become spiritual, to lay hold
of immortality, not after death, which by the
malice of the devil entered into the world,
and was made the punishment of sin; but
after that change, which the Apostle signifies,
" Then we living, who remain,
when he says,
together with them, shall be caught up in the
clouds, to meet Christ, into the air," 5 that we
may understand both that those bodies of the
first pair were mortal, in the first forming,
and yet that they would not have died, had
they not sinned, as God had threatened: even
as if He should threaten a wound, in that the
body was capable
of wounds; which yet
would not have happened, unless what He
had forbidden were done.
Thus, therefore,
even through sexual intercourse there might
take place generations of such bodies, as up
to a certain point should have increase, and

1 Gen. ii. 21, 22.

2 Gen. i. 28

3 See De Civ. Dei, b. xiv.

Ps. cxxxviii. 3, LXX.

5 1 Thess. iv. 17.

4-QO

yet should not pass into old age; or even
into old age, and yet not into death; until
the earth were filled with that multiplication
For if to the garments of
of the blessing.
the Israelites 1 God granted their proper state
without any wearing away during forty years,
how much more would He grant unto the
bodies of such as obeyed His command a certain most happy temperament of sure state,
until they should be changed for the better,
not by death of the man, whereby the body
is abandoned by the soul, but by a blessed
change from mortality to immortality, from
Of these
an animal to a spiritual quality.
opinions which be true, or whether some other
or others yet may be formed out of these
words, were a long matter to enquire and
discuss.

3. This we now say, that, according to this
condition of being born and dying, which we
know, and in which we have been created,
the marriage of male and female is some
good; the compact whereof divine Scripture
it allowed
so commends, as that neither is
one put away by her husband to marry, so
long as her husband lives: nor is
it allowed
one put away by his wife to marry another,
unless she who have separated from him be
dead.
Therefore, concerning the good of
marriage, which the Lord also confirmed in
the Gospel, not only in that He forbade to
2 save because of fornicaput away a wife,
tion, but also in that He came by invitation
to a marriage, 3 there is good ground to inquire
And this
for what reason it be a good.
seems not to me to be merely on account of
the begetting of children, but also on account
of the natural society itself in a difference of
Otherwise it would not any longer be
sex.
called marriage in the case of old persons,
especially if either they had lost sons, or had
But now in good, algiven birth to none.
though aged, marriage, albeit there hath withered away the glow of full age between male
and female, yet there lives in full vigor the
order of charity between husband and wife:
because, the better they are, the earlier they
have begun by mutual consent to contain
from sexual intercourse with each other: not
that it should be matter of necessity afterwards
not to have power to do what they would, but
that it should be matter of praise to have
been unwilling at the first, to do what they
had power to do.
If therefore there be kept
good faith of honor, and of services mutually
due from either sex, although the members
of either be languishing and almost corpselike, yet of souls duly joined together, the

chastity 3 continues, the purer by how much it
is the more proved, the safer, by how much
Marriages have this good
it is the calmer.
also, that carnal or youthful incontinence, although it be faulty, is brought unto an honest
use in the begetting of children, in order that
out of the evil of lust the marriage union may
bring to pass some good.
Next, in that the
lust of the flesh is repressed, and rages in a
way more modestly, being tempered by paFor there is interposed a
rental affection.
certain gravity of glowing pleasure, when in
that wherein husband and wife cleave to one
another, they have in mind that they be
father and mother.

4. There is this further, that in that very
debt which married persons pay one to another, even if they demand it with somewhat
too great intemperance and incontinence, yet
Unto
they owe faith alike one to another.
which faith the Apostle allows so great right,
as to call it "power," saying, "The woman
hath not power of her own body, but the man;
again in like manner also the man hath not
power of his own body, but the woman." 5
But the violation of this faith is called adultery, when either by instigation of one's own
lust, or by consent of lust of another, there
is sexual intercourse on either side with another against the marriage compact: and thus
faith is broken, which, even in things that are
of the body, and mean, is a great good of the
soul: and therefore it is certain that it ought
to be preferred even to the health of the
body, wherein even this life of ours is conFor, although a little chaff in comtained.
parison of much gold is almost nothing; yet
faith, when it
is kept pure in a matter of
chaff, as in gold, is not therefore less because
But when faith
it is kept in a lesser matter.
is employed to commit sin, it were strange
that we should have to call it faith; however
of what kind soever it be, if also the deed be
done against it,
is the worse done; save
when it
is on this account abandoned, that
there may be a return unto true and lawful
faith, that is, that sin may be amended, by
As if
correction of perverseness of the will.
any, being unable alone to rob a man, should
find a partner in his iniquity, and make an
agreement with him to do it together, and to
divide the spoil; and, after the crime hath
been committed, should take off the whole to
That other grieves and comhimself alone.
plains that faith hath not been kept with him,
but in his very complaint he ought to consider, that he himself rather ought to have
kept faith with human society in a good life,

it

1 Deut. xxix. 5.

! Matt. xix. 9.

3 John ii.

4 Perhaps

"

charity."

5 1 Cor. vii. 4.

ON THE GOOD OF MARRIAGE.

fellowship of

not to make unjust spoil of a man, if he feels
with how great injustice it hath failed to be
kept with himself in a
sin.
Forsooth the former, being faithless in both
instances, must assuredly be judged the more
But, if he had been displeased at
wicked.
what they had done ill, and had been on this
account unwilling to divide the spoil with his
partner in crime, in order that it might be
restored to the man, from whom it had been
taken, not even a faithless man would call
Thus a woman, if, having
him faithless.
broken her marriage faith, she keep faith
with her adulterer, is certainly evil: but, if
Further ;
not even with her adulterer, worse.
if she repent her of her sin, and returning to
chastity, renounce all adulterous
marriage
compacts and resolutions, I count it strange
if even the adulterer himself will think her
one who breaks faith.

is to be called marriage.

5. Also the question is wont to be asked,
when a male and female, neither the one the
husband, nor the other the wife, of any other,
come together, not for the begetting of children, but, by reason of incontinence, for the
mere sexual intercourse, there being between
them this faith, that neither he do it with any
other woman, nor she with any other man,
' And
whether it
perhaps this may, not without reason, be
if it shall be the resolution 3
called marriage,
of both parties until the death of one, and if
the begetting of children, although they came
not together for that cause, yet they shun
not, so as either to be unwilling to have children born to them, or even by some evil work
to use means that they be not born.
But, if
either both,' or one, of these be wanting, I
find not how we can call it marriage.
For, if
a man should take unto him any one for a
time, until he find another worthy either of
his honors or of his means, to marry as his
compeer; in his soul itself he is an adulterer,
and that not with her whom he is desirous of
finding, but with her, with whom he so lies,
as not to have with her the partnership of a
Whence she also herself, knowing
husband.
and willing this, certainly acts unchastely in
having intercourse with him, with whom she
has not the compact of a wife.
However, if
she keep to him faith of bed, and after he
shall have married, have no thought of marriage herself, and prepare to contain herself
altogether from any such work, perhaps I
should not dare lightly to call her an adulteress; but who shall say that she sins not, when
he is aware that she has intercourse with a
But further, if
man, not being his wife ?

from that intercourse, so far as pertains to
herself, she has no wish but for sons, and suffers unwilling whatever she suffers beyond the
cause of begetting; there are many matrons
to whom she is to be preferred; who, although
they are not adulteresses, yet force their husbands, for the most part also wishing to exercise continence, to pay the due of the flesh,
not through desire of children, but through
glow of lust making an intemperate use of
their very right; in whose marriages, however,
this very thing, that they are married, is a
For for this purpose are they married,
good.
that the lust being brought under a lawful
bond, should not float at large without form
and loose; having of itself weakness of flesh
that cannot be curbed, but of marriage fellowship of faith that cannot be dissolved;
of itself encroachment of immoderate intercourse, of marriage a way of chastely begetFor, although it be shameful to wish to
ting.
use a husband for purposes of lust, yet it is
honorable to be unwilling to have intercourse
save with an husband, and not to give birth
There are
to children save from a husband.
also men incontinent to that degree, that they
spare not their wives even when pregnant.
Therefore whatever that is immodest, shameless, base, married persons do one with another, is the sin of the persons, not the fault
of marriage.

of

marriage.

6. Further, in the very case of the more
immoderate requirement of the due of the
flesh, which the Apostle enjoins not on them
by way of command, but allows to them by
way of leave, that they have intercourse also
beside the cause of begetting children; although evil habits impel them to such intercourse, yet marriage guards them from adulFor neither is that comtery or fornication.
mitted because of marriage, but is pardoned
Therefore married
because
persons owe one another not only the faith
of their sexual intercourse itself, for the begetting of children, which is the first fellowship of the human kind in this mortal state;
but also, in a way, a mutual service of sustaining 4 one another's weakness, in order to
shun unlawful intercourse: so that, although
perpetual continence be pleasing to one of
them, he may not, save with consent of the
" The wife hath not
other.
power of her own body, but the man: in like
manner also the man hath not power of his
own body, but the woman." 5 That that also,
which, not for the begetting of children, but
for weakness and
incontinence, either he
seeks of marriage, or she of her husband,

For thus far also,

1 Nuptice.

2 Connubium.

3 Placuerit.

4 Excipienda.

5 1 Cor. vii. 4.

they fall

they deny not the one or the other; lest by
into damnable seductions,
this
through temptation of Satan, by reason of
incontinence either of both, or of whichever
For intercourse of marriage for
of them.
the sake of begetting hath not fault; but for
the satisfying of lust, but yet with husband or
wife, by reason of the faith of the bed, it
hath venial fault: but adultery or fornication
hath deadly fault, and, through this, continence from all intercourse is indeed better even
than the intercourse of marriage itself, which
But
takes place for the sake of begetting.
because that Continence is of larger desert,
but to pay the due of marriage is no crime,
but to demand it beyond the necessity of begetting is a venial fault, but to commit fornication or adultery is a crime to be punished;
charity of the married ought to beware, lest,
whilst it seek for itself occasion of larger
honor, it do that for its partner which cause
condemnation.
putteth
away his wife, except for the cause of fornication, maketh her to commit adultery."
To such a degree is that marriage compact
entered upon a matter of a certain sacrament,
that it is not made void even by separation
itself, since, so long as her husband lives,
even by whom she hath been left, she commits adultery, in case she be married to another: and he who hath left her, is the cause
of this evil.

whosoever

For

"

7. But I marvel, if, as it is allowed to put
away a wife who is an adulteress, so it be allowed, having put her away, to marry another.
For holy Scripture causes a hard knot in this
matter, in that the Apostle says, that, by
commandment of the Lord, the wife ought
not to depart from her husband, but, in case
she shall have departed, to remain unmarried, or to be reconciled to her husband;
whereas surely she ought not to depart and
remain unmarried, save from an husband
that is an adulterer, lest by withdrawing from
him, who is not an adulterer, she cause him
to commit adultery.
But perhaps she may
justly be reconciled to her husband, either
he being to be borne with, if she cannot contain herself, or being now corrected.
But I
see not how the man can have permission to
marry another, in case he have left an adulteress, when a woman has not to be married to
another, in case she have left an adulterer.
And, this being the case, so strong is that
bond of fellowship in married persons, that,
although it be tied for the sake
f begetting
children, not even for the sake of begetting
is in a man's
children is

it loosed.

For it

power to put away a wife that is barren, and
marry one of whom to have children.
And
yet it is not allowed; and now indeed in our
times, and after the usage of Rome, neither
to marry in addition, so as to have more than
one wife living: and, surely, in case of an
adulteress or adulterer being left, it would be
possible that more men should be born, if
either the woman were married to another, or
the man should marry another. And yet, if
this be not lawful, as the Divine Rule seems
to prescribe, who is there but it must make
him attentive to learn, what is the meaning of
this so great strength of the marriage bond ?
Which I by no means think could have been
of so great avail, were it not that there were
taken a certain sacrament of some greater
matter from out this weak mortal state of
men, so that, men deserting it, and seeking
to dissolve it, it should remain unshaken for
their punishment.
Seeing that the compact
of marriage is not done away by divorce intervening; so that they continue wedded persons one to another, even after separation;
and commit adultery with those, with whom
they shall be joined, even after their own divorce, either the woman with a man, or the
man with a woman. And yet, save in the City
of our God, in His Holy Mount, the case is
not such with the wife. 3
But, that the laws
of the Gentiles are otherwise, who is there
that knows not; where, by the interposition
of divorce, without any offense of which man
takes cognizance, both the woman is married
to whom she will, and the man marries whom
And something like this custom, on
he will.
account of the hardness of the Israelites,
Moses seems to have allowed, concerning a
bill of divorcement. 4
In which matter there
appears rather a rebuke, than an approval, of
divorce. 5

8. "Honorable," therefore, "is marriage
in all, and the bed undefiled." 6 And this we
do not. so call a good, as that it is a good in
comparison of fornication:
otherwise there
will be two evils, of which the second is
worse: or fornication will also be a good, because adultery is worse: for it
is worse to
violate the marriage of another, than to cleave
unto an harlot: and adultery will be a good,
because incest is worse; for it is worse to lie
with a mother than with the wife of another:
and, until we arrive at those things, which, as
the Apostle saith, "it is a shame even to
speak of," 7 all will be good in comparison of
But who can doubt that
what are worse.
Therefore marriage and fornithis is false ?

1 Matt. v. 32.

2 1 Cor. vii. 10, 11.

3 Ps. xlviii. 1.
6 Heb. xiii. 4.

4 Deut. xxiv. 1.

[See R. V.]

5 Matt. xix.
7 Eph. v. 12.

ON THE GOOD OF MARRIAGE.

For "knowledge shall be destroyed,"

cation are not two evils, whereof the second is
worse: but marriage and continence are two
goods, whereof the second is better, even as
this temporal health and sickness are not
two evils, whereof the second is worse; but
that health and immortality are two goods,
Also knowlwhereof the second is better.
edge and vanity are not two evils, whereof
vanity is the worse: but knowledge and charity are two goods, whereof charity is the better.
saith the Apostle: and yet it is necessary for
this time: but "charity shall never fail."
Thus also this mortal begetting, on account
of which marriage takes place, shall be destroyed: but freedom from all sexual interhere, and
course is both angelic exercise 2
But as the repasts of
continueth for ever.
the Just are better than the fasts of the sacrilegious, so the marriage of the faithful is
to be set before the virginity of the impious.
However neither in that case is repast preferred to fasting, but righteousness to sacrilege; nor in this, marriage to virginity, but
For for this end the rightfaith to impiety.
eous, when need is, take their repast, that,
as good masters, they may give
to their
slaves, i.e., their bodies, what is just and fair:
but for this end the sacrilegious fast, that they
Thus for this end the
may serve
married, that they may be
faithful
chastely joined unto husbands, but for this
end the impious are virgins, that they may
commit fornication away from the true God.
As, therefore, that was good, which Martha
was doing, being engaged in the ministering
unto the Saints, but that better, which Mary,
her sister, sitting at the feet of the Lord, and
hearing His word; thus we praise the good
of Susanna 3 in married chastity, but yet we
set before her the good of the widow Anna, 4
and, much more, of the Virgin Mary. 5
It
was good that they were doing, who of their
substance were ministering necessaries unto
Christ and His disciples: but better, who left
all their substance, that they might be freer
to follow the same Lord.
But in both these
cases of good, whether what these, or whether
what Martha and Mary were doing, the better could not be done, unless the other had
Whence we are to
been passed over or left.
understand, that we are not, on this account,
to think marriage an evil, because, unless
there be abstinence from it, widowed chastity,
or virgin purity, cannot be had. For neither
on this account was what Martha was doing
evil, because, unless
abstained
from it, she could not do what was better:

her sister

devils.

are

nor on this account is it evil to receive a just
man or a prophet into one's house, because
he, who wills to follow Christ unto perfection,
ought not even to have a house, in order to
do what is better.

he

Wherefore,

doeth better.

in some cases venially,

9. Truly we must consider, that God gives
us some goods, which are to be sought for
their own sake, such as wisdom, health,
friendship: but others, which are necessary
for the sake of somewhat, such as learning,
meat, drink, sleep, marriage, sexual interFor of these certain are necessary
course.
for the sake of wisdom, as learning: certain
for the sake of health, as meat and drink and
sleep: certain for the sake of friendship, as
for hence
marriage or sexual intercourse:
subsists the propagation of the human kind,
wherein friendly fellowship is a great good.
These goods, therefore, which are necessary
for the sake of something else, whoso useth
not for this purpose, wherefore they were inin
sins;
stituted,
But whoso useth
other cases damnably.
them for this purpose, wherefore they were
Therefore, to whomsogiven doeth well.
ever they are not necessary, if he use them
these
not,
goods, when we have need, we do well to
wish; but we do better not to wish than to
wish: because ourselves are in a better state,
when we account them not necessary. And
on this account it is good to marry, because
it is good to beget children, to be a mother
of a family: but it is better not to marry,
because it is better not to stand in need of
this work, in order to human fellowship itself.
For such is the state of the human race now,
that (others, who contain not, not only being
taken up with marriage, but many also waxing wanton through unlawful concubinages,
the Good Creator working what is good out
of their evils) there fails not numerous progeny, and abundant succession, out of which
Whence we
to
holy friendships.
gather, that, in the first times of the human
race, chiefly for the propagation of the People
of God, through whom the Prince and Saviour
of all people should both be prophesied of,
and be born, it was the duty of the Saints to
use this good of marriage, not as to be sought
for its own sake, but necessary for the sake
of something else: but now, whereas, in order
to enter upon holy and pure fellowship, there
is on all sides from out all nations an overflowing fullness of spiritual kindred, even they
who wish to contract marriage only for the
sake of children, are to be admonished, that
they use rather the larger good of continence.

procure

1 1 Cor. xiii. 8.
3 Hist, of Susanna, 22, 23.

= Meditatio.
4 Luke ii. 37.

5 Luke i. 27, 28.

6 1 Tim. v. 14.

"

10. But I am aware of some that murmur:
all men should abstain
What, say they, if
from all sexual intercourse, whence will the
human race exist ? Would that all would this,
only in "charity out of a pure heart, and
good conscience, and faith
unfeigned;" 1
much more speedily would the City of God
be filled, and the end of the world hastened.
For what else doth the Apostle, as is manifest, exhort to, when he saith, speaking on
I would that all were as myself;"
this head,
" But this I say, brethren,
or in that passage,
the time is short: it remains that both they
who have wives, be as though not having:
and they who weep, as though not weeping:
and they who rejoice, as though not rejoicing:
and they who buy, as though not buying: and
they who use this world as though they use it
For the form of this world passeth
not.
have
I would
you without
care."
by.
" Whoso is without a wife,
Then he adds,
thinks of the things of the Lord, how to
please the Lord: but whoso is joined in marriage, thinks of the things of the world, how
to please his wife: and a woman that is unmarried and a virgin is different: she that is
unmarried is anxious about the things of the
Lord, to be holy both in body and spirit: but
she that is married, is anxious about the
things of the world, how to please her husband." 3 Whence it seems to me, that at this
time, those only, who contain not, ought to
sentence of the
marry, according to that
same Apostle, "But if they contain not, let
them be married: for it is better to be married
than to burn." 4

"

"

ii. And yet not to these themselves is
marriage a sin; which, if it were chosen in
comparison of fornication, would be a less sin
But
than fornication, and yet would be a sin.
now what shall we say against the most plain
Let her do
speech of the Apostle, saying,
what she will; she sinneth not, if she be marIf thou shalt have taken a wife,
ried;" 5 and,
thou hast not sinned: and, if a virgin shall
have been married, she sinneth not." 6 Hence
surely it is not lawful now to doubt that marriage is no sin.
Therefore the Apostle alloweth not marriage as matter "of pardon:" 7 for
who can doubt that it is extremely absurd to
say, that they have not sinned, unto whom
"pardon" is granted. But he allows, as matter
of "pardon," that sexual intercourse, which
takes place through incontinence, not alone for
the begetting of children, and, at times, not at
all for the begetting of children; and it is not
that marriage forces this to take place, but

that it procures pardon for it; provided however it be not so in excess as to hinder what
ought to be set aside as seasons of prayer,
nor be changed into that use which is against
nature, on which the Apostle could not be
silent, when speaking of the excessive corruptions of unclean and impious men.
For
necessary sexual intercourse for begetting is
free from blame, and itself is alone worthy of
But that which goes beyond this
marriage.
necessity, no longer follows reason, but lust.
And yet it pertains to the character of marriage, not to exact this, but to yield it to the
lest by fornication the other sin
partner,
But, if both are set under such
damnably.
lust, they do what is plainly not matter of
However, if in their intercourse
marriage.
they love what is honest more than what is
dishonest, that is, what is matter of marriage
more than what is not matter of marriage,
this is allowed to them on the authority of the
Apostle as matter of pardon: and for this
fault, they have in their marriage, not what
sets them on to commit it, but what entreats
pardon for it, if they turn not away from them
the mercy of God, either by not abstaining on
certain days, that they may be free to pray,
and through this abstinence, as through fasting, may commend their
or by
changing the natural use into that which is
against nature, which is more damnable when
it is done in the case of husband or wife.

prayers;

12. For, whereas that natural use, when it
pass beyond the compact of marriage, that is,
beyond the necessity of begetting, is pardonable in the case of a wife, damnable in the
case of an harlot; that which is against nature
is execrable when done in the case of an harlot, but more execrable in the case of a wife.
Of so great power is the ordinance of the
Creator, and the order of Creation, that, in
matters allowed us to use, even when the due
measure is exceeded, it is far more tolerable,
than, in what are not allowed, either a single,
And, therefore, in a matter
or rare excess.
allowed, want of moderation, in a husband or
wife, is to be borne with, in order that lust
break not forth into a matter that is not alHence is it also that he sins far less,
lowed.
who is ever so unceasing in approaches to his
wife, than he who approaches ever so seldom
But, when the man
to commit fornication.
shall wish to use the member of the wife not
allowed for this purpose, the wife is more
shameful, if she suffer it to take place in her
own case, than if
in the case of another
woman. Therefore the ornament of marriage
is chastity of begetting, and faith of yielding

i Tim. i. 5.
1 Cor. vii. 9,

7 Veniam,

- 1 Cor. vii. 7.
5 1 Cor. vii. 36.

3 Ver. 29-34.
6 Ver. 28.

8 Rom. i. 26, 27.

ON THE GOOD OF MARRIAGE.

the due of the flesh: this is the work of marriage, this the Apostle defends from every
" Both if thou shalt have
charge, in saying,
taken a wife, thou hast not sinned: and if a
virgin shall have been married, she sinneth
not:" and, "Let her do what she will: she sinBut an adneth not if she be married." 1
vance beyond moderation in demanding the
due of either sex, for the reasons which I
have stated above, is allowed to married persons as matter of pardon.

13. What therefore he says, "She, that is
unmarried, thinketh of the things of the Lord,
"
that she may be holy both in body and spirit;
we are not to take in such sense, as to think
that a chaste Christian wife is not holy in
Forsooth unto all the faithful it was
body.
" Know ye not that your bodies are a
said,
temple of the Holy Ghost within you, Whom
ye have from God?" 2
Therefore the bodies
also of the married are holy, so long as they
keep faith to one another and to God. And
that this sanctity of either of them, even an
unbelieving partner does not stand in the way
of, but rather that the sanctity of the wife
the unbelieving husband, and the
profits
sanctity of the husband profits the unbelieving wife, the same Apostle is witness, saying,
" For the unbelieving husband is sanctified in
the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified
Wherefore that was said acin a brother." 3
cording to the greater sanctity of the unmarried than of the married, unto which there
is also due a greater reward, according as, the
one being a good, the other is a greater good:
inasmuch as also she has this thought only,
For it is not that a
how to please the Lord.
female who believes, keeping married chastity,
thinks not how to please the Lord; but assuredly less so, in that she thinks of the things
of the world, how to please her husband.
For this is what he would say of them, that
they may, in a certain way, find themselves
obliged by marriage to think of the things of
the world, how to please their husbands.

14. And not without just cause a doubt is
raised, whether he said this of all married
women, or of such as so many are, as that
For
nearly all may be thought so to be.
neither doth that, which he saith of unmarried
women, "She, that is unmarried, thinkest of
the things of the Lord, to be holy both in
body and spirit:"
4 pertain unto all unmarried
women: whereas there are certain widows
Howwho are dead, who live in delights.
ever, so far as regards a certain distinction
and, as it were, character of their own, of the

unmarried and married; as she deserves the
excess of hatred, who containing from mar5 that is, from a thing allowed, does not
riage,
contain from offenses, either of luxury, or
pride, or curiosity and prating; so the married
woman is seldom met with, who, in the very
obedience of married life, hath no thought
save how to please God, by adorning herself,
not with plaited hair, or gold and pearls and
6 but as becometh women making
costly attire,
profession of piety, through a good conversaSuch marriages, forsooth, the Apostle
tion.
Peter also describes by giving commandment.
"
In like manner," saith he, "wives obeying
their own husbands; in order that, even if
any obey not the word, they may be gained
without discourse through the conversation
of the wives, seeing your fear and chaste
conversation: that they be not they that are
adorned without with crispings of hair, or
clothed with gold or with fair raiment; but
that hidden man of vour heart, in that unbroken continuance of a quiet and modest
spirit, which before the Lord also is rich.
For thus certain holy women, who hoped in
the Lord, used to adorn themselves, obeying
their own husbands: as Sarah obeyed Abraham,
calling him Lord: whose daughters ye are
become, when ye do well, and fear not with
Husbands in like manner livany vain fear.
ing at peace and in chastity with your wives,
both give ye honor as to the weaker and subject vessel, as with co-heirs of grace, and see
that your prayers be not hindered." 7
Is it indeed that such marriages have no thought of
the things of the Lord, how to please the
But they are very rare: who denies
Lord?
this?
And, being, as they are, rare, nearly
all the persons who are such, were not joined
together in order to be such, but being already
joined together became such.

15. For what Christian men of our time
being free, from the marriage bond, having
power to contain from all sexual intercourse,
seeing it to be now "
a time," as it is written,
"not of embracing, but of abstaining from
embrace," 8 would not choose rather to keep
virginal or widowed continence, than (now
that there is no obligation from duty to human society)
to endure tribulation of the
flesh, without which marriages cannot be (to
pass over in silence other things from which
But when through dethe Apostle spares.)
sire reigning they shall have been joined together, if they shall after overcome it, because
it is not lawful to loose, in such wise as it was
lawful not to tie, the marriage bond, they be-

1 1 Cor. vii. 28, 36.
3 1 Cor. vii. 14.

2 1 Cor. vi. 19.
4 1 Cor. vii. 34.

S 1 Tim. v. 6.
7 1 Peter iii. 1-

6 1 Tim. ii. 9, 10.
8 Eccles. iii.5.

those

But in

concord.

come such as the form of marriage makes
profession of, so as that either by mutual
consent they ascend unto a higher degree of
holiness, or, if both are not such, the one who
is such will not be one to exact but to yield
the due, observing in all things a chaste and
times,
religious
wherein as yet the mystery of our salvation
was veiled in prophetic sacraments, even they
who were such before marriage, yet contracted
marriage through the duty of begetting children, not overcome by lust, but led by piety,
unto whom if there were given such choice,
as in the revelation of the New Testament
" Whothere hath been given, the Lord saying
so can receive, let him receive;" 1 no one
doubts that they would have been ready to
receive it even with joy, who reads with careful attention what use they made of their
wives, at a time when also it was allowed one
man to have several, whom he had with more
chastity, than any now has his one wife, of
these, unto whom we see what the Apostle
For they had them
allows by way of leave. 2
in the work of begetting children, not
in
the disease of desire, as the nations which
know not God." 3 And this is so great a thing,
that many at this day more easily abstain
from all sexual intercourse their whole life
through, than, if they are joined in marriage,
observe the measure of not coming together
Forsooth
except for the sake of children.
we have many brethren and partners in the
heavenly inheritance of both sexes that are
continent, whether they be such as have made
trial of marriage, or such as are entirely free
from all such intercourse: forsooth they are
without number: yet,
in our familiar discourses with them, whom have we heard,
whether of those who are, or of those who
have been, married, declaring to us that he
has never had sexual intercourse with his wife,
save with the hope of conception ?
What,
therefore, the Apostles command the married,
this is proper to marriage, but what they
allow by way of pardon, or what hinders
prayers, this marriage compels not, but bears
with.

"

16. Therefore if haply, (which whether it
can take place, I know not; and rather think
it cannot take place; but yet, if haply), having taken unto himself a concubine for a
time, a man shall have sought sons only from
this same intercourse; neither thus is that
union to be preferred to the marriage even of
those women, who do this, that is matter of
pardon. 4 For we must consider what belongs

1 Matt. xix. 12.
3 i Thess. iv. 5.

2 1 Cor. vii. 6.
4 Veniale.

to marriage, not what belongs to such women
as marry and use marriage with less moderaFor neither if each
tion than they ought.
one so use lands entered upon unjustly and
wrongly, as out of their fruits to give large
alms, doth he therefore justify rapine: nor if
another brood over, through avarice, an estate
to which he has succeeded, or which he hath
justly gained, are we on this account to blame
the rule of civil law, whereby he is made a
Nor will the wrongfulness of a
lawful owner.
tyrannical rebellion deserve praise, if the tyrant treat his subjects with royal clemency:
nor will the order of royal power deserve
blame, if a king rage with tyrannical cruelty.
For it is one thing to wish to use well unjust
power, and it is another thing to use unjustly
Thus neither do concubines
just power.
taken for a time, if they be such in order to
sons, make their concubinage lawful; nor do
married women, if they live wantonly with
their husbands, attach any charge to the order of marriage.

17. That marriage can take place of persons first ill joined, an honest decree followBut a marriage once
ing after, is manifest.
for all entered upon in the City of our God,
where, even from the first union of the two,the
man and the woman, marriage bears a certain
sacramental character, can no way be disFor
solved but by the death of one of them.
the bond of marriage remains, although a
family, for the sake of which it was entered
upon, do not follow through manifest barrenso that, when now married persons
ness;
know that they shall not have children, yet it
is not lawful for them to separate even for
the very sake of children, and to join themAnd if they shall so do,
selves unto others.
they commit adultery with those unto whom
they join themselves, but themselves remain
husbands and wives.
Clearly with the good
will of the wife to take another woman, that
from her may be born sons common to both,
by the sexual intercourse and seed of the
one, but by the right and power of the other,
was lawful among the ancient fathers: whether
it be lawful now also, I would not hastily proFor there is not now necessity of
nounce.
begetting children, as there then was, when,
even when wives bare children, it was allowed,
in order to a more numerous posterity, to
marry other wives in addition, which now is
For the difference that
certainly not lawful.
separates times causes the due season to have
so great force unto the justice and doing or
not doing any thing, that now a man does
better, if he marry not even one wife, unless
But then they
he be unable to contain.
married even several without any blame, even

ON THE GOOD OF MARRIAGE.

those who could much more easily contain,
were it not that piety at that time had another
demand upon them.
For, as the wise and
just man, * who now desires to be dissolved
and to be with Christ, and takes more pleasure
in this, the best, now not from desire of living
here, but from duty of being useful 2
, takes
food that he may remain in the flesh, which
is necessary for the sake of others; so to
have intercourse with females in right of marriage, was to holy men at that time a matter
of duty not of lust.

their

18. For what food is unto the conservation
of the man, this sexual intercourse is unto
the conservation of the race: and both are
not without carnal delight: which yet being
modified, and by restraint of temperance reduced unto the use after nature, cannot be
But what unlawful food is in the suplust. 3
porting of life, this sexual intercourse of fornication or adultery is in the seeking of a
And what unlawful food is in luxury
family.
of belly and throat, this unlawful intercourse
is in lust that seeks not a family. And what
the excessive appetite of some is in lawful
food, this that intercourse that is matter of
As therefore
pardon is in husband and wife.
it is better to die of hunger than to eat things
offered unto idols: so it is better to die without children, than to seek a family from
But from whatever
unlawful intercourse.
source men be born, if they follow not the
parents, and worship God
vices of
For
aright, they shall be honest and safe.
the seed of man, from out what kind of man
soever, is the creation of God, and it shall
fare ill with those who use it ill, yet shall not
But as the good
itself at any time be evil.
sons of adulterers are no defense of adulteries, so the evil sons of married persons are
no charge against marriage.
Wherefore as
the Fathers of the time of the New Testament
taking food from the duty of conservation,
although they took it with natural delight of
the flesh, were yet in no way compared with
the delight of those who fed on what had
been offered in sacrifice, or of those who,
although the food was lawful, yet took it to
excess: so the Fathers of the time of the Old
Testament from the duty of conservation
used sexual intercourse; and yet that their
natural delight, by no means relaxed unto
unreasonable and unlawful lust, is not to be
compared either with the vileness of fornications, or with the intemperance of married
Forsooth through the same vein 4
persons.

1 Phil. i. 23.
3 Retract, b. ii.

it was meant that the good and
right use of lust is not lust, for as it is evil will to use good things,
so is it good will to use evil things."

4 " Vena."

c. xxii. 2.

"

2 Consulendi.

of charity, now after the spirit, then after
it was a duty to beget sons for the
the flesh,
sake of that mother Jerusalem: but it was
nought save the difference of times which
made the works of the fathers different.
But
thus it was necessary that even Prophets, not
living after the flesh, should come together
after the flesh; even as it was necessary that
Apostles also, not living after the flesh, should
eat food after the flesh.

19. Therefore as many women as there are
now, unto whom it is said, "if they contain
not, let them be married, s '' are not to be
compared to the holy women then, even when
Marriage itself indeed in all
they married.
nations is for the same cause of begetting
sons, and of what character soever these may
be afterward, yet was marriage for this purpose instituted, that they may be born in due
But men, who contain
and honest order.
not, as it were ascend unto marriage by a
step of honesty: but they, who without doubt
would contain, if the purpose of that time had
allowed this, in a certain measure descended
And, on
unto marriage by a step of piety.
this account, although the marriages of both,
so far as they are marriages, in that they
are for the sake of begetting, are equally
good, yet these men when married are not to
be compared with those men as
married.
For these have, what is allowed them by the
way of leave, on account of the honesty of
marriage, although it pertain not to marriage;
that is, the advance which goes beyond the
necessity of begetting, which they had not.
But neither can these, if haply there be now
any found, who neither seek, nor desire, in
marriage any thing, save that wherefore marriage was instituted, be made equal to those
men.
For in these the very desire of sons is
carnal, but in those it was spiritual, in that
it was suited to the sacrament of that time.
Forsooth now no one who is made perfect in
piety seeks to have sons, save after a spiritual
sense; but then it was the work of piety itself
to beget sons even after a carnal sense: in
that the begetting of that people was fraught
with tidings of things to come, and pertained
unto the prophetic dispensation.

20. And on this account, not, so as it was
allowed one man to have even several wives,
was it allowed one female to have several
husbands, not even for the sake of a family,
in case it should happen that the woman
could bear, the man could not beget.
For
by a secret law of nature things that stand
chief love to be singular; but what are subject are set under, not only one under one,

5 1 Cor. vii. 9.

4oS

but, if the system of nature or society allow,
even several under one, not without becoming
beauty. For neither hath one slave 90 several
masters, in the way that several slaves have one
Thus we read not that any of the
master.
holy women served two or more living husbands: but we read that many females served
one husband, when the social state ' of that
nation allowed it, and the purpose of the time
persuaded to it: for neither is
it contrary to
For several females
the nature of marriage.
can conceive from one man: but one female
cannot from several, (such is the power of
things principal:) as many souls are rightly
made subject unto one God. And on this
account there is no True God of souls, save
One: but one soul by means of many false
gods may commit fornication, but not be
made fruitful.

21. But since out of many souls there shall
be hereafter one City of such as have one
soul and one heart 2 towards God; which perfection of our unity shall be hereafter, after
this sojourn in a strange land, wherein the
thoughts of all shall neither be hidden one
from another, nor shall be in any matter opposed one to another; on this account the
Sacrament of marriage of our time hath been
so reduced to one man and one wife, as that
it is not lawful to ordain any as a steward of
the Church, save the husband of one wife. 3
And this they have understood more acutely
who have been of opinion, that neither is he
to be ordained, 4 who as a catechumen or as
For it is a
a heathen 5 had a second wife.
For in bapmatter of sacrament, not of sin.
But he who said,
tism all sins are put away.
"
If thou shalt have taken a wife, thou hast
not sinned; and if a virgin shall have been
and, "Let her
married, she sinneth not:" 6
do what she will, she sinneth not, if she be
married," hath made it plain enough that
But on account of the
marriage is no sin.
sanctity of the Sacrament, as a female, although it be as a catechumen that she hath
suffered violence, cannot after Baptism be consecrated among the virgins of God: so there
was no absurdity in supposing of him who had
exceeded the number of one wife, not that he
had committed any sin, but that he had lost a
certain prescript rule 7 of a sacrament necessary not unto desert of good life, but unto the
seal of ecclesiastic ordination; and thus, as
the many wives of the old Fathers signified
our future Churches out of all nations made

2 Acts iv. 32.

1 Societas.
5 Thus Ambrose, Verelte, and ancient Jerome, Ep. ad Ocean.
and harshly against Ep. to Ch. of general custom, speaks strongly
this interpretation, and says, b. i. near the end, that Rufnnus had
Ben.
found fault with him for this.

4 Tit. i. 6.

3 1 Tim. iii. 2.

6 1 Cor. vii. 28, 3' .

7 Normam.

so our
subject unto, one husband, Christ:
8 the husband of one wife, sigchief-priest,
nifies unity out of all nations, made subject
unto one husband, Christ: which shall then
be perfected, when He shall have unveiled
the hidden things of darkness, 9 and shall have
made manifest the thoughts of the heart, that
then each may have praise from God.
But
now there are manifest, there are hidden, dissensions, even where charity is safe between
those, who shall be hereafter one, and in one;
which shall then certainly have no existence.
As therefore the Sacrament of marriage with
several of that time signified the multitude
that should be hereafter made subject unto
God in all nations of the earth, so the Sacrament of marriage with one of our times signifies the unity of us all made subject to God,
which shall be hereafter in one Heavenly City.
Therefore as to serve two or more, so to pass
over from a living husband into marriage with
another, was neither lawful then, nor is
it
lawful now, nor will it ever be lawful.
Forsooth to apostatise from the One God, and to
go into adulterous superstition of another, is
Therefore not even for the
ever an evil.
sake of a more numerous family did our
Saints do, what the Roman Cato is said to
have done, 10 to give up his wife, during his
own life, to fill even another's house with
the marriage of one
sons.
woman the sanctity of the Sacrament is of
more avail than the fruitfulness of the womb.
22. If, therefore, even they who are united
in marriage only for the purpose of begetting,
for which purpose marriage was instituted,
are not compared with the Fathers, seeking
their very sons in a way far other than do
these; forasmuch as Abraham, being bidden
to slay his son, fearless and devoted, spared
not his only son, whom from out of great
despair he had received" save that he laid down
his hand, when He forbade him, at Whose
command he had lifted it up; it remains that
we consider, whether at least continent persons among us are to be compared to those
Fathers who were married; unless haply now
these are to be preferred to them, to whom
we have not yet found persons to compare.
For there was a greater good in their marriage, than is the proper good of marriage: to
which without doubt the good of Continence
is to be preferred: because they sought not
sons from marriage by such duty as these are
led by, from a certain sense of mortal nature
requiring succession against decease.
And,
whoso denies this to be good he knows not

Forsooth in

8 A ntistes.
10 Cato minor, cf. Plutarch, p. 771.

9 1 Cor. iv. 5.
" Gen. xxii. 12.

ON THE GOOD OF MARRIAGE.

God, the Creator of all things good, from
things heavenly even unto things earthly,
from things immortal even unto things morBut neither are beasts altogether without
tal.
this sense of begetting, and chiefly birds,
whose care of building nests meets us at once,
and a certain likeness to marriages, in order
to beget and nurture together.
But those
men, with mind far holier, surpassed this
affection of mortal nature, the chastity whereof
in its own kind, there being added thereto the
worship of God, as some have understood, is
set forth as bearing first thirty-fold; who
sought sons of their marriage for the sake of
Christ; in order to distinguish His race after
the flesh from all nations : even as God was
pleased to order, that this above the rest
should avail to prophesy of Him, in that it
was foretold of what race also, and of what
nation, He should hereafter come in the flesh.
Therefore it was a far greater good than the
chaste marriages of believers among us, which
father Abraham knew in his own thigh, under
which he bade his servant to put his hand,
that he might take an oath concerning the
wife, whom his son was to marry.
For putting his hand under the thigh of a man, and
swearing by the God of Heaven, 1 what else
did he signify, than that in that Flesh, which
derived its origin from that thigh, the God of
Heaven would come ?
Therefore marriage is
a good, wherein married persons are so much
the better, in proportion as they fear God with
greater chastity and faithfulness, specially if
the sons, whom they desire after the flesh,
they also bring up after the spirit.

23. Nor, in that the Law orders a man to
be purified even after intercourse with a wife,
doth it show it to be sin: unless it be that
which is allowed by way of pardon, which
also, being in excess, hinders prayers.
But,
as the Law sets 2 many things in sacraments
and shadows of things to come; a certain as
it were material formless state of the seed,
which having received form will hereafter produce the body of man, is set to signify a life
formless, and untaught: from which formless
state, forasmuch as it behoves that man be
cleansed by form and teaching of learning;
as a sign of this, that purification was ordered
For neither in
after the emission of seed.
sleep also doth it take place through sin.
And yet there also a purification was commanded. Or, if any think this also to be sin,
thinking that it comes not to pass save from
some lust of this kind, which without doubt
is false; what? are the ordinary menses also
of women sins ? And yet from these the same

old Law commanded that they should be
cleansed by expiation; for no other cause,
save the material formless state itself, in that
which, when conception hath taken place, is
added as it were to build up the body, and for
this reason, when it flows without form, the
Law would have signified by it a soul without
form of discipline, flowing and loose in an
unseemly manner. And that this ought to
receive form, it signifies, when it commands
such flow of the body to be purified.
Lastly,
what ? to die, is that also a sin ? or, to bury a
dead person, is
it not also a good work of
humanity ? and yet a purification was commanded even on occasion of this also; because also a dead body, life abandoning it, is
not sin, but signifies the sin of a soul abandoned by righteousness. 3

24. Marriage, I say, is a good, and may
be, by sound reason, defended against all
But with the marriage of the
calumnies.
inquire not what marriage,
holy fathers, I
but what continence, is on a level: or rather
not marriage with marriage; for it is an equal
gift in all cases given to the mortal nature of
men; but men who use marriage, forasmuch
as I find not, to compare with other men who
used marriage in a far other spirit, we must
inquire what continent persons admit of being
Uncompared with those married persons.
less, haply, Abraham could not contain from
marriage, for the sake of the kingdom of
heaven, he who, for the sake of the kingdom
of heaven, could fearless sacrifice his only
pledge of offspring, for whose sake marriage
was dear !

25. Forsooth continence is a virtue, not of
But the virtues of
the body, but of the soul.
the soul are sometimes shown in work, sometimes lie hid in habit, as the virtue of martyrdom shone forth and appeared_ by enduring
sufferings; but how many are there of the
same virtue of mind, unto whom trial is wanting, whereby what is within, in the sight of
God, may go forth also into the sight of men,
and not to men begin to exist, but only become known?
For there was already in Job
patience, which God knew, and to which He
bore witness: but it became known unto men
by test of trial: 4 and what lay hid within was
not produced, but shown, by the things that
were brought on him from without. Timothy
also certainly had the virtue of abstaining
from wine, 5 which Paul took not from him, by
advising him to use a moderate portion of
wine, "for the sake of his stomach and his
often infirmities/' otherwise he taught him a
deadly lesson, that for the sake of the health

1 Gen. xxiv. 2-4.

2 Infirmitas.

3 Numb. xix. 11.

4 Job i. 8.

5 1 Tim. v. 23.

4io

"

of the body there should be a loss of virtue
in the soul: but because what he advised
could take place with safety to that virtue, the
profit of drinking was so left free to the body,
as that the habit of continence continued in the
For it is the habit itself, whereby any
soul.
thing is done, when there is need; ' but when
it is not done, it can be done, only there is
This habit, in the matter of that
no need.
continence which is from sexual intercourse,
they have not, unto whom it is said,
If they
contain not, let them be married." 2
But this
is said, "Whoso
they have, unto whom it
can receive, let him receive.*' 3 Thus have
perfect souls used earthly goods, that are
necessary for something else, through this
habit of continence, so as, by it, not to be
bound by them, and so as by it, to have power
also not to use them, in case there were no
Nor doth any use them well, save who
need.
hath power also not to use them. Many indeed with more ease practise abstinence, so
as not to use, than practise temperance, so as
But no one can wisely use them,
to use well.
save who can also continently not use them.
From this habit Paul also said,
I know both
to abound, and to suffer want." 4
Forsooth
to suffer want is the part of any men soever;
but to know to suffer want is the part of great
So, also, to abound, who cannot? but
men.
to know also to abound, is not, save of those,
whom abundance corrupts not.

"

26. But, in

order that it may be more
clearly understood, how there may be virtue
in habit, although it be not in work, I speak
of an example, about which no Catholic
For that our Lord
Christian can doubt.
Jesus Christ in truth of flesh hungered and
thirsted, ate and drank, no one doubts of
such as out of the Gospel are
believers.
What, then, vyas there not in Him the virtue
of continence from meat and drink, as great
" For John came neither
as in John Baptist ?
eating nor drinking; and they said, He hath
a devil; the Son of Man came both eating
and drinking; and they said,
Lo, a glutton
and wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and
What, are not such things said
sinners." 5
also against them of His household, our
fathers, from another kind of using of things
earthy, so far as pertains to sexual interLo, men lustful and unclean, lovers
course;
" And yet as in
of women and lewdness ?
Him that was not true, although it were true
that He abstained not, even as John, from
eating and drinking, for Himself saith most
plainly and truly,
John came, not eating,
nor drinking; the Son of Man came eating

"

"

"

"

"

and drinking:
so neither is this true in these
Fathers; although there hath come now the
Apostle of Christ, not wedded, nor begetting,
so that the heathen say of him, He was a
magician; but there came then the Prophet
of Christ, marrying and begetting sons, so
that the Manichees say of him, He was a
man fond of women: " And wisdom,
saith
He, "hath been justified of her children." 6
What the Lord there added, after He had
thus spoken of John and of Himself; "But
wisdom," saith He, "hath been justified of her
children." Who see that the virtue of continence ought to exist even in the habit of the
soul, but to be shown forth in deed, according to opportunity of things and times; even
as the virtue of patience of holy martyrs
appeared in deed; but of the rest equally
holy was in habit.
Wherefore, even as there
is not unequal desert of patience in Peter,
who suffered, and in John, who suffered not;
so there is not unequal desert of continence
in John who made no trial
of marriage, 7
and in Abraham, who begat sons.
For both
the celibate of the one, and the marriage
estate of the other, did service as soldiers to
Christ, as times were allotted; but John had
continence in work also, but Abraham in
habit alone.

27. Therefore at that time, when the Law
also, following upon the days of the Patri8 pronounced accursed, whoso raised
archs,
not up seed in Israel, even he, who could,
put it not forth, but yet possessed it.
But
from the period that the fullness of time hath
come, 9 that it should be said, "Whoso can
receive, let him receive,"
I0 from that period
even unto this present, and from henceforth
even unto the end, whoso hath, worketh:
whoso shall be unwilling to work, let him not
falsely say, that he hath. And through this
means, they, who corrupt good manners by
evil communications," with empty and vain
craft, say to a Christian man exercising continence, and refusing marriage, What then,
are you better than Abraham ?
But let him
not, upon hearing this, be troubled; neither
let him dare to say,
Better," nor let him fall
away from his purpose: for the one he saith
But
not truly, the other he doth not rightly.
let him say, I indeed am not better than
Abraham, but the chastity of the unmarried
is better than the
chastity of marriage;
whereof Abraham had one in use, both in
For he lived chastely in the marriage
habit.
state: but it was in his power to be chaste
without marriage, but at that time it behoved
But I with more ease use not marriage,
not.

"

1 Or "work."
4 Phil. iv. 12.

2 1 Cor.
5 Matt.

18-19.

3 Matt. xix. 12.

6 Matt. xi. 19.
9 Gal. iv. 4.

7 S. Jerome agt. Jovinianus.
IO Matt. xix. 12.

8 Deut. xxv. 5, 10.
" 1 Cor. xv. 33.

ON THE GOOD OF MARRIAGE.

which Abraham used, than so use marriage as
Abraham used it: and therefore I am better
than those, who through incontinence
of
mind cannot do what I do; not than those,
who, on account of difference of time, did
For what I now do, they
not do what I do.
would have done better, if it had been to be
done at that time; but what they did,
should not so do, although it were now to be
Or, if he feels and knows himself to
done.
be such, as that, (the virtue of continence
being preserved and continued in the habit
of his mind, in case he had descended unto
the use of marriage from some duty of religion,) he should be such an husband, and
such a father, as Abraham was; let him dare
to make plain answer to that captious questioner, and to say, I am not indeed better
than Abraham, only in this kind of continence, of which he was not void, although
it appeared not: but I am such, not having
Let him say
other than he, but doing other.
this plainly: forasmuch as, even if he shall
wish to glory, he will not be a fool, for he
But if he spare, lest any
saith the truth.
think of him above what he sees him, 1 or
hears any thing of him; let him remove from
his own person the knot of the question, and
let him answer, not concerning the man, but
concerning the thing itself, and let him say,
Whoso hath so great power is such as AbraBut it may happen that the virtue of
ham.
continence is less in his mind, who uses not
marriage, which Abraham used: but yet it is
greater than in his mind, who on this account
held chastity of marriage, in that he could
Thus also let the unmarried
not a greater.
woman, whose thoughts are of the things of the
Lord, that she may be holy both in body and
shall
that
spirit,
shameless questioner saying, What, then, are
you better than Sara ? answer, I am better,
but than those, who are void of the virtue of
continence, which I believe not of Sara: she
therefore together with this virtue did what was
suited to that time, from which I am free,
that in my body also may appear, what she
kept in her mind.

2 when she

heard

have

28. Therefore, if we compare the things
themselves, we may no way doubt that the
chastity of continence is better than marriage
chastity, whilst yet both are good: but when
we compare the persons, he is better, who
hath a greater good than another.
Further,
he who hath a greater of the same kind, hath
also that which is less; but he, who only hath
what is less, assuredly hath not that which is
For in sixty, thirty also are congreater.

1 2 Cor. xii. 6.

2 1 Cor. vii. 34.

But not to
tained, not sixty also in thirty.
work from out that which he hath, stands in
the allotment of duties, not in the want of
virtues: forasmuch as neither is he without
the good of mercy, who finds not wretched
persons such as he may mercifully assist.

29. And there is this further, that men are
not rightly compared with men in regard of
some one good.
For it may come to pass,
that one hath not what another hath, but
hath another thing, which must be esteemed
The good of obedience is
of more value.
For marriage is
better than of continence.
in no place condemned by authority of our
Scriptures, but disobedience is in no place
If therefore there be set before
acquitted.
us a virgin about to continue so, but yet disobedient, and a married woman who could
not continue a virgin, but yet obedient, which
shall we call better? shall it be (the one) less
praiseworthy, than if she were a virgin, or
(the other) worthy of blame, even as she is a
So, if you compare a drunken virgin
virgin ?
with a sober married woman, who can doubt
to pass the same sentence?
Forsooth marriage and virginity are two goods, whereof
the one is greater; but sobriety and drunkenness, even as obedience and stubbornness,
are, the one good, and the other evil.
But
it is better to have all goods even in a less
degree, than great good with great evil: forasmuch as in the goods of the body also it is
better to have the stature of Zacchseus with
sound health, than that of Goliah with fever.

plainly

30. The right

is, not
question
whether a virgin every way disobedient is to
be compared to an obedient married woman,
but a less obedient to a more obedient: forasmuch as that also of marriage is chastity,
and therefore a good, but less than virginal.
Therefore if the one, by so much less in the
good of obedience, as she is greater in the
good of chastity, be compared with the other,
which of them is to be preferred that person
judges, who in the first place comparing
chastity itself and obedience, sees that obedience is in a certain way the mother of all virtues. And therefore, for this reason, there
may be obedience without virginity, because
But
virginity is of counsel, not of precept.
I call that obedience, whereby precepts are
And, therefore, there may
complied with.
be obedience to precepts without virginity,
but not without chastity.
For it pertains
unto chastity, not to commit fornication, not
to commit adultery, to be defiled by no unlawful intercourse: and whoso observe not
these, do contrary to the precepts of God,
and on this account are banished from the
But there may be virvirtue of obedience.

"

ginity without obedience, on this account,
is possible for a woman, having
because it
received the counsel of virginity, and having
guarded virginity, to slight precepts: even as
we have known many sacred virgins, talkative,
curious, drunken, litigious, covetous, proud:
all which are contrary to precepts, and slay
one, even as Eve herself, by the crime of
Wherefore not only is the
disobedience.
obedient to be preferred to the disobedient,
but a more obedient married woman to a less
obedient virgin.

31. From this obedience that Father, who
was not without a wife, was prepared to be
1 and that slain by himwithout an only son,
For I shall not without due cause call
self.
him an only son, concerning whom he heard
the Lord say,
In Isaac shall there be called
for thee a seed. 2 "
Therefore how much
sooner would he hear it, that he should be
even without a wife, if this he were bidden ?
Wherefore it is not without reason that we
often consider, that some of both sexes, containing from all sexual intercourse, are negligent in obeying precepts, after having with so
great warmth caught at the not making use
Whence who
of things that are allowed.
doubts that we do not rightly compare unto
holy fathers and
the excellence of those
mothers begetting sons, the men and women
of our time, although free from all intercourse,
yet in virtue of obedience inferior: even if
there had been wanting to those men in habit
of mind also, what is plain in the deed of the
Therefore let these follow the Lamb,
latter.
boys singing the new song, as it is written in
" who have not defiled themthe Apocalypse,
selves with women:" 3 for no other reason
Nor
than that they have continued virgins.
let them on this account think themselves
better than the first holy fathers, who used
marriage, so to speak, after the fashion of
Forsooth the use of it is such, as
marriage.
that, if in it there hath taken place through
carnal intercourse aught which exceeds necessity of begetting, although in a way that deFor what
serves pardon, there is pollution.
doth pardon expiate, if that advance cause
no pollution whatever ? From which pollution
it were strange if boys following the Lamb
were free, unless they continued virgins.
the

marriage
throughout all nations and all men stands
in the occasion of begetting, and faith of
chastity: but, so far as pertains unto the
People of God, also in the sanctity of the

32. Therefore

good of

1 Retract, b. ii. c. 22. 2.

" I do not quite approve this; as one
should rather believe that he believed his son would presently be
restored to him by resurrection, as we read in the Epistle to the
Hebrews."

2 Gen. xxi. 12.

3 Rev. xiv. 4.

I will," says he,

Sacrament, by reason of which it is unlawful
for one who leaves her husband, even when
she has been put away, to be married to another, so long as her husband lives, no not
even for the sake of bearing children: and,
whereas this is the alone cause, wherefore
marriage takes place, not even where that
very thing, wherefore it takes place, follows
not, is the marriage bond loosed, save by the
death of the husband or wife.
In like manner as if there take place an ordination of
clergy in order to form a congregation of
people, although the congregation of people
follow not, yet there remains in the ordained
persons the Sacrament of Ordination; and if,
for any fault, any be removed from his office,
he will not be without the Sacrament of the
Lord once for all set upon him, albeit continuing unto condemnation.
Therefore that
marriage takes place for the sake of begetting children, the Apostle is a witness thus,
"
" that the younger women
be married.-"
And, as though it were said to
him, For what purpose ?
straightway he
added, "to have children, to be mothers of
But unto the faith of chastity
families."
" The wife hath not
pertains that saying,
power of her own body, but the husband:
likewise also the husband hath not power of
his own body, but the wife." 4
But unto the
sanctity of the Sacrament that saying, "The
wife not to depart from her husband, but, in
case she shall have departed, to remain unmarried, or to be reconciled to her husband:
and let not the husband put away his wife." s
All these are goods, on account of which
marriage is a good; offspring, faith, sacraBut now, at this time, not to seek
ment.
offspring after the flesh, and by this means
to maintain a certain perpetual freedom from
every such work, and to be made subject after
a spiritual manner unto one Husband Christ,
is assuredly better and holier; provided, that
is, men so use that freedom, as it is written,
so as to have their thoughts of the things of
the Lord, how to please the Lord; that is,
that Continence 6 at all times do take thought,
that obedience fall not short in any matter:
and this virtue, as the root-virtue, and (as it
is wont to be called) the womb, and clearly
universal, the holy fathers of old exercised
in deed; but that Continence they possessed
Who assuredly, through
in habit of mind.
that obedience, whereby they were just and
holy, and ever prepared unto every good
work, even if they were bidden to abstain
from all sexual intercourse, would perform it.
For how much more easily could they, at the

4 1 Cor. vii. 4.

5 1 Cor. vii. 10, 11.

6 1 Cor. vii. 32.

ON THE GOOD OF MARRIAGE.

bidding or exhortation of God, not use sexual
intercourse, who, as an act of obedience,
could slay the child, for the begetting of
which alone they used the ministry of sexual
intercourse ?

33. And, the case being thus, enough and
more than enough answer has been made to
the heretics, whether they be
Manichees,
or whosoever other that bring false charges
against the Fathers of the Old Testament, on
the subject of their having several wives,
thinking this a proof whereby to convict them
of incontinence: provided, that is, that they
perceive, that that is no sin, which is committed neither against nature, in that they
used those women not for wantonness, but
for the begetting of children: nor against
custom, forasmuch as such things were usually done at those times: nor against command, forasmuch as they were forbidden by
But such as used women unlawfully,
no law.
either the divine sentence in those Scriptures
convicts them, or the reading sets them forth
for us to condemn and shun, not to approve
or imitate.

34. But those of ours who have wives we
advise, with all our power, that they dare
not to judge of those holy fathers after their
own weakness, comparing, as
the Apostle
says, themselves with themselves; 1 and therefore, not understanding how great strength
the soul hath, doing service unto righteousness against lusts, that it acquiesce not in
carnal motions of this sort, or suffer them to
glide on or advance unto sexual intercourse
beyond the necessity of begetting children,
so far as the order of nature, so far as the
use of custom, so far as the decrees of laws
is on this account
prescribe.
that men have this suspicion concerning those
fathers, in that they themselves have either
chosen marriage through incontinence, or
But
their wives with intemperance.
use
however let such as are continent, either
men, who, on the death of their wives, or,
women, who, on the death of their husbands,
both, who, with mutual consent, have
or
vowed continence unto God, know that to
them indeed there is due a greater recom-

Forsooth it

the

the

regards)

marriages of

pense than marriage chastity demands; but,
holy
(as
Fathers, who were joined after the manner
of prophecy, who neither in sexual intercourse sought aught save children, nor in
children themselves aught save what should
set forward Christ coming hereafter in the
flesh, not only let them not despise them in
comparison of their own purpose, but let
them without any doubting prefer them even
to their own purpose.

" How great

35. Boys also and virgins dedicating unto
God actual chastity we do before all things
admonish, that they be aware that they must
guard their life meanwhile upon earth with so
great humility, by how much the more what
they have vowed is heavenly.
Forsooth it
soever thou art,
is written,
by so much humble thyself in all things."
Therefore it is our part to say something of
their greatness, it is their part to have thought
of great humility.
Therefore, except certain, those holy fathers and mothers who
were married, than whom these
although
they be not married are not better, for this
reason, that, if they were married, they would
not be equal, let them not doubt that they
surpass all the rest of this time, either married, or after trial made of marriage, exercising continence; not so far as Anna surpasses
Susanna; but so far as Mary surpasses both.
I am speaking of what pertains unto the holy
for who knows
chastity itself of the flesh;
Therenot, what other deserts Mary hath ?
fore let them add to this so high purpose
conduct suitable, that they may have an
assured security of the surpassing reward;
knowing of a truth, that, unto themselves
and unto all the faithful, beloved and chosen
members of Christ, coming many from the
East, and from the West, although shining
with light of glory that differeth one from
another, according to their deserts, there is
this great gift bestowed in common, to sit
down in the kingdom of God with Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob, 3 who not for the sake
of this world, but for the sake of Christ,
were husbands, for the sake of Christ were
fathers.

1 2 Cor. x. 12.

2 Ecclus. lii. 18.

3 Matt. viii. 11.

ST. AUGUSTIN:

OF HOLY VIRGINITY

[DE VIRGINITATE.]

TRANSLATED BY

REV. C.

CORNISH, MA,

OF EXETER COLLEGE, OXFORD.

OF HOLY VIRGINITY.

[DE VIRGINITATE.]

Retr. ii. 23.

" After I had written 'on the Good of Marriage,' it was expected that I
should write on Holy Virginity; and I did not delay to do so:/ and that it is God's gift, and
how great a gift, and with what humility to be guarded, so far as" I was able I set forth/in
one volume.

This book begins," &c.

1. We lately put forth a book "

of the Good
of Marriage," in which also we admonished
and admonish the virgins of Christ, not, on
account of that greater gift which they have
received, to despise, in comparison of themselves, the fathers and mothers of the People
of God; and not to think those men, 1 (whom
the Apostle sets forth as the olive, that the
engrafted wild olive be not proud,) who did
service to Christ about to come hereafter, even
by the begetting of sons, on this account of
less desert, because by divine right continence
is preferred to wedded life, and pious virginity
Forsooth in them were being
to marriage.
prepared and brought forth future things,
which now we see fulfilled in a marvellous
and effectual manner, whose married life also
was prophetic: whence, not after the wonted
custom of human wishes and joys, but by the
very deep counsel of God, in certain of them
fruitfulness obtained to be honored, in certain
also barrenness to be made fruitful.
But at
this time, towards them unto whom it is said,
"if they contain not, let them be married/'
we must use not consolation, but exhortation.
" Whoso can
But them, unto whom it is said,
receive, let him receive," 3 we must exhort,that

in

Spirit

virgin

marriage.

they be not alarmed; and alarm that they be
Wherefore virginity is not
not lifted up.
only to be set forth, that it may be loved, but
also to be admonished, that it be not puffed up.
2. This we have undertaken in our present
discourse: may Christ help us, the Son of a
virgin, and the Spouse of virgins, born after
the flesh of a virgin womb, and wedded after
the
Whereas,
therefore, the whole Church itself is a virgin
espoused unto one Husband Christ,
4 as the
Apostle saith, of how great honor are its
members worthy, who guard this even in the
flesh itself, which the whole Church guards in
the faith ? which imitates the mother of her
For the Church also
husband, and her Lord.
For whose
is both a mother and a virgin.
virgin purity consult we for, if she is not a
virgin ? or whose children address we, if she
is not a mother? Mary bare the Head of
This Body after the flesh, the Church bears
the members of that Body after the Spirit.
In both virginity hindeis not fruitfulness: in
both fruitfulness takes not away virginity.
Wherefore, whereas the whole Church is holy
both in body and spirit, and yet the whole is
not virgin in body but in spirit; how much

1 Rom. xi. 17 18.

1 Cor. vii. 9.

3 Mat. xix. 12.

4 2 Cor. xi. 2.

4i8

more holy is it in these members, wherein it
is virgin both in body and spirit ?

3. It is written in the Gospel, of the mother
and brethren of Christ, that is, His kindred
after the flesh, that, when word had been
brought to Him, and they were standing without, because they could not come to Him by
" Who
reason of the crowd, He made answer,
is My mother? or who are My brethren ? and
stretching forth His Hand over His disciples,
He saith, These are My brethren: and whosoever shall have done the will of My Father,
that man is to Me brother, and mother, and
71 What else teaching us, than to presister.'
fer to kindred after the flesh, our descent after
the Spirit: and that men are not blessed for
this reason, that they are united by nearness
of flesh unto just and holy men, but that, by
obeying and following, they cleave unto their
doctrine and conduct.
Therefore Mary is
more blessed in receiving the faith of Christ,
For
than in conceiving the flesh of Christ.
to a certain one who said, "Blessed is the
2 He Himself made
womb, which bare Thee,''
answer, "Yea, rather, blessed are they who
hear the Word of God, and keep it."
Lastly,
to His brethren, that is, His kindred after the
flesh, who believed not in Him, what profit
was there in that being of kin ? Thus also
her nearness as a Mother would have been of
no profit to Mary, had she not borne Christ
in her heart after a more blessed manner than
in her flesh.

4. Her virginity also itself was on this account more pleasing and accepted, in that it
was not that Christ being conceived in her,
rescued it beforehand from a husband who
would violate it, Himself to preserve it; but,
before He was conceived, chose it, already
dedicated to God, as that from which to be
This is shown by the words which
born.
Mary spake in answer to the Angel announc-
"
ing to her her conception;
How,'*' saith she,
" shall this be, seeing I know not a man?" 3
Which assuredly she would not say, unless
she had before vowed herself unto God as a
But, because the habits of the Israelvirgin.
ites as yet refused this, she was espoused to a
just man, who would not take from her by
violence, but rather guard against violent
persons, what she had already vowed.
Al-
" How
though, even if she had said this only,
shall this take place?" and had not added,
"seeing I know not a man," certainly she would
not have asked, how, being a female, she
should give birth to her promised Son, if she
had married with purpose of sexual interShe might have been bidden also to
course.

continue a virgin, that in her by fitting miracle the Son of God should receive the form of
a servant, but, being to be a pattern to holy
virgins, lest it should be thought that she alone
needed to be a virgin, who had obtained to
conceive a child even without sexual intercourse, she dedicated her virginity to God,
when as yet she knew not what she should
conceive, in order that the imitation of a
heavenly life in an earthly and mortal body
should take place of vow, not of command;
through love of choosing, not through necesThus Christ by being
sity of doing service.
born of a virgin, who, before she knew Who
was to be born of her, had determined to
continue a virgin, chose rather to approve,
than to command, holy virginity. And thus,
even in the female herself, in whom He took
the form of a servant, He willed that virginity
should be free.

their

cannot,

virginity,

keeping

5. There is, therefore, no reason why the
virgins of God be sad, because themselves
be
also
For Him alone could
mothers of the flesh.
virginity give birth to with fitting propriety,
Who in His Birth could have no peer.
However, That Birth of the Holy Virgin is the
ornament of all holy virgins; and themselves
together with Mary are mothers of Christ, if
they do the will of His Father.
For Mary
also is on this account the Mother of Christ
in a way more full of praise and blessing,
according to His sentence mentioned above.
"Whosoever doeth the will of my Father
Who is in heaven, that one is to Me brother,
and sister, and mother."
All these degrees
of nearness of kin to Himself, He shows
forth in a spiritual manner, in the People
whom He hath redeemed: as brothers and
sisters He hath holy men and holy women,
forasmuch as they all are co-heirs in the
His mother is the
heavenly inheritance.
whole Church, because she herself assuredly
gives birth to His members, that is, His
Also His mother is every
faithful ones.
pious soul, doing the will of His Father with
most fruitful charity, in them of whom it
travaileth, until Himself 4 be formed in them.
Mary, therefore, doing the will of God, after
the flesh, is only the mother of Christ, but
after the Spirit she is both His sister and
mother.

6. And on this account, that one female,
not only in the Spirit, but also in the flesh,
And a mother
is both a mother and a virgin.
indeed in the Spirit, not of our Head, Which
is the Saviour Himself, of Whom rather she was
born after the Spirit: forasmuch as all, who

1 Matt. xii. 46-50.

Luke xi. 27, 28.

3 Luke i. 34.

4 Gal. iv. 19.

OF HOLY VIRGINITY.

are

rightly

have believed in Him, among whom is herself
called "children of the
also,
Bridegroom:" * but clearly the mother of His
members, which are we: in that she wrought
together by charity, that faithful ones should
be born in the Church, who are members of
That Head: but in the flesh, the mother of
the Head Himself.
For it behoved that our
Head, on account of a notable miracle, should
be born after the flesh of a virgin, that He
might thereby signify that His members would
be born after the Spirit, of the Church a virgin: therefore Mary alone both in Spirit and
in flesh is a mother and a virgin: both the
mother of Christ, and a virgin of Christ; but
the Church, in the Saints who shall possess
the kingdom of God, in the Spirit indeed is
altogether the mother of Christ, altogether a
virgin of Christ: but in the flesh not altogether,
but in certain a virgin of Christ, in certain a
Forsooth both
mother, but not of Christ.
faithful women who are married, and virgins
dedicated to God, by holy manners, and
2 and good concharity out of a pure heart,
science, and faith unfeigned, because they do
the will of the Father, are after a spiritual
But they who in
sense mothers of Christ.
married life give birth to (children) after the
flesh, give birth not to Christ, but to Adam,
and therefore run, that their offspring having
been dyed 3 in His Sacraments, may become
members of Christ, forasmuch as they know
what they have given birth to.

7. I have said this, lest haply married fruitfulness dare to vie with virgin chastity, and to
set forth Mary herself, and to say unto the
virgins of God, She had in her flesh two things
worthy of honor, virginity and fruitfulness;
inasmuch as she both continued a virgin, and
bore: this happiness, since we could not both
have the whole, we have divided, that ye be virgins, we be mothers: for what is wanting to
you in children, let your virginity, that hath
been preserved, be a consolation: for us, let
the gain of children make up for our lost virThis speech of faithful women marginity.
ried, unto holy virgins, would any how be to
be endured, if they gave birth to Christians
in the flesh; that in this alone, save virginity,
the fruitfulness of Mary in the flesh should
"be more excellent, that she gave birth to the
Head Himself of these members, but they to
the members of That Head: but now, although by this speech there vie such as on
this one account wed and have intercourse
with husbands, that they may have sons, and
have no other thought of their sons, than to
gain them for Christ, and do this so soon as they

1 Matt. ix. iS. [See R. V.]

2 1 Tim. i. 5.

3 Imbuti.

can: yet are not Christians born of their flesh,
but made so afterwards: the Church giving
them birth, through this, that in a spiritual
manner she is the mother of the members of
Christ, of Whom also after a spiritual manner
she is the virgin. And unto this holy birth
mothers also who have not borne in the flesh
Christians, are workers together, that they
may become what they know that they could
not give birth to in the flesh: yet are they
workers together through this, wherein themselves also are virgins and mothers 4 of Christ,
in "faith which worketh
that
is to say,
through love.'' 5

8. Therefore no fruitfulness of the flesh
can be compared to holy virginity even
For neither is itself also honof the flesh.
ored because it
is virginity, but because it
hath been dedicated to God, and, although
it be kept in the flesh, yet is it kept by religion
and devotion of the Spirit. And by this means
even virginity of body is
spiritual, which
continence of piety vows and keeps.
For,
even as no one makes an immodest use of
the body, unless the sin have been before
conceived in the spirit, so no one keeps modesty in the body, unless chastity have been
before implanted in the spirit.
But, further,
if modesty of married life, although it be
guarded in the flesh, is yet attributed to the
soul, not to the flesh, under the rule and
guidance of which, the flesh itself hath no
intercourse with any beside its own proper
estate of marriage; how much more, and
with how much greater honor, are we to
reckon among the goods of the soul that
continence, whereby the virgin purity of the
flesh is vowed, consecrated, and kept, for the
Creator Himself of the soul and flesh.

9. Wherefore neither are we to believe
that their fruitfulness of the flesh, who at this
time seek in marriage nothing else save children, to make over unto Christ, can be set
against the loss of virginity.
Forsooth, in
former times, unto Christ about to come
after the flesh, the race itself of the flesh was
needful, in a certain large and prophetic nation: but now, when from out every race of
men, and from out all nations, members of
Christ may be gathered unto the People of
God, and City of the kingdom of heaven,
whoso can receive sacred virginity, let him
receive it; and let her only, who contains not,
For what, if any rich woman
be married. 6
were to expend much money on this good
work, and to buy, from out different nations,

4 Tt has been proposed to omit "giee," making the sense, "wherein the virgins themselves also are mothers of Christ," but the sense
is good as it stands.

5 Gal. v. 6.

6 Matt. xix. 12; 1 Cor. vii. 9.

'inx ^oog]

slaves to make Christians, will she not provide
for the giving birth to members of Christ in a
manner more rich, and more numerous, than
by any, how great soever, fruitfulness of the
womb ? And yet she will not therefore dare
to compare her money to the offering
1 of
But if for the sake of makholy virginity.
ing such as shall be born Christians, fruitfulness of the flesh shall with just reason be set
against the loss of chastity, this matter will
be more fruitful, if virginity be lost at a great
price of money, whereby many more children
may be purchased to be made Christians,
than could be born from the womb, however
it be
fruitful, of
extreme folly to say this, let the faithful
women that are married possess their own
good, of which we have treated, so far as
seemed fit, in another volume; and let them
more highly honor, even as they are most
rightly used to do, in the sacred virgins, their
better good, of which we are treating in our
present discourse

a single person.

But, if

For not even herein ought such as are
married to compare themselves with
the
deserts of the continent, in that of them virgins are born: for this is not a good of marriage, but of nature: which was so ordered
of God, as that of every sexual intercourse
whatever of the two sexes of human kind,
whether in due order and honest, or base and
unlawful, there is born no female save a virgin, yet is none born a sacred virgin: so it is
brought to pass that a virgin is born even of
fornication, but a sacred virgin not even of
marriage.

For it

ii. Nor do we ourselves set forth this in
virgins, that they are virgins; but that they
are virgins dedicated unto God by pious conis not at a venture that I
tinence.
may say, a married woman seems to me happier than a virgin about to be married: for
the one hath what the other as yet desires,
especially if she be not yet even the betrothed
The one studies to please one,
of any one.
unto whom she hath been given; the other
many, in doubt unto whom she is to be given:
by this one thing she
guards modesty of
thought from the crowd, that she is seeking,
not an adulterer, but a husband, in the crowd.
Therefore that virgin is with good reason set
before a married woman, who neither sets
the
herself
love,
whereas she seeks from out the multitude
the love of one; nor, having now found him,
orders herself 2 for one, taking thought of the
" how to please her husthings of the world,
3 but hath so loved "Him of fair beauty
band ;"

multitude

forth for

to

above the sons of men," 4 as that, because she
could not, even as Mary, conceive Him in her
flesh, she hath kept her flesh also virgin for
Him conceived in her heart.
This kind of
virgins no fruitfulness of the body hath given
birth to: this is no progeny of flesh and blood.
If of these the mother be sought for, it is the
None bears sacred virgins save a
Church.
sacred virgin, she who hath been espoused
to be presented chaste unto one Husband,
Christ. 5 Of her, not altogether in body, but
spirit virgin, are born holy
altogether in
virgins both in body and in spirit.

12. Let marriages possess their own good,
not that they beget sons, but that honestly,
that lawfully, that modestly, that in a spirit
of fellowship they beget them, and educate
them, after they have been begotten, with
cooperation, with wholesome teaching, and
earnest purpose: in that they keep the faith
of the couch one with another; in that they
violate not the sacrament of wedlock.
All
these, however, are offices of human duty:
but virginal chastity and freedom through
pious continence from all sexual intercourse
is the portion of Angels, and a practice,
6 in
corruptible flesh, of perpetual incorruption.
To this let all fruitfulness of the flesh yield,
all chastity of married life; the one is not in
(man's) power, the other is not in eternity;,
free choice hath not fruitfulness of the flesh,
heaven hath not chastity of married life.
Assuredly they will have something great beyond others in that common immortality,
who have something already not of the flesh
in the flesh.

in

world:

13. Whence they are marvellously void of
wisdom, who think that the good of this continence is not necessary for the sake of the
kingdom of heaven, but for the sake of the
forsooth, married
present
that,
persons are strained different ways by earthly
cares more and more straitened, from which
trouble virgins and continent persons
are
free: as though on this account only it were
better not to be married, that the straits of
this present time may be escaped, not that it
is of any profit unto a future life.
And, that
they may not seem to have put forth this
vain opinion from out the vanity of their own
heart, they take the Apostle to witness, where
But concerning virgins I have not
he saith,
command of the Lord, but I give counsel,
as having obtained mercy from God to be
Therefore I think that this is good
faithful.
on account of the present necessity, because
Lo, say

is good for a man so to be." 7

"

it

1 Muner i.

2 Componit.

3 1 Cor. vii. 34.

4 Ps. xlv. 2.
6 Mfditatio.

5 2 Cor. xi.
7 1 Cor. vii. 25, 26.

OF HOLY VIRGINITY.

"

they, where the Apostle shows
that this is
good on account of the present necessity,"
As
not on account of the future eternity.
though the Apostle would have regard for
the present necessity, otherwise than as providing and consulting for the future; whereas
calls not
all his dealing 1
life
eternal.

unto

save

is

if

"

there

were

possessed,

14. It is, therefore, the present necessity
that we are to avoid, but yet such as is a
hindrance to somewhat of the good things to
come; by which necessity the married life is
forced to have thought of the things of the
world, how to please, the husband the wife,
or the wife the husband. Not that these separate from the kingdom of God, as there are
sins, which are restrained by command, not
by counsel, on this account, because it
matter of condemnation not to obey the Lord
when He commands: but that, which, within
the kingdom of God itself, might be more
larger
largely
thoughts how they were to please God, will
assuredly be less, when as this very thing is
less thought of by necessity of marriage.
Therefore he says, "Concerning virgins I
have not command of the Lord." 2
For whosoever obeys not a command, is guilty and
Wherefore, because
liable for punishment.
it is not sin to marry a wife or to be married,
(but if it were a sin, it would be forbidden by
Command,") on this account there is no
a
" Command "
of the Lord concerning virgins.
But since, after we have shunned or had forgiveness of sins, we must approach eternal
life, wherein is a certain or more excellent
glory, to be assigned not unto all who shall
live for ever, but unto certain there; in order
to obtain which it is not enough to have been
set free from sins, unless there be vowed
unto Him, Who setteth us free, something,
which it
is no matter of fault not to have
vowed, but matter of praise to have vowed
and performed; he saith, "I give counsel,
as having obtained mercy from God that I
For neither ought I to
should be faithful."
grudge faithful counsel, who not by my own
merits, but by the mercy of God, am faithI think therefore that this is good,
ful.
by reason of the present necessity."
This,
saith he, on which I have not command of
the Lord, but give counsel, that is concerning virgins, I think to be good by reason of
For I know what the
the present necessity.
the present time, unto which
necessity of
marriages serve, compels, that the things of
God be less thought of than is enough for
the obtaining that glory, which shall not be of

"

all, although they abide in eternal life and
salvation: "For star differeth from star in
brightness; so also the Resurrection of the
good for a man so
dead. 4
to be."

It is," therefore,

"

first,

she sinneth not." 7

Lastly, he added straightway,

15. After that the same Apostle adds, and
says, "Thou art bound to a wife, seek not
loosening: thou art loosed from a wife, seek
not a wife." 5 Of these two, that, which he
pertains unto command, against
set
which it is not lawful to do.
For it is not
lawful to put away a wife, save because of
6 as the Lord Himself saith in the
fornication,
" Thou
But that, which he added,
Gospel.
art loosed from a wife, seek not a wife," is a
sentence of counsel, not of command; therefore it is lawful to do, but it
is better not to
" Both if
do.
thou shalt have taken a wife, thou hast not
sinned; and, if a virgin shall have been marBut, after that
ried,
former saying of his, "Thou art bound to a
wife, seek not loosening," he added not, did
he, "And if thou shalt have loosed, thou hast
" For he had already said above,
not sinned ?
' But to these, who are in marriage, I command, not I, but the Lord, that the wife depart not from her husband: but, if she shall
have departed, that she remain unmarried, or
be reconciled unto her own husband;" for it
may come to pass that she depart, not through
any fault of her own, but of her husband.
Then he saith, "And let not the man put
away his wife," which, nevertheless, he set
down of command of the Lord: nor did he
then add, And, if he shall have put her away,
For this is a command, not
he sinneth not.
to obey which is sin: not a counsel, which if
you shall be unwilling to use, you will obtain
less good, not do any ill. On this account,
after he had said, "Thou art loosed from a
" because he was not givwife, seek not a wife;
ing command, in order that there be not evil
done, but was giving counsel, in order that
there be done what is better: straightway he
Both, if thou shalt have taken a wife,
added,
thou hast not sinned; and, if a virgin shall
have been married, she sinneth not.

16. Yet he added,

" But such shall have
" 8 in
tribulation of the flesh, but I spare you:
this manner exhorting unto virginity, and continual continence, so as some little to alarm
also from marriage, with all modesty, not as
from a matter evil and unlawful, but as from
one burdensome and troublesome.
For it is
one thing to incur dishonor of the flesh, and
another to have tribulation of the flesh: the

"

"

1 Dispensatio.

Cor.

3 1 Cor. vii.

4 1 Cor. xv. 41, 42.
7 1 Cor. vii. 10, 11.

5 1 Cor. vii. 27.
8 1 Cor. vii 28.

6 Matt. xix. 9.

persons

one is matter of crime to do, the other of labor
to suffer, which for the most part men refuse
But
not even for the most honorable duties.
for the having of marriage, now at this time,
wherein there is no service done unto Christ
about to come through descent of flesh by the
begetting of the family itself, to take upon
one to bear that tribulation of the flesh, which
the Apostle foretells to such as shall be married, would be extremely foolish, did not inlest, through the
continent
fear,
temptation of Satan, they should fall into
damnable sins.
But whereas he says that he
spares them, who he saith will have tribulation
of the flesh, there suggests itself to me in the
mean while no sounder interpretation, than
that he was unwilling to open, and unfold in
words, this self-same tribulation of the flesh,
which he fore-announced to those who choose
marriage, in suspicions of jealousy of married
life, in the begetting and nurture of children,
For
in fears and sorrows of childlessness.
how very few, after they have bound themselves with the bonds of marriage, are not
drawn and driven to and fro by these feelings ? And this we ought not to exaggerate,
lest we spare not the very persons, who the
Apostle thought were to be spared.

"

"

17. Only by this, which I have briefly set
down, the reader ought to be set on his guard
against those, who, in this that is written,
"but such shall have tribulation of the flesh,
but I spare you," falsely charge marriage, as
indirectly condemned by this sentence;
as
though he were unwilling to utter the condemnation itself, when he saith,
But I spare
so that, forsooth, when he spares them,
you;
he spared not his own soul, as saying falsely,
"And, if thou shalt have taken a wife, thou
hast not sinned; and if a virgin shall have
been married, she sinneth not." And this,
whoso believe or would have believed concerning holy Scripture, they, as it were, prepare for themselves a way for liberty of lying, or
for defense of their own perverse opinion, in
whatever case they hold other sentiments than
what sound doctrine demands.
For if there
shall be alleged any plain statement from the
divine books, whereby to refute their errors,
this they have at hand as a shield, whereby
defending themselves as it were against the
truth, they lay themselves bare to be wounded
by the devil: to say that the author of the
book did not speak the truth in this instance,
at one time in order to spare the weak, at another in order to alarm despisers: just as a case
shall come to hand, wherein to defend their own
perverse opinion: and thus, whilst they had
rather defend than amend their own opinions,
they essay to break the authority of holy

Scripture, whereby alone all proud and hard
necks are broken.

"

18. Wherefore I admonish both men and
women who follow after perpetual continence
and holy virginity, that they so set their own
good before marriage, as that they judge not
marriage an evil: and that they understand
that it was in no way of deceit, but of plain
" Whoso
truth that it was said by the Apostle,
gives in marriage does well; and whoso gives
not in marriage, does better; and, if thou
shalt have taken a wife, thou hast not sinned;
and, if a virgin shall have been married, she
" But she will
" * and a little after,
sinneth not;
be more blessed, if she shall have continued so,
according to my judgment."
And, that the
judgment should not be thought human, he
But I think I also have the Spirit of
adds,
God." This is the doctrine of the Lord, this
of the Apostles, this true, this sound, so to
choose greater gifts, as that the lesser be not
The truth of God, in the Scriptcondemned.
ure of God, is better than virginity of man
in the mind or flesh of any.
Let what is
chaste be so loved, as that what is true be not
For what evil thought may they not
denied.
have even concerning their own flesh, who
believe that the tongue of the Apostle, in that
very place, wherein he was commending virginity of body, was not virgin from corruption
In the first place, therefore, and
of lying.
chiefly, let such as choose the good of virginity, hold most firmly that the holy Scriptures have in nothing spoken lies; and, thus,
that that also is true which is said, "And if
thou shalt have taken a wife, thou hast not
sinned; and, if a virgin shall have been married, she sinneth not." And let them not think
that the so great good of virgin chastity is.
made less, if marriage shall not be an evil.
Yea rather, let her hence feel confident, rather,
that there is prepared for her a palm of greater
glory, who feared not to be condemned, in
case she were married, but desired to receive
a more honorable crown, in that she was not
Whoso therefore shall be willing to
married.
abide without marriage, let them not flee from
marriage as a pitfall of sin; but let them surmount it as a hill of the lesser good, in order
that they may rest in the mountain of the
It is on this condition,
greater, continence.
forsooth, that this hill is dwelt on; that one
a woman is
leave it not when he will.
bound, so long as her husband liveth." 2 However unto widowed continence one ascends
from it as from a step: but for the sake of
virgin continence, one must either turn aside
from it by not consenting to suitors, or overleap it by anticipating suitors.

For,

"

1 Cor. vii. 38, 28. 40.

2 1 Cor. vii. 3q.

OF HOLY VIRGINITY.

"

"

19. But lest any should think that of two
works, the good and the better, the rewards
will be equal, on this account it was necessary
to treat against those, who have so interpreted
But I think that
that saying of the Apostle,
this is good by reason of the present neces1 as to say that virginity is of use not in
sity/'
order to the kingdom of heaven, but in order to
this present time: as though in that eternal
life, they, who had chosen this better part,
would have nothing more than the rest of
men. And in this discussion when we came
to that saying of the same Apostle,
But such
shall have tribulation of the flesh, but 1 spare
v - we fell in with other disputants, who so
you;
far from making marriage equal to perpetual
altogether condemned
For
virginity,
whereas both are errors, either to equal marriage to holy virginity, or to condemn it: by
fleeing from one another to excess, these two
errors come into open collision, in that they
have been unwilling to hold the mean of truth:
whereby, both by sure reason and authority
of holy Scriptures, we both discover that marriage is not a sin, and yet equal it not to the
good either of virginal or even of widowed
Some forsooth by aiming at virchastity.
ginity have thought marriage hateful even
as adultery: but others, by defending marriage, would have the excellence of perpetual
continence to deserve nothing more than married chastity; as though either the good of
Susanna be the lowering of Mary: or the
greater good of Mary ought to be the condemnation of Susanna.

it.

"

20. Far be it, therefore, that the Apostle
so said, unto such as are married or are about
But I spare you," as if he were
to marry,
unwilling to say what punishment is due to the
Far be it that she,
married in another life.
whom Daniel set free from temporal judgment, be cast by Paul into hell !
Far be it
that her husband's bed be unto her punishment before the judgment seat of Christ,
keeping faith to which she chose, under false
charge of adultery, to meet either danger, or
death ! To what effect that speech,
It is
better for me to fall into your hands, than to
sin in the sight of God:" 3 if God had been
about, not to set her free because she kept
married chastity, but to condemn her because
she had married ? And now so often as married chastity is by truth of holy Scripture
justified against such as bring calumnies and
charges against marriage, so often is Susanna
by the Holy Spirit defended against false witnesses, so often is she set free from a false
charge, and with much greater ado.
For then

"

is

"

It was,

against one married woman, now against all;
then of hidden and untrue adultery, now of
true and open marriage, an accusation
Then one woman, upon what the
laid.
unjust elders said, now all husbands and
wives, upon what the Apostle would not
say, are accused.
forsooth, your
condemnation, say they, that he was silent on,
But I spare you." Who
when he said,
Surely he, who had said above;
(saith) this?
"And, if thou shalt have taken a wife, thou
hast not sinned; and, if a virgin shall have
been married, she sinneth not." 4 Why, therefore, wherein he hath been silent through
modesty, suspect ye a charge against marriage; and wherein he hath spoken openly,
recognize ye not a defense of marriage ?
What, doth he condemn by his silence them
whom he acquitted by his words ?
Is it not
now a milder charge, to charge Susanna, not
with marriage, but with adultery itself, than
to charge the doctrine of the Apostle with
falsehood ? What in so great peril could we
do, were it not as sure and plain that chaste
marriage ought not to be condemned, as it is
sure and plain that holy Scripture cannot lie ?
21. Here some one will say. What has this
to do with holy virginity, or perpetual continence, the setting forth of which was undertaken in this discourse ? To whom I make
answer in the first place, what I mentioned
above, that the glory of that greater good is
greater from the fact that, in order to obtain
it, the good of married life
is surmounted,
not the sin of marriage shunned.
Otherwise
it would be enough for perpetual continence,
not to be specially praised, but only not to be
blamed : if it were maintained on this account,
because it was a crime to wed.
In the next
place, because it is not by human judgment,
but by authority of Divine Scripture, that men
must be exhorted unto so excellent a gift, we
must plead not in a common-place manner,
or merely by the way, that divine Scripture
itself seem not to any one in any matter to
For they discourage rather than
have lied.
exhort holy virgins, who compel them to continue so by passing sentence on marriage.
For whence can they feel sure that that is
true, which is written, "And he, who gives
her not in marriage, does better:
if they
think that false, which yet is written close
" Both he, who gives his virgin, does
above,
But, if they shall without all doubt
well?"
have believed Scripture speaking of the good
of marriage, confirmed by the same most true
authority of the divine oracle, they will hasten
beyond unto their own better part with glow-

" 5

1 1 Cor. vii. 26.

2 1 Cor. vii. 28

Hist, of Sus. 23.

4 1 Cor. vii. 28.

5 1 Cor. vii. 38.

Wherefore we
ing and confident eagerness.
have already spoken enough for the business
which we have taken in hand, and, so far as we
could, have shown, that neither that saying
" But I think that this is good
of the Apostle,
by reason of the present necessity,"
* is so to
be understood, as though in this life holy
virgins are better than faithful women married, but are equal in the kingdom of heaven,
and in a future life: nor that other, where
" But such shall have
he saith of such as wed,
tribulation of the flesh, but I spare you;" 2
is to be so understood, as though he chose
rather to be silent on, than to speak of, the
sin and condemnation of marriage.
Forsooth
two errors, contrary the one to the other,
have, through not understanding them, taken
For
hold of each one of these two sentences.
that concerning the present necessity they
interpret in their own favor, who contend to
equal such as wed to such as wed not: but
is said, "But I spare you,"
this, where it
they who presume to condemn such as wed.
But we, according to the faith and sound
doctrine of holy Scriptures, both say that
marriage is no sin, and yet set its good not
only below virginal, but also below widowed
continence; and say that the present necessity of married persons is an hindrance to
their desert, not indeed unto life eternal, but
unto an excellent glory and honor, which is
reserved for perpetual continence: and that
at this time marriage is not expedient save
for such as contain not; and that on the
tribulation of the flesh, which cometh from
the affection of the flesh, without which marriages of incontinent persons cannot be, the
Apostle neither wished to be silent, as forewarning what was true, nor to unfold more
fully, as sparing man's weakness.

22. And now by plainest witnesses of divine
Scriptures, such as according to the small
measure of our memory we shall be able to
remember, let it more clearly appear, that,
not on account of the present life of this
world, but on account of that future life
which is promised in the kingdom of heaven,
we are to choose perpetual continence.
But
who but must observe this in that which the
same Apostle says a little after, "Whoso is
without a wife has thought of the things of
the Lord, how to please the Lord: but whoso
is joined in marriage has thought of the
things of the world, how to please his wife.
And a woman unmarried and a virgin is divided; 3 she that is unmarried is careful about
the things of the Lord, to be holy both in
body and spirit: but she that is married is

careful about the things of the world, how to
please her husband." 4
Certainly he saith
not, hath thought of the things of a state
without care in this world, to pass her time
without weightier troubles; nor doth he say
that a woman unmarried and a virgin is divided, that is, distinguished, and separated
from her who is married, for this end, that
the unmarried woman be without care in this
in order to avoid temporal troubles,
life,
which the married woman is not free from:
but, "She hath thought," saith he, "of the
things of the Lord, how to please the Lord;
and is careful about the things of the Lord,
to be holy both in body and spirit."
Unless
to such a degree, perchance, each be foolishly
contentious, as to essay to assert, that it is
not on account of the kingdom of heaven, but
on account of this present world, that we
please the Lord," or that it is on
wish to
account of this present life, not on account
of life eternal, that they are "holy both in
body and spirit." To believe this, what else
is it, than to be more miserable than all men ?
For so the Apostle saith,
If in this life only
we are hoping in Christ, we are more miserable than all men." s What ? is he who breaks
his bread to the hungry, if he do it only on
account of this life, a fool; and shall he be
prudent, who chastens his own body even
unto continence, whereby he hath no intercourse even in marriage, if it shall profit him
nought in the kingdom of heaven ?

"

"

"

6 To whom He saith,

23. Lastly, let us hear the Lord Himself
delivering most plain judgment on this matFor, upon Plis speaking after a divine
ter.
and fearful manner concerning husband and
wife not separating, save on account of fornication, His disciples said to Him,
If the
case be such with a wife, it
is not good to
" Not all remarry."
For there are eunuchs
ceive this saying.
who were so born: but there are others who
were made by men: and there are eunuchs,
who made themselves eunuchs for the sake
of the kingdom of heaven: whoso can receive,
let him receive.-" What could be said more
true, what more clear?
Christ saith, the
Truth saith, the Power and Wisdom of God
saith, that they, who of pious purpose have
contained from marrying a wife, make themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom
of heaven: and against this, human vanity
with impious rashness contends, that they,
who do so, shun only the present necessity
of the troubles of married life, but in the
kingdom of heaven have no more than others.
24. But concerning what eunuchs speaketh

1 i Cor, vii 26,

2 1 Cor. vii. 28.

3 cf, de Bon, Conj, 10.

4 1 Cor. vii. 32, 33, 34.
6 Matt, xix. 10, ii, 12.

5 1 Cor. xv. 19.

OF HOLY VIRGINITY.

For it

God by the prophet Isaiah, unto whom He
saith that He will give in His house and in
His wall a place by name, much better than
of sons and daughters/ save concerning these,
who make themselves eunuchs for the sake of
the kingdom of heaven ? For for these, whose
bodily organ is without strength, so that they
cannot beget, (such as are the eunuchs of rich
men and of kings,) it is surely enough, when
they become Christians, and keep the commands of God, yet have this purpose, that, if
they could, they would have wives, to be
made equal to the rest of the faithful in the
house of God, who are married, who bring
up in the fear of God a family which they
have lawfully and chastely gotten, teaching
their sons to set their hope on God; but not
to receive a better place than of sons and
is not of virtue of the
daughters.
soul, but of necessity of the flesh, that they
Let who will contend that
marry not wives.
the Prophet foretold this of those eunuchs
who have suffered mutilation of body; that
even also helps the cause which we have unFor God hath not preferred these
dertaken.
eunuchs to such as have no place in His
house, but assuredly to those who keep the
desert of married life in begetting sons.
For,
when He saith, "I will give unto them a
place much better;'' He shows that one is
also given unto the married, but much inTherefore, to allow that in the house
fer or.
of God there will be the eunuchs after the
flesh spoken of above, who were not in the
People of Israel: because we see that these
also themselves, whereas they become not
Jews, yet become Christians: and that the
Prophet spake not of them, who through
purpose of continence seeking not marriage, i
make themselves eunuchs for the sake of the
is any one so madly
kingdom of heaven:
opposed to the truth as to believe that eunuchs
made so in the flesh have a better place than
married persons in the house of God, and to
contend that persons being of pious purpose
continent, chastening the body even unto
contempt of marriage, making themselves
eunuchs, not in the body, but in the very
root of concupiscence, practising an heavenly
and angelic life in an earthly mortal state, are
on a level with the deserts of the married;
and, being a Christian, to gainsay Christ
when He praises those who have made themselves eunuchs, not for the sake of this world,
but for the sake of the kingdom of heaven,
affirming that this is of use for the present
life, not for a future ? What else remains fcr
these, save to assert that the kingdom of

heaven itself pertains unto this temporal life,
wherein we now are ?
For why should not
blind presumption advance even to this madness ? And what more full of phrensy than
For, although at times the
this assertion ?
Church, even that which is at this time, is
called the kingdom of heaven; certainly it is
so called for this end, because it
is being
gathered together for a future and eternal life.
Although, therefore, it have the promise of
the present, and of a future life, yet in all its
good works it looks not to
the things that
are seen, but to what are not seen.
For
what are seen are temporal ; but what are not
seen, are eternal." 2

"

"

25. Nor indeed hath the Holy Spirit failed
to speak what should be of open and unshaken avail against these men, most shamelessly and madly obstinate, and should repel
their assault, as of wild beasts, from His
sheep-fold, by defences that may not be
For, after He had said concerning
stormed.
I will give unto them in My house
eunuchs,
and in My wall a named place, much better
than of sons and daughters;'' 3 lest any too
carnal should think that there was any thing
temporal to be hoped for in these words,
" An eternal name I
straightway He added,
"
will give unto them, nor shall it ever fail:
as though He should say, Why dost thou
Why dost
draw back, impious blindness ?
thou draw back ? Why dost thou pour the
clouds of thy perverseness over the clear
(sky) of truth ? Why in so great light of
Scriptures dost thou seek after darkness from
Why dost thou
out which to lay snares ?
promise temporal advantage only to holy persons exercising continence? "An eternal
name I will give unto them:" why, where
persons keep from all sexual intercourse, and
also in the very fact that they abstain from
these, have thought of the things of the Lord,
how to please the Lord, do you essay to refer
them unto earthly advantage? "An eternal
name I will give unto them. ' ' Why contend you
that the kingdom of heaven, for the sake of
which holy eunuchs have made themselves
eunuchs, is to be understood in this life only?
"An eternal name I will give unto them.''
And if haply in this place you endeavor to
take the word itself eternal in the sense of
lasting for a long time, I add, I heap up, I
nor shall it ever fail." What more
tread in,
seek you ? What more say you ?
This eternal name, whatever it be, unto the eunuchs
of God, which assuredly signifies a certain
peculiar and excellent glory, shall not be in
common with many, although set in the same

"

1 Is. Ivi. 4, 5. [See R.V.]

2 2 Cor. iv. 18; 1 Tim. iv. 8.

3 Is. Ivi. 4, 5.

[See R.V.]

is

For on
kingdom, and in the same house.
this account also, perhaps, it is called a name,
that it distinguishes those, to whom it
given, from the rest.

26. What then, say they, is the meaning
of that penny, which is given in payment to
all alike when the work of the vineyard is
ended ? whether it be to those who have
labored from the first hour, or to those who
* What assuredly doth
have labored one hour ?
it signify, but something, which all shall have
in common, such as is life eternal itself, the
kingdom of heaven itself, where shall be all,
whom God hath predestinated, called, justified, glorified? "For it behoveth that this
corruptible put on incorruption, and this mor2 This is that penny,
tal put on immortality."
Yet "star differeth from star
wages for all.
the
so also the resurrection of
in glory;
These are the different merits of
dead." 3
For, if by that penny the heaven
the Saints.
were signified, have not all the stars in common
to be in the heaven ? And yet,
There is one
glory of the sun, another glory of the moon,
If that penny were
another of the stars."
taken for health of body, have not all the
members, when we are well, health in common; and, should this health continue even
unto death, is it not in all alike and equally?
And yet, "God hath set the members, each
one of them, in the body, as He would;" < that
neither the whole be an eye, nor the whole
hearing, nor the whole smelling: and, whatever else there is, it hath its own property,
although it have health
all.
Thus because life eternal itself shall be alike
to all, an equal penny was assigned to all;
but, because in that life eternal itself the
lights of merits shall shine with a distinction,
in the house of
there are
the Father: s and, by this means, in the penny
not unlike, one lives not longer than another;
but in the many mansions, one is honored
with greater brightness than another.

many mansions "

equally with

"

"

27. Therefore go on, Saints of God, boys
and girls, males and females, unmarried men
and women; go on and persevere unto the
Praise more sweetly the Lord, Whom
end.
ye think on more richly: hope more happily in
Him, Whom ye serve more instantly: love more
ardently Him, whom ye please more attentively. With loins girded, and lamps burning, wait
for the Lord, when He cometh from the mar6 Ye shall bring unto the marriage of
riage.
the Lamb a new song, which ye shall sing
on your harps.
the
whole earth singeth, unto which it
"

is said,
Sing unto the Lord a new song; sing unto the

Not surely such as

1 Matt. xx. 9, 10.
4 1 Cor. xii. 18.

- 1 Cor. xv. 53.
5 John xiv. 2.

3 1 Cor. xv. 41, 42.
6 Luke xii. 35, 36.

Lord, the whole earth " 7
: but such as no one
shall be able to utter but you.
For thus
there saw you in the Apocalypse a certain
one 8 beloved above others by the Lamb, who
had been wont to lie on His breast, and who
used to drink in, and burst 9 forth, the Word
He saw
of God above wonders of heaven.
you twelve times twelve thousand of holy
harpers, of undefiled virginity in body, of
inviolate truth in heart; and he wrote of you,
that ye follow the Lamb whithersoever He
Where think we that This Lamb
shall go.
goeth, where no one either dares or is able to
follow save you ? Where think we that He
Into what glades and meadows?
goeth?
Where, I think, the grass are joys; not vain
joys of this world, lying madnesses; nor joys
such as shall be in the kingdom of God itself,
for the rest that are not virgins; but distinct
from the portion of joys of all the rest.
Joy of
the virgins of Christ, of Christ, in Christ, with
Christ, after Christ, through Christ, for Christ.
The joys peculiar to the virgins of Christ, are
not the same as of such as are not virgins, alFor there are to different
though of Christ.
persons different joys, but to none such. Go
(enter) into these, follow the Lamb, because
the Flesh of the Lamb also is assuredly virFor this He retained in Himself when
gin.
grown up, which He took not away from His
Mother by His conception and birth.
Follow Him, as ye deserve,
10 in virginity of heart
and flesh, wheresoever He shall have gone.
For what is it to follow, but to imitate ?
Because " Christ hath suffered for us,"
leaving
us an example, as saith the Apostle Peter,
" that we should follow His steps."
Him
each one follows in that, wherein he imitates
Him: not so far forth as He is the only Son
of God, by Whom all things were made; but
so far forth as, the Son of Man, He set forth
in Himself, what behoved for us to imitate.
And many things in Him are set forth for all to
imitate: but virginity of the flesh not for all;
for they have not what to do in order to be
virgins, in whom it hath been already brought
to pass that they be not virgins.

"

28. Therefore let the rest of the faithful,
who have lost virginity, follow the Lamb, not
whithersoever He shall have gone, but so far
But they
as ever they shall have been able.
are able every where, save when He walks in
Blessed are the
the grace of virginity.
I2 imitate Him, Who, "whereas
poor in spirit;"
"He was rich, was made poor for your sakes." 13
"Blessed are the meek;" imitate Him, Who
Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly
said,

"

"

7 Ps. xcvi. 1.
9 " Eructiiabat." cf. Ps. xiv. 1. Vulg.
11 1 Peter ii. 21.

8 Rev. xiv. 1-5.

12 Matt. v. 3-10.

J Merito.
'3 2 Cor. viii. 9.

OF HOLY VIRGINITY.

"

imitate Him,

of heart/' 1 " Blessed are they that mourn;"
imitate Him, Who "wept over" Jerusalem.
"Blessed are they, who hunger and thirst after
Him, Who said,
righteousness:" imitate
" My meat is to do the will of Him Who sent
" Blessed are the merciful;
Me." 3
imitate
Him, Who came to the help of him who was
wounded by robbers, and who lay in the way
"Blessed are
half-dead and despaired of. 4
" Who did
the pure in heart;"
no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth." 5
"Blessed are the peace-makers;"
imitate
Him, Who said on behalf of His persecutors,
"
Father, forgive them, for they know not
what they do." 6 " Blessed are they, who suffer
persecution for righteousness sake;" imitate
Him, Who "
suffered for you, leaving you
an example, that ye follow His steps." 7
These things, whoso imitate, in these they
follow the Lamb.
But surely even married
persons may go in those steps, although not
setting their foot perfectly in the same print,
yet walking in the same paths.

29. But, lo, That Lamb goeth by a Virgin
road, how shall they go after Him, who have
lost what there is no way for them to recover? Do ye, therefore, do ye go after
Him, His virgins; do ye thither also go after
Him, in that on this one account whithersoever He shall have gone, ye follow Him: for
unto any other gift whatsoever of holiness,
whereby to follow Him, we can exhort married
persons, save this which they have lost beyond power of recovery. Do ye, therefore, follow Him, by holding with perseverance what ye
have vowed with ardor. Go when ye can,
that the good of virginity perish not from
you, unto which ye can do nothing, in order
The rest of the multithat it may return.
tude of the faithful will see you, which cannot
unto this follow the Lamb; it will see you,
it will not envy you: and by rejoicing together
with you, what it hath not in itself, it will
For that new song also, which
have in you.
is your own, it will not be able to utter; but
it will not be unable to hear, and to be delighted with your so excellent good: but ye,
who shall both utter and hear, in that what
ye shall say, this ye shall hear of yourselves,
will exult with greater happiness, and reign
But they will have no sorwith greater joy.
row on account of your greater joy, to whom
Forsooth That Lamb,
this shall be wanting.
Whom ye shall follow whithersoever He shall
have gone, will not desert those who cannot
follow Him, where you can.
Almighty is the
Lamb, of Whom we speak. He both will go

before you, and will not depart from them,
when God shall be all in all. 9 And they, who
shall have less, shall not turn away in dislike
from you: for, where there is no envying, difference exists with concord.
then, have trust, be strong, continue, ye who
vow and pay unto the Lord your God vows
of perpetual continence, not for the sake of
this present world, but for the sake of the
kingdom of Heaven.

Take to you,

30. Ye also who have not yet made this
vow, who are able to receive it, receive it."
Run with perseverance, that ye may obtain. 12
Take ye each his sacrifices, and enter ye into
the courts I3 of the Lord, not of necessity, having power over your own will, 14
For not as,
"Thou shalt
not commit adultery, Thou
IS can it so be said, Thou shalt
shalt not kill,"
The former are demanded, the
not wed.
If the latter are done,
latter are offered.
they are praised: unless the former are done,
they are condemned.
In the former the
Lord commands us what is due; but in the
latter, if ye shall have spent any thing more,
on His return He will repay you.
Think of
(whatever that be) within His wall "a place
named, much better than of sons and of
Think of "an eternal name"
daughters/' 17
there. l8 Who unfolds of what kind
that
name shall be ?
Yet, whatever it shall be, it
By believing and hoping
shall be eternal.
and loving this, ye have been able, not to
shun marriage, as forbidden, but to fly past
it, as allowed.

safest

humility.

31. Whence the greatness of this service, I9
unto the undertaking of which we have according to our strength exhorted, the more
excellent and divine it is, the more doth it
warn our anxiety, to say something not only
concerning most glorious chastity, but also
When then
concerning
such as make profession of perpetual chastity, comparing themselves with married persons, shall have discovered, that, according
to the Scriptures, the others are below both
in work and wages, both in vow and reward,
let what is written straightway come into their
mind, "By how much thou art great, by so
much humble thyself in all things: and thou
shalt find favor before God." 20 The measure
of humility for each hath been given from
the measure of his greatness itself:
unto
which pride is full of danger, which layeth
the greater wait against persons the greater
they be. On this followeth envying, as a
daughter in her train; forsooth pride straight-

1 Matt. xi. 2g.
4 Luke x. 30-35.
7 1 Peter ii. 21.

2 Luke xix. 41.
5 1 Peter ii. 22.
8 Forma.

3 John iv. 34.
6 Luke xxiii. 34.

9 1 Cor. xv. 28.
12 1 Cor. ix. 24.
! 5 Ex. xx. 14, 13.
J 7 Luke x. 35. See 8 48.
J 9 M'uner is.

10 "Praisumite."
*3 Ps. xcvi. 8.
16 "
18 Is. Ivi. 5.
20 Ecclus. iii. 18.

Supereroga-veritis."

" Matt. xix. 12.
M 1 Cor. vii. 37.

"

way giveth birth to her, nor is she ever without such a daughter and companion.
By
which two evils, that is, pride and envying, is
Therefore it is against
the devil (a devil).
pride, the mother of envying, that the whole
For this
Christian discipline chiefly wars.
teaches humility, whereby both to gain and
to keep charity; of which after that it had
" * as though
been said,
Charity envieth not;
we were asking the reason, how it comes to
pass that it envieth not, he straightway added,
"
is not puffed up;" as though he should say,
on this account it hath not envying, in thatTherefore the Teacher
neither hath it pride.
of humility, Christ, first "emptied Himself,
taking the form of a servant, made in the
likeness of men, and found in fashion as a
man, He humbled Himself, made obedient
even unto death, even the death of the
But His teaching itself, how careCross." 2
fully it suggests humility, and how earnest
and instant it is in commanding this, who can
easily unfold, and bring together all witnesses
This let him essay
for proof of this matter?
to do, or do, whosoever shall wish to write a
separate treatise on humility;
but of this
present work the end proposed is different, and
it hath been undertaken on a matter so great,
as that it hath chiefly to guard against pride.
32. Wherefore a few witnesses, which the
Lord deigns to suggest to my mind, I proceed to mention, from out the teaching of
Christ concerning humility, such as perhaps
His dismay be enough for my purpose.
course, the first which He delivered to His
disciples at greater length, began from this.
"
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is
3 And these withthe Kingdom of Heaven. 7 '
out all controversy we take to be humble.
The faith of that Centurion He on this account chiefly praised, and said that He had
not found in Israel so great faith, because he
believed with so great humility as to say,
am not worthy that thou shouldest enter under
my roof." 4 Whence also Matthew for no
other reason said that he " came " unto Jesus,
(whereas Luke most plainly signifies that he
came not unto Him himself, but sent his
that by his most faithful
friends,)
humility he himself came unto Him more
than they whom he sent.
Whence also is
" The Lord is very high,
that of the Prophet,
and hath respect unto things that are lowly:
"
but what are very high He noteth afar off;
assuredly as not coming unto Him. Whence
" O
also He saith to that woman of Canaan,
woman, great is thy faith; be it done unto

save

"

"

6 whom above He had
thee as thou wilt;"
called a dog, and had made answer that the
bread of the sons was not to be cast to her.
And this she taking with humility had said,
" Even so, Lord; for the dogs also eat of the
crumbs which fall from their masters' table."
And thus what by continual crying she obtained not, by humble confession she earned. 7
Hence also those two are set forth praying in
the Temple, the one a Pharisee, and the other
a Publican, for the sake of those who seem to
themselves just and despise the rest of men,
and the confession of sins is set before the
reckoning up of merits. And assuredly the
Pharisee was rendering thanks unto God by
reason of those things wherein he was greatly
"I render thanks to Thee,"
self-satisfied.
saith he, "that I am not even as the rest of
men, unjust, extortioners, adulterers, even
as also this publican.
I fast twice in the
week, I give tithes of all things whatsoever I
But the Publican was standing afar
possess.
off, not daring to lift up his eyes to Heaven,
but beating his breast, saying, God be merciful unto me a sinner."'
But there follows the
Verily I say unto you,
divine judgment,
the Publican went down from the Temple
justified more than that Pharisee." 8 Then
" Forasthe cause is shown, why this is just;
much as he who exalteth himself shall be
humbled, and whoso humbleth himself shall
Therefore it may come to pass,
be exalted."
that each one both shun real evils, and reflect
on real goods in himself, and render thanks
for these unto "the Father of lights, from
Whom cometh down every best gift, and
9 and yet be rejected by
every perfect gift,"
reason of the sin of haughtiness, if through
pride, even in his thought alone, which is
before God, he insult other sinners, and
specially when confessing their sins in prayer,
unto whom is due not upbraiding with arroWhat is it
gance, but pity without despair.
that, when His disciples were questioning
among themselves, who of them should be
greater, He set a little child before their eyes,
Unless ye shall be as this child, ye
saying,
shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven?" 10
Did He not chiefly commend humility, and
Or when
set in it the desert of greatness ?
unto the sons of Zebedee desiring to be at
His side in lofty seats He so made answer,"
as that they should rather think of having to
drink the Cup of His Passion, wherein He
humbled Himself even unto death, even the
12 than with proud desire
death of the Cross,
demand to be preferred to the rest; what

"

1 1 Cor. xiii. 4.
3 Matt. v. 3.
5 Ps. cxxxviii. 6.

[See R. V.]

4 Matt, viii

2 Phil. ii. 7, 8.
5-10; Luke vii. 6,

[See R. V.]

6 Matt. xv. 22-28
9 James i. 17.
1? Phil. ii. 8.

7 Promcruit.
10 Matt, xviii. 1-3.

8 Luke xviii. 11-14.
11 Matt. xx. 21, 22.

OF HOLY VIRGINITY.

did He show, save, that He would be a bestower of exaltation upon them, who should
first follow Him as a teacher of humility ?
And now, in that, when about to go forth
unto His Passion, He washed the feet of His
disciples, and most openly taught them to do
for their fellow-disciples and fellow-servants
this, which He their Lord and Master had
done for them; how greatly did He commend
1 And in order to commend this
humility?
He chose also that time, wherein they were
looking on Him, as immediately about to die,
with great longing ; assuredly about to retain
in their memory this especially, which their
Master, Whom they were to imitate, had
pointed out to them as the last thing.
But
He did this at that time, which surely He
could have done on other days also before,
wherein He had been conversant with them;
at which time if it were done, this same would
indeed be delivered, but certainly would not
be so received.

33. Whereas, then, all Christians have to
guard humility, forasmuch as it is from Christ
that they are called Christians, Whose Gospel
no one considers with care, but that he discovers Him to be a Teacher of humility;
specially is it becoming that they be followers
and keepers of this virtue, who excel the rest
of men in any great good, in order that they
may have a great care of that, which I set
By how much thou
down in the beginning,
art great, by so much humble thyself in all
" 2
things, and thou shalt find grace before God.
Wherefore, because perpetual Continence and
specially virginity, is a great good in the
Saints of God, they must with all watchfulness beware, that it be not corrupted with
pride.

"

"

34. Paul the Apostle censures evil unmarried women, curious and prating, and
says that this fault comes of idleness.
But
at the same time/' saith he, "being idle they
learn to go about to houses: but not only
idle, but curious also and prating, speaking
Of these he had
what they ought not." 3
'"' But younger widows avoid; for
said above,
when they have past their time in delights,
they wish to wed in Christ; having condemnation, in that they have made void their first
faith:'' that is, have not continued in that,
And yet
which they had vowed at the first.
he saith not, they marry, but
they wish to
For many of them are recalled
marry."
from marrying, not by love of a noble purpose, but by fear of open shame, which also
itself comes of pride, whereby persons fear to
displease men more than God.
These, there-

"

"

fore, who wish to marry, and do not marry
on this account, because they cannot with
impunity, who would do better to marry than
to be burned, that is, than to be laid waste in
their very conscience by the hidden flame of
lust, who repent of their profession, and who
feel their confession irksome; unless they correct and set right their heart, and by the fear
of God again overcome their lust, must be
accounted among the dead; whether they
pass their time in delights, whence the AposBut she who passes her time in detle says,
lights, living, is dead;" 4 or whether in labors
and fastings, which are useless where there is
no correction of the heart, and serve rather
for display than amendment.
I do not, for
my part, impose on such a great regard for
humility, in whom pride itself is confounded,
and bloodstained by wound of conscience.
Nor on such as are drunken, or covetous, or
who are lying in any other kind whatever of
damnable disease, at the same time that the) 7have profession of bodily continence, and
through perverse manners are at variance with
their own name, do I impose this great anxiety
about pious humility: unless haply in these
evils they shall dare even to make a display
of themselves, unto whom it is not enough,
that the punishments of these are deferred.
Nor am I treating of these, in whom there is
a certain aim of pleasing, either by more elegant dress than the necessity of so great profession demands, or by remarkable manner
of binding the head, whether by bosses of
hair swelling forth, or by coverings so yieldthat the fine net- work below appears:
ing,
unto these we must give precepts, not as
concerning
yet
Give
chastity
me one who makes profession of perpetual
continence, and who is
free from these,
and all such faults and spots of conduct;
for this one I fear pride, for this so great
good I am in alarm from the swelling of
The more there is in any one
arrogance.
on account of which to be self-pleased, the
more I fear, lest, by pleasing self, he please
not Him, Who "
resisteth the proud, but unto
the humble giveth -grace." 5

humility, but

concerning

modesty.

virgin

itself,

or

purity.

35. Certainly we are to contemplate in
Christ Himself, the chief instruction and
What further
pattern of virginal
precept then concerning humility shall I give
to the continent, than what He saith to all,
" Learn of Me, in that I am meek and lowly
" 6 when He had made mention
of heart ?
above of His greatness, and, wishing to show
this very thing, how great He was, and how

1 John xiii. 1-17.
3 1 Tim. v. 11, 12, 13.

[See R. V.]

2 Ecclus. iii. 18.

4 1 Tim. v. 6.

5 James iv. 6.

6 Matt. xi. 29.

-+o o

"

little He had been made for our sakes, saith,
"I confess to Thee, O Father, Lord of
heaven and earth, in that Thou hast hidden
these things from the wise and prudent, and
Even
hast revealed them unto little children.
so, O Father, in that so it hath been pleasing
All things have been delivered
before Thee.
unto Me of My Father: and no one knoweth
the Son, save the Father; and no one knoweth the Father, save the Son, and he to whom
the Son shall have willed to reveal Him.
Come unto Me, all ye who labor and are burTake My
dened, and I will refresh you.
yoke upon you, and learn of Me, in that I am
meek and lowly of heart." 1
He, He, unto
Whom the Father hath delivered all things,
and Whom no one knoweth but the Father,
and Who alone, (and he, unto whom He shall
to reveal Him), knoweth the
have willed
Father, saith not, "Learn of Me'' to make
the world, or to raise the dead, but,
in that
I am meek and lowly of heart." O saving
teaching? O Teacher and Lord of mortals,
unto whom death was pledged and passed on
in the cup of pride, He would not teach what
Himself was not, He would not bid what
I see Thee, O good Jesu,
Himself did not.
with the eyes of faith, which Thou hast
opened for me, as in an assembly of the
human race, crying out and saying, "Come
unto Me, and learn of Me."
What, I beseech Thee, through Whom all things were
made, O Son of God, and the Same Who was
made among all things, O Son of Man: to
" For
learn what of Thee, come we to Thee ?
that I am meek," saith He, "and lowly of
Is it to this that all the treasures of
heart."
wisdom and knowledge hidden in Thee 2 are
brought, that we learn
this of Thee as a
great thing, that Thou art "meek and lowly
Is it so great a thing to be little,
of heart ?
that it could not at all be learned unless it
were brought to pass by Thee, Who art so
For by no other
great?
way is there found out rest for the soul, save
when the unquiet swelling hath been dispersed, whereby it was great unto itself, when
it was not sound unto Thee.

So indeed it

is.

"

36. Let them hear Thee, and let them
come to Thee, and let them learn of Thee to
be meek and lowly, who seek Thy Mercy and
Truth, by living unto Thee, unto Thee, not
Let him hear this, laborunto themselves.
ing and laden, who is weighed down by his
burthen, so as not to dare to lift up his eyes
to heaven, that sinner beating his breast, and
Let him hear, the
drawing -near from afar. 3
centurion, not worthy that Thou shouldest

1 Matt. xi. 25-29.

2 Col. ii. 3.

3 Luke xviii. 13

Let him hear, Zacenter under his roof. 4
cheus, chief of publicans, restoring fourfold
the gains of damnable sins. 5
Let her hear,
the woman in the city a sinner, by so much the
more full of tears at Thy feet, the more alien
she had been from Thy steps.
Let them
hear, the harlots and publicans, who enter
into the kingdom of heaven before the Scribes
Let them hear, every kind
and Pharisees. 7
of such ones, feastings with whom were cast
in Thy teeth as a charge, forsooth, as though
by whole persons who sought not a physician,
whereas Thou earnest not to call the righteous,
All these, when
but sinners to repentance.
they are converted unto Thee, easily grow
meek, and are humbled before Thee, mindful of their own most unrighteous life, and of
Thy most indulgent mercy, in that, "where
sin hath abounded, grace hath abounded
more." 9

' '

" Whoso can receive,

37. But regard the troops of virgins, holy
boys and girls: this kind hath been trained
up in Thy Church: there for Thee it hath
been budding from its mother's breasts; for
Thy Name it hath loosed its tongue to speak,
Thy Name, as through the milk of its infancy, it hath had poured in and hath sucked,
I, who before
no one of this number can say,
was a blasphemer, and persecutor, and injurious, but I obtained mercy, in that I did it
being ignorant, in unbelief." I0 Yea more,
that, which Thou commandedst not, but only
didst set forth, for such as would, to seize,
let him resaying,
ceive;'' they have seized, they have vowed,
and, for the sake of the kingdom of heaven,
not for that Thou threatenedst, but for that
Thou exhortedst, they have made themselves
eunuchs." To these cry out, let these hear
" meek and lowly of
Thee, in that Thou art
Let these, by how much they are
heart."
great, by so much humble themselves in all
things, that they may find grace before Thee.
They are just: but they are not, are they,
such as Thou, justifying the ungodly? They
are chaste: but them in sins their mothers
nurtured in their wombs. 12 They are holy,
but Thou art also Holy of Holies. They are
virgins, but they are not also born of virgins.
They are wholly chaste both in spirit and in
flesh: but they are not the Word made flesh. 13
And yet let them learn, not from those unto
whom Thou forgivest sins, but from Thee
Thyself, The Lamb of God Who takest away
the sins of the world, 14 in that Thou art
" meek and lowly of heart."

4 Matt. viii. 8.
7 Matt. xxi. 31.
9 Rom. v. 20.
12 Ps. Ii. 5.

5 Luke xix. 2-8.
5 Luke xix. 2-8.
8 Matt. ix. n-13. [SeeR.V.]
to 1 Tim. i. i3.
10 1 Tim. i. i3
1 3 John i. 14

6 Luke vii. 37, 38.
" Matt. xix. 12.
*4 John i. 29.

'

OF HOLY VIRGINITY.

"

38. I send thee not, soul that art religiously
chaste, that hast not given the reins to fleshly
appetite even so far as to allowed marriage,
that hast not indulged thy body about to depart even to the begetting one to succeed
thee, that hast sustained aloft thy earthly
members, afloat to acccustom them to heaven;
I send thee not, in order that thou mayest
learn humility, unto publicans and sinners,
who yet enter into the kingdom of heaven before the proud: I send thee not to these: for
they, who have been set free from the gulf of
uncleanness, are unworthy that undefiled virginity be sent to them to take pattern from.
I send thee unto the King of Heaven, unto
Him, by Whom men were created, and Who
was created among men for the sake of men;
unto Him, Who is fair of beauty above the
sons of men, 1 and despised by the sons of
men on behalf of the sons of men:
unto
Him, Who, ruling the immortal angels, disdained not to do service unto mortals.
Him,
at any rate, not unrighteousness, but charity,
made humble;
Charity, which rivalleth not,
" 2 foris not puffed up, seeketh not her own;
asmuch as
Christ also pleased not Himself,
but, as it is written of Him, The reproaches
of such as reproached Thee have fallen upon
Go then, come unto Him, and learn,
Me. 3
in that He is "meek and lowly of heart."
Thou shalt not go unto him, who dared not
by reason of the burden of unrighteousness
to lift up his eyes to heaven, but unto Him,
Who by the weight of charity came down
Thou shalt not go unto her,
from heaven. 4
who watered with tears the feet of her Lord,
seeking forgiveness of heavy sins; but thou
shalt go unto Him, Who, granting forgiveness
of all sins, washed the feet of His own disciI know the dignity of thy virginity;
ples.
I propose not to thee to imitate the Publican
humbly accusing his own faults; but I fear
for the Pharisee proudly boasting of his own
I say not, Be thou such as she,
merits. 6
of whom it was said,
There are forgiven
unto her many sins, in that she hath loved
much;" 7 but I fear lest, as thinking that
thou hast little forgiven to thee, thou love
little.

"

"

39. I

fear, I say, greatly for thee, lest,
when thou boastest that thou wilt follow the
Lamb wheresoever He shall have gone, thou
be unable by reason of swelling pride to follow Him through strait ways.
It is good for
thee, O virgin soul, that thus, as thou art a
virgin, thus altogether keeping in thy heart
that thou hast been born again, keeping in

1 Ps. xlv. 2.
4 John vi. 3
7 Luke vii.

2 1 Cor. xiii. 4,
5 John xiii. 5.

3 Rom. xv. 3.
6 Luke xviii. 10-14.

it

is

"

"

"

as

casteth

written,

thy flesh that thou hast been born, thou yet
conceive of the fear of the Lord, and give
birth to the spirit of salvation. 8 "
Fear," indeed, "there is not in charity, but perfect
out
charity,"
fear:" 9 but fear of men, not of God: fear
of temporal evils, not of the Divine Judgment
Be not thou high-minded, but
at the last.
fear." IO Love thou the goodness of God; fear
thou His severity: neither suffers thee to be
For by loving you fear, lest you
proud.
grievously offend One Who is
loved and
For what more grievous offense, than .
loves.
that by pride thou displease Him, Who for thy
sake hath been displeasing to the proud ?
And where ought there to be more that
"
chaste fear abiding for ever and ever," than
in thee, who hast no thought of the things of
this world, how to please a wedded partner;
but of the things of the Lord, how to please
the Lord ?
I2 That other fear is not in charity,
but this chaste fear quitteth not charity.
If
you love not, fear lest you perish; if you love,
That fear charity
fear lest you displease.
The
casteth out, with this it runneth within.
For we have not
Apostle Paul also says,
received the spirit of bondage again to fear;
but we have received the spirit of adoption of
sons, wherein we cry, Abba, Father." 13
believe that he speaks of that fear, which had
been given in the Old Testament, lest the
temporal goods should be lost, which God
had promised unto those not yet sons under
grace, but as yet slaves under the law.
There
is also the fear of eternal fire, to serve God
in order to avoid which is assuredly not yet
For the desire of the reof perfect charity.
ward is one thing, the fear of punishment anWhither
other. They are different sayings,
shall I go away from Thy Spirit, and from
" One
Thy face whither shall I flee?" 14 and,
thing I have sought of the Lord, this I will
seek after; that I may dwell in the house of
the Lord through all the days of my life, that
I may consider the delight of the Lord, that
" Turn
I be protected in His temple:" IS and,
and, "My
not away Thy face from me:" 16
soul longeth and fainteth unto the courts of
Those sayings let him have had,
the Lord. 17
who dared not to lift up his eyes to heaven;
and she who was watering with tears His feet,
in order to obtain pardon for her grievous
sins; but these do thou have, who art careful
about the things of the Lord, to be holy both
With those sayings there
in body and spirit.
companies fear which hath torment, which

"

8 Is. xxvi. 18. see LXX.
10 Rom. xi. 20.
13 Rom. viii. 15.
16 Ps. xxvii. 9.

Ps. xix. 9.
" Ps. cxxxix. 7.
I 7 Ps. lxxxiv. 2.

9 x John, iv. 18. [See R.V.]
I2 1 Cor. vii. 32.
'5 Ps. xxvii. 4.

perfect charity casteth forth; but with these
sayings there companies chaste fear of the
And
Lord, that abideth for ever and ever.
" Be not thou
to both kinds it must be said,
high-minded, but fear;" 1 that man neither of
defense of his sins, nor of presumption of
For Paul also
righteousness set himself up.
himself, who saith, "For ye have not re-
" 2
ceived the spirit of bondage again to fear;
yet, fear being a companion of charity, saith,
" With fear and much trembling was I to-
" 3 and that saying, which I have
wards you:
mentioned, that the engrafted wild olive tree
be not proud against the broken branches of
the olive tree, himself made use of, saying,
" Be not thou high-minded, but fear;" himself
admonishing all the members of Christ in
general, saith, "With fear and trembling
work out your own salvation; for it
is God
Who worketh in you both to will and to do, ac-
" 4 that it seem
cording to His good pleasure;
not to pertain unto the Old Testament what
" Serve the Lord in fear, and reis written,
joice unto Him with trembling." 5

at My words." 6

40. And what members of the holy body,
which is the Church, ought more to take
care, that upon them the holy Spirit may rest,
But
than such as profess virginal holiness?
how doth He rest, where He findeth not His
own place ? what else than an humbled heart,
to fill, not to leap back from; to raise up,
not to weigh down ? whereas it hath been
most plainly said, "On whom shall rest My
On him that is humble and quiet,
Spirit ?
and trembles
Already
thou livest righteously, already thou livest
piously, thou livest chastely, holily, with viras yet, however, thou livest
ginal purity;
here, and art thou not humbled at hearing,
"
What, is not human life upon earth a trial ??
Doth it not drive thee back from over-confi-
" Woe unto the world because
dent arrogance,
of offenses ?" 8
Dost thou not tremble, lest
thou be accounted among the many, whose
"love waxeth cold, because that
iniquity
" 9 Dost thou not smite thy breast,
abounds ?
when thou hearest,
Wherefore, whoso thinketh that he standeth, let him see to it lest he
" I0 Amid these divine warnings and
fall ?
human dangers, do we yet find it so hard to
persuade holy virgins to humility ?

41. Or are we indeed to believe that it is
for any other reason, that God suffers to be
mixed up with the number of your profession, many, both men and women, about to
fall, than that by the fall of these your fear

"

religiously, piously, with

may be increased, whereby to repress pride;
which God so hates, as that against this one
thing The Highest humbled Himself?
Unless haply, in truth, thou shalt therefore fear
less, and be more puffed up, so as to love
little Him, Who hath loved thee so much, as
to give up Himself for thee," because He
hath forgiven thee little, living, forsooth from
childhood,
pious
As though
chastity, with inviolate virginity.
in truth you ought not to love with much
greater glow of affection Him, Who, whatsoever things He hath forgiven unto sinners
upon their being turned to Him, suffered you
Or indeed that Pharinot to fall into them.
12 who therefore loved little, because he
see,
thought that little was forgiven him, was it
for any other reason that he was blinded by
this error, than because being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, and seeking to establish his own, he had not been made subject
unto the righteousness of God ? I3 But you, an
elect race, and among the elect more elect,
virgin choirs that follow the Lamb, even you
"by grace have been saved through faith;
and this not of yourselves, but it
is the gift
of God: not of works, lest haply any be
For we are His workmanship, created
elated.
in Jesus Christ in good works, which God
hath prepared, that in them we may walk." 14
What therefore, by how much the more ye
are adorned by His gifts, shall ye by so much
the less love Him ? May He Himself turn
away so dreadful madness!
Wherefore forasmuch as the Truth has spoken the truth,
that he, unto whom little
is forgiven, loveth
little; do ye, in order that ye may love with
full glow of affection Him, Whom ye are free
to love, being loosened from ties of marriage,
account as altogether
you,
whatever of evil, by His governance, ye have
For "
not committed.
your eyes ever unto
the Lord, forasmuch as He shall pluck out
Except the Lord
of the net your feet,
IS and,
shall have kept the city, in vain hath he
watched who keepeth it." 16 And speaking of
Continence itself the Apostle says,
But I
would that all men were as I myself; but
each one hath his own proper gift from God;
one in this way, and another in that way." 17
Who therefore bestoweth these gifts ? Who
distributeth his own proper gifts unto each as
l8 Forsooth God, with Whom there is
He will ?
not unrighteousness, 19 and by this means with
what equity He makes some in this way, and
others in that way, for man to know is either
impossible or altogether hard: but that with

forgiven unto

"

"

1 Rom. xi. 20.
4 Phil. ii. 12, 13.
7 Job. vii. 1. LXX.
9 Matt. xxiv. 12.

2 Rom. viii. 15.

[See R. V."|

5 Ps. ii. 11.

s Matt, xviii. 7.
I0 1 Cor. x. 12.

[See R. V.]

3 1 Cor. ii. 3.
6 Is. Lxvi. 2.

11 Gal. ii. 20.
r4 Eph. ii. 8-10.
*7 1 Cor. vii. 7.

I2 Luke vii. 36-47.

[See R. V.]

15 Ps. xxv. 15.

l8 rCor. xii. 11.

x 3 Rom. x. 3.
16 ps . cxxv ii. 1.
19 Rom. ix. 16.

OF HOLY VIRGINITY.

What," therefore,

equity He maketh, it is not lawful to doubt.
"
" hast thou, which thou
" x And by what perversity
hast not received ?
dost thou less love Him, of Whom thou hast
received more ?

42. Wherefore let this be the first thought
for the putting on of humility, that God's
virgin think not that it is of herself that she
is such, and not rather that this best "gift
cometh down from above from the Father of
Lights, with Whom is no change nor shadow
of motion. " 2
For thus she will not think
that little hath been forgiven her, so as for her
to love little, and, being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and wishing to establish her
own, not to be made subject to the righteousIn which fault was that Simon,
ness of God.
who was surpassed by the woman, unto whom
many sins were forgiven, because she loved
But she will have more cautious and
much.
true thoughts, that we are so to account all
sins as though forgiven, from which God keeps
us that we commit them not.
Witnesses are
those expressions of pious prayers in holy
is shown, that those
Scriptures, whereby it
very things, which are commanded by God,
are not done save by His Gift and help, Who
commands.
For there is a falsehood in the
asking for them, if we could do them without
What is there so
the help of His grace.
generally and chiefly charged, as obedience
whereby the Commandments of God are
And yet we find this wished for.
kept?
"Thou," saith he, "hast charged, that Thy
commandments be greatly kept."
Then it
follows, "O that my ways were directed to
keep Thy righteousnesses: then shall I not
be confounded, whilst I look unto all Thy
commandments." 3
That which he had set
down above that God had commanded, that
he wished might of himself be fulfilled.
This
is done assuredly, that there be not sin; but,
if there hath been sin, the command is that
one repent; lest by defense and excuse of sin
he perish through pride, who hath done it,
whilst he is unwilling that what he hath done
This also is
perish through repentance.
asked of God, so that it may be understood
that it is not done, save by His grant from
" O Lord,
Whom it is asked.
a watch to my mouth, and a door of continence
around my lips:
let not my heart turn away
unto evil words, to make excuses in sins, with
men that work unrighteousness." 4
If, therefore, both obedience, whereby we keep His
commandments, and repentance whereby we
excuse not our sins, are wished for and asked,
it is plain that, when it is done, it is by His

Set," saith he,

"

1 1 Cor. iv. 7.
3 Ps. cxix. 4-6.

2 James i. 17.
4 Ps. cxli. -3, 4.

[See R. V.]

gift that it is possessed, by His help that it is
fulfilled, yet more openly is it said by reason
By the Lord the steps of a
of obedience,
man are directed, and He shall will His
way:" s and of repentance the Apostle says,
"
if haply God may grant unto them repent-

"

ance. ' ' 6

43. Concerning continence also itself hath
it not been most openly said, "And when I
knew that no one can be continent unless God
give it, this also itself was a part of wisdom,
to know whose gift it was?" 7
But perhaps
continence is the gift of God, but wisdom
man bestows upon himself, whereby to understand, that that gift is, not his own, but of
Yea, "The Lord maketh wise the
God.
blind:" 8 and, "The testimony of the Lord

"

faithful,

wise/' save

it giveth wisdom unto

little
is
and, "If any one want wisdom, let
ones:" 9
him ask of God, Who giveth unto all liberally,
and upbraideth not, and it shall be given to
But it becometh virgins to be wise,
him." 10
11 How
that their lamps be not extinguished.
"
not having high thoughts, but
For Wisdom
consenting unto the lowly."
"
Itself hath said unto man,
Lo, piety is wisdom !" I3
If therefore thou hast nothing,
" Be not highwhich thou hast not received,
And love not thou
minded, but fear." 14
little, as though Him by Whom little hath been
forgiven to thee; but, rather, love Him much,
by Whom much hath been given to thee.
For
if he loves, unto whom it hath been given not
to repay: how much more ought he to love,
unto whom it hath been given to possess.
For both, whosoever continues chaste from
the beginning, is ruled by Him; and whosoever is made chaste instead of unchaste, is
corrected by Him; and whosoever is unchaste
even unto the end, is abandoned by Him.
But this He can do by secret counsel, by unrighteous He cannot: and perhaps it is for
this end that it lies hid, that there may be
more fear, and less pride.

44. Next let not man, now that he knoweth
that by the grace of God he is what he is, fall
into another snare of pride, so as by lifting
up himself for the very grace of God to deBy which fault that other
spise the rest.
Pharisee both gave thanks unto God for the
goods which he had, and yet vaunted himself
above the Publican confessing his sins. What
therefore should a virgin do, what should she
think, that she vaunt not herself above those,
men or women, who have not this so great
For she ought not to feign humility,
gift ?

5 Ps. xxxvii. 23.
8 Ps. cxlvi. 8.
11 Matt. xxv. 4.
z 4 Rom. xi. 20.

6 2 Tim. ii. 25.
9 Ps. xix. 7.
12 Rom. xii. 16.

7 Wisd. viii. 21.
10 James i. 5.
*3 Job xxviii. 28. LXX.

but to set it forth: for the feigning of humility
is greater pride. Wherefore Scripture wishing
to show that humility ought to be true, after
having said, "By how much thou art great,
by so much humble thyself in all things,"
added soon after, "And thou shalt find grace
before God:" 1
assuredly where one could
not humble one's self deceitfully.

45. Wherefore what shall we say ?

is there
any thought which a virgin of God may truly
have, by reason of which she dare not to set
herself before a faithful woman, not only a
widow, but even married ?
I say not a reprobate virgin; for who knows not that an obedient woman is to be set before a disobedient
But where both are obedient unto
virgin ?
the commands of God, shall she so tremble
to prefer holy virginity even to chaste marriage, and continence to wedded life, the fruit
an hundred-fold to go before the thirty-fold ?
Nay, let her not doubt to prefer this thing to
that thing; yet let not this or that virgin,
obeying and fearing God, dare to set herself
before this or that woman, obeying and fearing God; otherwise she will not be humble,
and "God resisteth the proud!" 2
What,
therefore, shall she have in her thoughts ?
Forsooth the hidden gifts of God, which
nought save the questioning of trial makes
known to each, even in himself.
For, to
pass over the rest, whence doth a virgin know,
although careful of the things of the Lord,
how to please the Lord, 3 but that haply, by
reason of some weakness of mind unknown
to herself, she be not as yet ripe for martyrdom, whereas that woman, whom she rejoiced
to set herself before, may already be able to
drink the Cup of the Lord's humiliation, 4
which He set before His disciples, to drink
place ?
Whence, I say, doth she know but that she
herself be not as yet Thecla, that other be
Certainly, unless there
already Crispina. s
be present trial, there takes place no proof of
this gift.

enamored

when

high

first,

of

46. But this is so great, that certain understand it to be the fruit an hundred-fold. 6
For the authority of the Church bears a very
conspicuous witness, in which it is known to
the faithful in what place the Martyrs, in what
place the holy nuns deceased, are rehearsed

2 James iv. 6.
4 Matt. xx. 22.

1 Ecclus. iii. 18.
3 1 Cor. vii. 32.
5 A married woman, who was beheaded in the persecution
under Diocletian and Maximian at Thebeste in Africa.
See
" bethink you that in
Ser. 354,
the time of persecution not only Agnes the. Virgin was crowned,
but likewise Crispina, the wife ; and perchance, as there is no
doubt, some of the continent then failed, and many of the wedded
fought and conquered." Ban. ed.

rid Conthientes, n. 5. where he says,

6 St. Jerome mentions this interpretation ; but b. 1. agt. Jovinian, and on Matt. i3, takes that which assigns the hundred-fold to
virginity. Ben. ed.

hundred-fold

at the Sacraments of the Altar. 7
But what
the meaning is of that difference of fruitfulness, let them see to it, who understand these
things better than we; whether the virginal
life be in fruit an hundred-fold, in sixty-fold
the widowed, in thirty- fold the married; or
whether the
fruitfulness be
ascribed unto martyrdom, the sixty- fold unto
continence, the thirty-fold unto marriage; or
whether virginity, by the addition of martyrhundred-fold, but when
dom, fill up the
alone be in sixty-fold, but married persons
bearing thirty-fold arrive at sixty- fold, in case
they shall be martyrs: or whether, what seems
to me more probable, forasmuch as the gifts
of Divine grace are many, and one is greater
and better than another, whence the Apostle
" But emulate ye the better gifts;
" 8 we
says,
are to understand that they are more in number than to allow of being distributed under
In the first place, that
those different kinds.
we set not widowed continence either as bearing no fruit, or set it but level with the desert
of married charity, or equal it unto virgin
glory; or think that the Crown of Martyrdom, either established in habit of mind, although proof of trial be wanting, or in actual
making trial of suffering, be added unto either
one of those these chastities, without any inNext, when we set it
crease of fruitfulness.
down that many men and women so keep virginal chastity, as that yet they do not the
things which the Lord saith,
If thou wiliest
to be perfect, go, sell all that thou hast, and
give unto the poor, and thou shalt have
treasure in Heaven: and come, follow me;'' 9
and dare not unite themselves to those dwelling together, among whom no one saith that
any thing is his own, but all things are unto
them common; 10 do we think that there is no
addition of fruitfulness unto the virgins of
God, when they do this ? or that the virgins
of God are without any fruit, although they
do not this ? Therefore there are many gifts,
and some brighter and higher than others,
And at times one is fruitful
each than each.
in fewer gifts, but better; another in lower
gifts, but more. And in what manner they
be either made equal one to another, or distinguished one from another, in
receiving
eternal honors, who of men would dare to
is plain both that
pronounce ? whereas yet it
those differences are many, and that the
better are profitable not for the present time,
But I judge that the Lord
but for eternity.
willed to make mention of three differences

"

"

7 Ser. 150, he says,

Martyrs are in such place rehearsed at the
Altar of God as that prayer is not made for them ; but for the
other deceased that are mentioned prayer is made." Ben. ed.

8 1 Cor. xii. 31.

9 Matt. xix. 21.

,0 Acts ii. 44, 4, 32.

OF HOLY VIRGINITY.

of fruitfuiness, the rest He left to such as unFor also another Evangelist hath
derstand. 1
made mention only of the hundred-fold: 2 we
are not, therefore, are we, to think that he
either rejected, or knew not of, the other two,
but rather that he left them to be understood ?
47. But, as I had begun to say, whether
the fruit an hundred-fold be virginity dedicated to God, or whether we are to understand that interval of fruitfuiness in some
other way, either such as we have made mention of, or such as we have not made mention
of; yet no one, as I suppose, will have dared
to prefer virginity to martyrdom, and no one
will have doubted that this latter gift is hidden, if trial to test it be wanting. A virgin,
therefore, hath a subject for thought, such as
may be of profit to her for the keeping of
humility, that she violate not that charity,
which is above all gifts, without which assuredly whatever other gifts she shall have
had, whether few or many, whether great or
She hath, I say, a
small, she is nothing.
subject for thought, that she be not puffed
up, that she rival not; forsooth that she so
make profession that the virginal good is
much greater and better than the married
good, as that yet she know not whether this
or that married woman be not already able to
suffer for Christ, but herself as yet unable,
and she herein spared, that her weakness is
" For God,"
not put to the question by trial.
is faithful, Who will not
saith the Apostle,
suffer you to be tried above what ye are able;
but will make with the trial a way out, that
ye may be able to bear it." 3
Perhaps, therefore, those men or women keeping a way of
married life praiseworthy in its kind, are already able, against an enemy forcing to unrighteousness, to contend even by tearing in
pieces of bowels, and shedding of blood; but
these men or women, continent from childhood, and making themselves eunuchs for
the sake of the Kingdom of Heaven, still are
not as yet able to endure such, either for
For it
righteousness, or for chastity itself.
is one thing, for truth and an holy purpose,
not to consent unto one who would persuade
and flatter, but another thing not to yield even
to one who tortures and strikes. These lie hid
in the powers and strength of souls, by trial
they are unfolded, by actual essay they come
In order, therefore, that each be not
forth.
puffed up by reason of that, which he sees
clearly that he can do, let him humbly consider that he knows not that there is perchance something more excellent which he
cannot do, but that some, who neither have

"

1 Matt. xiii. 8.

1 Luke viii. 8.

3 1 Cor. x. 13.

"

nor profess that of which he is lawfully selfconscious, are able to do this, which he himThus will be kept, not by
self cannot do.
"
In honor prefeigned but by true humility,
"
venting one another," 4 and,
esteeming each
the other higher than himself." 5

48. What now shall I say concerning the
very carefulness and watchfulness against
" Who shall boast that he hath a chaste
sin ?
heart ? or who shall boast that he is clean
from sin?" 6
Holy virginity is indeed inviolate from the mother's womb; but "no
is clean in Thy sight, not
one," saith he,
even the infant whose life is of one day upon
There is kept also in faith inthe earth." 7
violate a certain virginal chastity, whereby
the Church is joined as a chaste virgin unto
One Husband: but That One Husband hath
taught, not only the faithful who are virgin
in mind and body, but all Christians altogether, from spiritual even unto carnal, from
Apostles even unto the last penitents, as
though from the height of heaven even unto
the bounds of it,
s to pray, and in the prayer
itself hath admonished them to say, "And
forgive us our debts, even as we also forgive
our debtors:" 9 where, by this which we seek,
He shews what also we should remember that
we are. For neither on behalf of those debts,
which for our whole past life we trust have
been forgiven unto us in Baptism through
His peace, hath He charged us to pray, saying, "And forgive us our debts, even as we
also forgive our debtors:
otherwise this were
a prayer which Catechumens rather ought to
pray up to the time of Baptism; but whereas
is what baptized persons pray, rulers and
people, pastors and flocks;
is sufficiently
shown that in this life, the whole of which is
a trial, no one ought to boast himself as
though free from all sins. 10

"

"

49. Wherefore also the virgins

of God
follow the Lamb
without blame indeed,
whithersoever He shall have gone," both the
cleansing of sins being perfected, and virginity being kept, which, were it lost, could
not return: but, because that same Apocalypse
itself, wherein such unto one such were revealed, in this also praises them, that
in
their mouth there was not found a lie:
let
them remember in this also to be true, that
they dare not say that they have not sin.
Forsooth the same John, who saw that, hath
said this, "If we shall have said that we
have not sin, we deceive our own selves, and
the truth is not in us; but if we shall have
confessed our faults, He is faithful and just,

"
" "

it

it

4 Rom. xii. 10. [See R.V.]
7 Job xxv. 4.
9 Matt. vi. 12.

5 Phil. ii. 3.
8 Matt. xxiv. 31. [See R.V.]

6 Prov. xx. 9.
" Rev. xiv. 4, 5.

JO Job vii. 1.

43^

so as to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
But if we shall
from all unrighteousness.
have said that we have not sinned, we shall
make Him a liar, and His word shall not be
This surely is not said unto these
in us." 1
or those, but unto all Christians, wherein
virgins also ought to recognize themselves.
For thus they shall be without a lie, such as
in the Apocalypse they appeared. And by
this means so long as there is not as yet perfection in heavenly height, confession in lowliness maketh them without blame.

50. But, again, lest by occasion of this
sentence, any one should sin with deadly security, and should allow himself to be carried
away, as though his sins were soon by easy
confession to be blotted out, he straightway
" My little children, these things have
added,
I written unto you, that ye sin not; and, if
one shall have sinned, we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous,
and Himself is a propitiation of our sins/' 2
Let no one therefore depart from sin as
though about to return to it, nor bind himself
as it were by compact of alliance of this kind
with unrighteousness, so as to take delight
rather to confess it than to shun it.
But,
forasmuch as even upon such as are busy and
on the watch not to sin, there creep by stealth,
in a certain way, from human weakness, sins,
however small, however few, yet not none;
these same themselves become great and
grievous, in case pride shall have added to
them increase and weight: but by the Priest,
Whom we have in the heavens, if by pious
humility they be destroyed, they are with all
ease cleansed.

I contend not, I gainsay not.

51. But I contend not with those, who assert that a man can in this life live without
For
any sin:
perhaps we take measure of the great from
out our own misery, and, comparing ourselves
with ourselves, understand not. 3 One thing
I know, that those great ones, such as we are
not, such as we have not as yet made proof
of, by how much they are great, by so much
humble themselves in all things, that they
For, let them
may find grace before God.
be how great soever they will, "there is no
servant greater than his Lord, nor disciple
greater than his master." 4 And assuredly
He is the Lord, Who saith, "All things have
been delivered unto Me of My Father;" 5 and
" Come unto
He is the Master, Who saith,
" and
Me, all ye who labor, and learn of Me;
yet what learn we? "In that I am meek,"
" and lowly of heart."
saith He,

52. Here some one will say, This is now

As
not to write of virginity, but of humility.
though truly it were any kind of virginity,
and not that which is after God, which we
had undertaken to set forth. And this good,
by how much I see it to be great, by so much
I fear for it, lest it be lost, the thief pride.
Therefore there is none that guardeth the
virginal good, save God Himself Who gave
it: and God is Charity.
The Guardian
therefore of virginity is Charity:
but
the
place of this Guardian is humility.
There
forsooth He dwelleth, Who said, that on the
lowly and quiet, and that trembleth at His
words, His Spirit resteth. 7
What, therefore,
have I done foreign from my purpose, if
wishing the good, which I have praised, to be
more securely guarded, I have taken care
also to prepare a place for the Guardian ?
For I speak with confidence, nor have I any
fear lest they be angry with me, whom I
admonish with
care to fear for themselves
More easily do follow the
together with me.
Lamb, although not whithersoever He shall
have gone, yet so far as they shall have had
power, married persons who are humble, than
virgins who are proud.
For how doth one
follow Him, unto Whom one wills not to
approach ? or how doth one approach Him,
unto Whom one comes not to learn,
in that
I am meek and lowly of heart?
Wherefore
those the Lamb leadeth following whithersoever He shall have gone, in whom first Himself shall have found where to lay His Head.
For also a certain proud and crafty person
Lord, I will follow Thee
had said to Him,
whithersoever Thou shalt have gone;" 8 to
whom He made answer, "Foxes have dens,
and fowls of heaven nests: but the Son of
Man hath not where to lay His Head."
By
the term of foxes He reproved wily craftiness,
and by the name of birds puffed-up arrogance,
wherein He found not pious humility to rest
And by this no where at all did he follow the Lord, who had promised that he would
follow Him, not unto a certain point of progress, but altogether whithersoever He should
have gone.

in.

"

"

"

53. Wherefore this do ye, virgins of God,
this do ye: follow ye the Lamb, whithersoever
He shall have gone.
But first come unto
Him, Whom ye are to follow, and learn, in
that He is meek and lowly of heart. Come
ye in lowly wise unto the Lowly, if ye love:
For
and depart not from Him, lest ye fall.
whoso fears to depart from Him asks and
Let there not come to me foot of
says,
pride." 9 Go on in the way of loftiness with
the foot of lowliness; Himself lifteth up such

1 1 John i. 8-10. [SeeR.V.]
4 John xiii. 16.

2 1 John ii. 1, 2.
5 Matt. xi. 27, 28.

3 2 Cor. x. 12.

6 1 John iv. 8.
8 Matt. viii. 19, 20.

7 Is. lxvi. 2.
9 Ps. xxxvi. 11.

OF HOLY VIRGINITY.

as follow in lowly wise, Who thought it not a
trouble to come down unto such as lay low.
Commit ye His gifts unto Him to keep/'guard
ye your strength unto Him." J
Whatever of
evil through His guardianship ye commit not,
account as forgiven unto you by Him: lest,
thinking that you have little forgiven unto
)'ou, ye love little, and with ruinous boasting
despise the publicans beating their breasts.
Concerning that strength of yours which hath
been tried beware, that ye be not puffed up,
because ye have been able to bear something:
but concerning that which hath been untried,
pray, that ye be not tempted above that ye
Think that some are supeare able to bear.
rior to you in secret, than whom ye are openly better. When the good things of others,
haply unknown to you, are kindly believed by
you, your own that are known to^you are not
lessened by comparison, but strengthened by
love: and what haply as yet are wanting, are
by so much the more easily given, by how
much they are the more humbly desired.
Let such among your number as persevere
afford to you an example: but let such as fall
Love the one that ye
increase your fear.
may imitate it; mourn over the other, that ye
be not puffed up. Do not ye establish your
own righteousness; submit yourselves unto
God Who justifies you.
Pardon the sins of
others, pray for your own: future sins shun
by watching, past sins blot out by confessing.
54. Lo, already ye are such, as that in the
rest of your conduct also ye correspond with
the virginity which ye have professed and
Lo, already not only do ye abstain from
kept.
murders, devilish sacrifices and abominations,
thefts, rapines, frauds, perjuries, drunkennesses, and all luxury and avarice, hatreds,
but even
emulations,
those things, which either are, or are thought,
lighter, are not found nor arise among you:
not bold face, not wandering eyes, not unbridled tongue, not petulant laugh, not scurrilous jest, not unbecoming mien, not swelling
or loose gait; already ye render not evil for
evil, nor curse for curse;
already, lastly, ye
fulfill that measure of love, that ye lay down
your lives for your brethren. 3
Lo, already ye
are such, because also such ye ought to be.
These, being added to virginity, set forth an
angelic life unto men, and the ways of heaven
But, by how much ye are
unto the earth.
great, whosoever of you are so great, "by so
much humble yourselves in all things, that ye
may find grace before God/' that He resist you
not as proud, that He humble you not as lifting up yourselves, that He lead you not

impieties,

cruelties;

through straits as being puffed up: although
anxiety be unnecessary, that, where Charity
glows, humility be not wanting.

55. If, therefore, ye despise marriages of
sons of men, from which to beget sons of
men, love ye with your whole heart Him, Who
is fair of form above the sons of men; ye have
your heart is free from marriage
leisure;
Gaze on the Beauty of your Lover:
bonds.
think of Him equal to the Father, made subject also to His Mother: ruling even in the
heavens, and serving upon the earth: creating
That
all things, created among all things.
very thing, which in Him the proud mock at,
gaze on, how fair it is: with inward eyes gaze
on the wounds of Him hanging, the scars of
Him rising again, the blood of Him dying,
the price of him that believes, the gain of
Him that redeems.
Consider of how great
value these are, weigh them in the scales of
Charity; and whatever of love ye had to expend upon your marriages, pay back to Him.
56. It is well that He seeks your beauty
within, where He hath given unto you power
to become daughters of God: 4 He seeks not
of you a fair flesh, but fair conduct, whereby
to bridle also the flesh. He is not one unto
Whom any one can lie concerning you, and
make him rage through jealousy. See with how
great security ye love Him, Whom ye fear not
Husband and
to offend by false suspicions.
wife love each other, in that they see each
other: and what they see not, that they fear
between themselves: nor have they sure delight in what is visible, while in what is conYe
cealed they usually suspect what is not.
in Him, Whom ye see not with the eyes, and
behold by faith, neither have what is real to
blame, nor fear lest haply ye offend Him by
If therefore ye should owe
what is
great love to husbands, Him, for Whose sake
ye would not have husbands, how greatly
Let Him be fixed in your
ought ye to love ?
whole heart, Who for you was fixed on the
Cross: let Him possess in your soul all that,
whatever it be, that ye would not have occuIt is not lawful for you to
pied by marriage.
love little Him, for Whose sake ye have not
So loving Him
loved even what were lawful.
Who is meek and lowly of heart, I have no
fear for you of pride.

false.

57. Thus, after our small measure, we
have spoken enough both of sanctity, whereby ye are properly called
sanctimoniales,"
and of humility, whereby whatever great name
But more worthily let those
ye bear is kept.
Three Children, unto whom He, Whom they
loved with full glow of heart, afforded refresh-

"

1 Ps. lix. 9. [See R.V.]

2 1 Pet. iii. 9. [See R.V.]

3 1 John iii. 16.

4 John i. 12.

ing in the fire, admonish you concerning this
our little work, much more shortly indeed in
number of words, but much more greatly in
weight of authority, in the Hymn wherein God
For joining humility
is honored by them.
unto holiness in such as praise God, they have
most plainly taught, that each, by how much
he make any more holy profession, by so much
do beware that he be not deceived by pride.

Wherefore do ye also praise Him, Who grants
unto you, that in the midst of the flames of
this world, although ye be not joined in marriage, yet ye be not burned: and praying also
Bless ye the Lord, ye holy and humfor us,
ble men of heart; utter an hymn, and exalt
Him above all forever." *

"

x Song of Three Children 65.

ST. AUGUSTIN:

ON

THE GOOD OF WIDOWHOOD.

[DE BONO VIDUITATIS.]

TRANSLATED BY

REV. C.

L. CORNISH, M.A.,

OF EXETER COLLEGE, OXFORD,

ON

THE GOOD OF WIDOWHOOD.
[DE BONO VIDUITATIS.]

This work is not mentioned in the Retractations, probably because it is a letter, and as
It is also marked as St. Augustin's by its references
The date is
The admonition for

such it is reckoned by Possidius, cap. 7.
to his other works, De Bono Conjugali, etc. cap. 15. Ep. to Proba, cap. 23.
marked by the recent consecration of Demetrias, which was in 413.
which he is thanked by Juliana, Ep. 188, may be that against Pelagianism.

An objection has been raised from its disagreement with the fourth Council of Carthage,
an. 398. can. 104, which excommunicates widows who marry again after consecration, and
pronounces them guilty of adultery, whereas in cap. 10 and 11, the opinion that such marThe two,
riages are no marriages, and that they ought to return to continence, is refuted.
however, are not wholly irreconcileable, as there may be a guilt similar to that of adultery
incurred, and it may be visited with a censure in the form of excommunication, and yet the
The 16th Canon of Chalcedon imposes such a penalty, with
marriage may remain valid.
power to the Bishop to relax it.

Abridgedfrom the Benedictine Edition.

Augustin the Bishop, servant of Christ,
and of the servants of Christ, unto the religious handmaiden of God, Juliana, in the
Lord of lords health.

Not any longer to be in debt of my promise
to your request and love in Christ, I have
seized the occasion as I could, amid other
my very pressing engagements, to write to
you somewhat concerning the profession of
holy widowhood, forasmuch as, when I was
present, you laded me with entreaty, and,
when I had not been able to deny you this,
you often by letters demanded my promise.
And in this work of ours, when you shall find
in reading that some things pertain not at all
unto your own person, or unto the person of
you, who are living together in Christ, nor

are strictly necessary to give counsel unto
your life, it will be your duty not on this account to judge them superfluous.
Forsooth
this letter, although it be addressed to you,
was not to be written for you alone; but certainly it was a matter for us not to neglect,
that it should profit others also through your
means.
Whatsoever, therefore, you shall
find here, such as either hath been at no time
necessary for you, or is not so now, and which
yet you shall perceive to be necessary for
others, grieve not either to possess or to lend
to read; that your charity also may be the
profit of others.

2. Whereas, therefore, in every question,
which relates to life and conduct, not only
teaching, but exhortation also is necessary;

THE WORKS OF ST. AUGUSTIN. YYYY

tle ?

in order that by teaching we may know what
is to be done, and by exhortation may be incited not to think it irksome to do what we
already know is to be done; what more can
I teach you, than what we read in the AposFor holy Scripture setteth a rule to our
teaching, that we dare not "be wise more
*** but be wise, as
than it behoveth to be wise;
" unto soberness, according as
himself saith,
unto each God hath allotted the measure of
faith." 2 Be it not therefore for me to teach
you any other thing, save to expound to you
the words of the Teacher, and to treat of
them as the Lord shall have given to me.

"

"

3. Therefore (thus) saith the Apostle, the
teacher of the Gentiles, the vessel of elecBut I say unto the unmarried and the
tion,
widows, that it is good for them, if they shall
These
have so continued, even as I also." 3
words are to be so understood, as that we
think not that widows ought not to be called
unmarried, in that they seem to have made
trial of marriage: for by the name of unmarried women he means those, who are not now
bound by marriage, whether they have been,
or whether they have not been so. And this
in another place he opens, where he says,
" Divided is a woman unmarried and a vir4 Assuredly when he adds a virgin also,
gin."
what would he have understood by an unmarried woman, but a widow? Whence also, in
what follows, under the one term " unmarhe embraces both professions, saying,
ried
"
She who is unmarried is careful of the
things of the Lord, how to please the Lord:
but she who is married is careful of the things
of the world, how to please her husband." 5
Certainly by the unmarried he would have
understood, not only her who hath never
married, but her also, who, being by widowhood set free from the bond of marriage, hath
ceased to be married; for on this account
also he calleth not married, save her, who hath
an husband; not her also, who hath had, and
Wherefore every widow is unhath not.
married; but, because not every unmarried
woman is a widow, for there are virgins also;
therefore he hath here set both, where he
" But I say unto the unmarried and the
says,
widows;" as if he should say, What I say
unto the unmarried, I say not unto them
alone, who are virgins, but unto them also
who are widows;
that it is good for them,
if they shall have so continued, even as
also I." 6

"

4. Lo, there is your good compared to that
good, which the Apostle calls his own, if faith
be present:
is

rather, because faith

yea,

1 So V.

2 Rom. xii. 3.

i) yvv'r) Kat r; napOdvos.

5 1 Cor. vii. 34.

3 toi?, tcus: i Cor. vii. 8.
6 1 Cor. vii. 8.

Short is this teaching, yet not on

present.
this account to be despised, because it
is
short; but on this account to be retained the
more easily and the more dearly, in that in
For it is not every
shortness it is not cheap.
kind of good soever, which the Apostle would
here set forth, which he hath unambiguously
placed above the faith of married women.
But how great good the faith of married
women, that is, of Christian and religious
women joined in marriage, hath, may be understood from this, that, when he was giving
charge for the avoiding of fornication, wherein
assuredly he was addressing married persons
" Know ye not that your bodies
also, he saith,
are the members of Christ?" 7 So great then
is the good of faithful marriage, that even the
very members are (members) of Christ.
But,
forasmuch as the good of widowed continence
is better than this good, the purpose of this
profession is, not that a catholic widow be
any thing more than a member of Christ, but
that she have a better place, than a married
woman, among the members of Christ.
Forsooth the same Apostle says,
For, as in one
body we have many members, but all members have not the same course of action; so
being many we are one body in Christ, and
each members one of another: having gifts
diverse according unto the grace, which hath
been given unto us." 8

"

"

5. Wherefore also when he was advising
married persons not to defraud one another
of the due of carnal intercourse; lest, by this
means, the one of them, (the due of marriage
being denied to him,) being through his own
incontinence tempted of Satan, should fall
But this I
away into fornication, he saith,
say of leave, not of command ; but I would that
all men were as I myself; but each one hath
his own proper gift from God; but one in this
way, and another in that." 9 You see that
wedded chastity also, and the marriage faith
of the Christian bed, is a "gift," and this of
God; so that, when as carnal lust exceeds
somewhat the measure of sensual intercourse,
beyond what is necessary for the begetting
of children, this evil is not of marriage, but
venial by reason of the good of marriage.
For not concerning marriage, which is contracted for the begetting of children, and the
faith of wedded chastity, and the sacrament
(indissoluble, so long as both live) of matrimony, all which are good; but concerning
that immoderate use of the flesh, which is
recognized in the weakness of married persons, and is pardoned by the intervention of
the good of marriage, the Apostle saith, "I

7 1 Cor. vi. 15.

8 Rom. xii. 4-6.

9 1 Cor. vii. 6, 7.

ON THE GOOD OF WIDOWHOOD.

speak of leave, not of command."
Also,
when he says, "The woman is bound, so
long as her husband lives: but, in case her
husband shall have died, she is set free:
let
her be married to whom she will, only in the
Lord: but she shall be more blessed, if she
shall have so continued, according to my
" x he shows sufficiently that a faithcounsel;
ful woman is blessed in the Lord, even when
she marries a second time after the death of
her husband, but that a widow is more blessed
in the same Lord; that is, to speak not only
in the words, but by instances also, of the
Scriptures, that Ruth is blessed, but that
Anna is more blessed.

6. Wherefore this in the first place you
ought to know, that by the good, which you
have chosen, second marriages are not condemned, but are set in lower honor.
For,
even as the good of holy virginity, which thy
daughter hath chosen, doth not condemn thy
one marriage; so neither doth thy widowhood
For hence,
the second marriage of any.
specially, the heresies of the Cataphryges
and of the Novatians swelled, which Tertullian also, inflated with cheeks full of sound
not of wisdom, whilst with railing tooth he
attacks 2 second marriages, as though unlawful, which the Apostle with sober mind allows 3
From this soundto be altogether lawful.
ness of doctrine let no man's reasoning, be
he unlearned, or be he learned, move thee;
nor do thou so extol thy own good, as to
charge as evil that of another's which is not
evil; but do thou rejoice so much the more
of thy own good, the more thou seest, that,
by it, not only are evils shunned, but some
For adultery and
goods too
But from these unlawfornication are evils.
ful things she is very far removed, who hath
bound herself by liberty of vow, and, not by
command of law, but by counsel of charity,
hath brought to pass that even things lawful
should not be lawful to her. And marriage
chastity is a good, but widowed continence is
Therefore this better good is
a better good.
honored by the submission of that other, not
that other condemned by the praise of this
that is better.

surpassed.

7. But whereas the Apostle, when commending the fruit of unmarried men and
women, in that I hey have thought of the
things of the Lord, how to please God, added
and saith,
But this I say for your profit, not
" 4 that is, not to force
to cast a snare on you
you; ''but in order to that which is honora-
" we ought not, because he saith that
ble;
the good of the unmarried is honorable,

"

is

"

"

good

for "

therefore to think that the bond of marriage
otherwise we shall condemn first
base;
also, which neither Cataphryges,
marriages
nor Novatians, nor their most learned upBut as,
holder Tertullian dared to call base.
" But I say unto the unmarried
when he says,
and widows, that it is good for them if they
" 5 assuredly he set
shall have so continued;
down "
better," since every thing,
which, when compared with a good, is called
better, this also without doubt is a good; for
what else is it that it is so called better, save
that it is more good ? and yet we do not on
this account suppose him by consequence to
have thought that it was an evil, in case they
married, in that he said, "it is good for them,
if they shall have so continued:" so also,
when he says,
but in order to that which is
honest," he hath not shown that marriage is
base, but that which was honester than (another thing also) honest, he hath commended
by the name of honest in general.
Because
what is honester, save what is more honest ?
But what is more honest is certainly honest.
Forsooth he plainly showed that this is better
than that other that is good, where he says,
"Whoso giveth to marry, doeth well; but
whoso giveth not to marry, doeth better." 6
And this more blessed than that other that is
blessed, where he saith, "But she shall be
more blessed, if she shall have so continued." 7
As, therefore, there is than good a better,
and than blessed a more blessed, so is there
than honest an honester, which he chose to
For far be it that that be base,
call honest.
of which the Apostle Peter speaking saith,
"Husbands, unto your wives, as unto the
weaker and subject vessel, give honor, as
unto co-heirs of grace;" and addressing the
wives, he exhorts them, by the pattern of
Sarah, to be subject unto their husbands;
"For so," saith he, "certain holy women,
who hoped in God, adorned themselves,
obeying their own husbands; even as Sarah
obeyed Abraham, calling him lord, whose
daughters ye are made, well-doing, and not
fearing any disturbance." 8

"

8. Whence, also, what the Apostle Paul
said of the unmarried woman,
that she may
be holy both in body and spirit:" 9 we are
not so to understand, as though a faithful
woman being married and chaste, and according to the Scriptures subject unto her husband, be not holy in body, but only in spirit.
For it cannot come to pass, that when the
spirit is sanctified, the body also be not holy,
of which the sanctified spirit maketh use: but,
that we seem not to any to argue rather than

1 1 Cor. vii. 39, 40.
3 "Conceditr

2 "Concidit."
4 1 Cor. vii. 35.

5 1 Cor. vii. 8.
8 1 Pet. iii. 5-7. [See R.V.]

6 1 Cor. vii. 38.
9 1 Cor. vii. 34.

7 ver. 40.

"

are

that

Christ ?

Taking,

Far be it." 1

of the faithful

since the
to prove this by divine saying;
Apostle Peter, making mention of Sarah, saith
" and in
holy women,'' and saith not,
only
body;" let us consider that saying of the
same Paul, where forbidding fornication he
" Know ye not, that your bodies are
saith,
members of
therefore,
members of Christ, shall I make them members of an harlot?
Therefore
let any one dare to say that the members of
Christ are not holy; or let him not dare to
separate from the members of Christ the
bodies
married.
" Your
Whence, also, a little after he saith,
body is the temple within you of the Holy
Spirit, Whom ye have from God; and ye are
not your own; for ye have been bought with
2 He saith that the body of
a great price."
the faithful is both members of Christ, and
the temple of the Holy Spirit, wherein assuredly the faithful of both sexes are underThere therefore are married women,
stood.
there unmarried women also; but distinct in
their deserts, and as members preferred to
members, whilst yet neither are separated
from the body.
he
speaking of an unmarried woman,
saith,
"
that she may be holy both in body and
spirit," he would have understood a fuller
sanctification both in body and in spirit, and
hath not deprived the body of married women
of all sanctification.

Whereas, therefore,

9. Learn, therefore, that thy good, yea,
rather, remember what thou hast learned,
that thy good is more praised, because there
is another good than which this is better,
than if this could not on any other condition
be a good, unless that were an evil, or altoThe eyes have great honor
gether were not.
in the body, but they would have less, if they
were alone, and there were not other memIn heaven itself the sun
bers of less honor.
by its light surpasses, not chides, the moon;
and star from star differs in glory, 3 not is at
Therefore, "God
variance through pride.
made all things, and, lo, very good;" 4 not
for no other
only "good," but also
For of each
reason, than because
several work throughout it was also said,
" God saw that it is good." But, when "
"
were named, "very" was added; and it was
said, "God saw all things which He made,
For certain several
and, lo, very good."
things were better than other several, but
Thereall together better than any several.
fore, may the sound doctrine of Christ make
thee in His Body sound through His Grace,
that, what thou hast better than others in

very;
all."

"
"

all

"

body and spirit, the self-same thy spirit, which
ruleth the body, may neither extol with insolence, nor distinguish with lack of knowledge.
10. Nor, because I called Ruth blessed,
Anna more blessed, in that the former married twice, the latter, being soon widowed
of her one husband, so lived long, do you
straightway also think that you are better
Forsooth different in the times
than Ruth.
of the Prophets was the dispensation of holy
females, whom obedience, not lust, forced
to marry, for the propagation of the people
of God, 5 that in them Prophets of Christ might
be sent beforehand; whereas the People itself
also, by those things which in figure happened
among them, whether in the case of those
who knew, or in the case of those who knew
not those things, was nothing else than a
Prophet of Christ, of whom should be born
the Flesh also of Christ.
In order therefore
for the propagation of that people, he was
accounted accursed by sentence of the Law.
whoso raised not up seed in Israel. 6 Whence
also holy women were kindled, not by lust of
sensual intercourse, but by piety of bearing;
so that we most rightly believe of them that
they would not have sought sensual intercourse, in case a family could have come by
And to the husbands was
any other means.
allowed the use of several wives living; and
that the cause of this was not lust of the flesh,
but forethought of begetting, is shown by the
fact, that, as it was lawful for holy men to
have several wives living, it was not likewise
lawful for holy women to have intercourse
with several husbands living;
in that they
would be by so much the baser, by how much
the more they sought what would not add to
Wherefore holy Ruth, not
their fruitfulness.
having seed such as at that time was necessary
in Israel, on the death of her husband sought
another of whom to have it.
Therefore than
this one twice married, Anna once married a
widow was on this account more blessed, in
that she attained also to be a prophetess of
Christ; concerning whom we are to believe,
that, although she had no sons, (which indeed
Scripture by keeping silence hath left uncertain,) yet, had she by that Spirit foreseen that
Christ would immediately come of a virgin,
by Which she was enabled to recognize Him
even as a child: whence, with good reason,
even without sons, (that is, assuming she had
none,) she refused a second marriage: in that
she knew that now was the time wherein
Christ were better served, not by duty of
bearing, but by zeal of containing: not by
fruitfulness of married womb, but by chastity

1 i Cor. vi. 15. [See R.V.]
3 1 Cor. xv. 41.

2 1 Cor. vi. 19, 20.
4 Gen. i. 31.

5 1 Cor. x. 11.

6 Deut. xxv. 5-10.

ON THE GOOD OF WIDOWHOOD.

But if Ruth also was
of widowed conduct.
aware that by her flesh was propagated a
seed, whereof Christ should hereafter have
flesh, and by marrying set forth her ministering to this knowledge, I dare not any longer
say that the widowhood of Anna was more
blessed than her fruitfulness.

" 2

ii. But thou who both hast sons, and livest
in that end of the world, wherein now is the
time not of casting stones, but of gathering;
not of embracing, but of abstaining from em1 when the Apostle cries out, "But
bracing;
this I say, brethren, the time is short; it remains, that both they who have wives be as
assuredly if thou hadst sought
not having;
a second marriage, it would have been no
obedience of prophecy or law, no carnal desire
even of family, but a mark of incontinence
For you would have done what the
alone.
Apostle says, after he had said, "It is good
for them, if they shall have so continued,
" 3 forsooth he straightway added,
even as I;
"
But if they contain not themselves, let them
marry; for I had rather that they marry than
For this he said, in order that
be burned."
the evil of unbridled desire might not be carried headlong iftto criminal baseness, being
taken up by the honest estate of marriage.
But thanks be to the Lord, in that thou hast
given birth to what thou wouldest not be, and
the virginity of thy child hath compensated
For Christian
for the loss of thy virginity.
doctrine, having diligent question made of it,
makes answer, that a first marriage also now
at this time is to be despised, unless inconFor he, who said,
tinence stand in the way.
"If they contain not themselves, let them
" If they have not
marry," could have said,
sons, let them marry/' if, when now after the
Resurrection and Preaching of Christ, there
is unto all nations so great and abundant supply of sons to be spiritually begotten, it were
any such duty to beget sons after the flesh,
And, whereas in
as it was in tfee first times.
another place he saith, "But I will that the
younger marry, bear children, be mothers of
4 he commends with apostolic sofamilies,''
briety and authority the good of marriage,
but doth not impose the duty of bearing, as
though in order to obey the law, even on
those who "
the good of continence.
Lastly, why he had said this, he unfolds,
" To give no occasion
when he adds and says,
of speaking evil to the adversary; for already
certain have turned back after Satan:" that
by these words of his we may understand,
that those, whom he would have marry, could
have done better to contain than marry; but

receive

"

better to marry than to go back after Satan,
that is, to fall away from that excellent purpose of virginal or widowed chastity, by looking back to things that are behind, and perish.
Wherefore, such as contain not themselves,
let them marry before they make profession
of continence, before they vow unto God,
what, if they pay not, they are justly condemned.
Forsooth in another place he saith
" For when they have lived in deof such,
lights in Christ, they wish to marry: having
condemnation, in that they have made of
none effect their first faith;" 5 that is, they
have turned aside their will from the purpose
of continence unto marriage.
Forsooth they
have made of none effect the faith, whereby
they formerly vowed what they were unwillTherefore the
ing by perseverance to fulfill.
good of marriage is indeed ever a good: but
in the people of God it was at one time an act
of obedience unto the law; now it is a remedy
for weakness, but in certain a solace of human
Forsooth to be engaged in the benature.
getting of children, not after the fashion of
dogs by promiscuous use of females, but by
honest order of marriage, is not an affection
such as we are to blame in a man; yet this
affection itself the Christian mind, having
thoughts of heavenly things, in a more praiseworthy manner surpasses and overcomes.

12. But since, as the Lord saith,

Not all
" 6 therefore let her who
receive this word ;
can receive it, receive it; and let her, who
containeth not, marry; let her, who hath not
begun, deliberate; let her, who hath undertaken it, persevere; let there be no occasion
given unto the adversary, let there be no
oblation withdrawn from Christ.
Forsooth
in the marriage bond if chastity be preserved,
condemnation is not feared; but in widowed
and virginal continence, the excellence of a
is sought for: and, when this
greater gift
has been sought, and chosen, and by debt of
vow offered, from this time not only to enter
upon marriage, but, although one be not
married, to wish to marry is matter of conFor, in order to show this, the
demnation.
Apostle saith not, "When they shall have
lived in delights, in Christ" they marry;
but "they wish to marry; having," saith he,
"
condemnation, in that they have made of
none effect their first faith," although not by
marrying, yet by wishing; not that the marriages even of such are judged matter of condemnation; but there is condemned a wrong
done to purpose, there is condemned a broken
faith of vow, there is condemned not a relief
by lower good, but a fall from higher good:

"

1 Ecci. iii. 5.
3 1 Cor. vii. 8, 9.

* 1 Cor. vii. 29. [See R.V.]
4 1 Tim v. 14, 15.

5 1 Tim. v. 11, 12. [See R.V.]
7 Muneris.

6 Matt. xix. 11.
8 1 Tim. v. 11, 12.

lastly, such are condemned, not because they
have entered upon marriage faith afterwards,
but because they have made of none effect
And in order
the first faith of continence.
in few words, the Apostle
to suggest this
would not say, that they have condemnation,
who after purpose of greater sanctity marry,
(not because they are not condemned, but
lest in them marriage itself should be thought
to be condemned:) but, after he had said,
"
they wish to marry," he straightway added,
"
having condemnation." And he stated the
reason, "in that they have made of none effect
their former faith," in order that it may appear
that it is the will which fell away from its
purpose, which is condemned, whether marriage follow, or fail to follow.

For whereas it

13. Wherefore they who say that the marriages of such are not marriages, but rather
adulteries, seem not to me to consider with
sufficient acuteness and care what they say;
forsooth they are misled by a semblance of
For, whereas they, who of Christian
truth.
sanctity marry not, are said to choose the
marriage of Christ, hence certain argue saying, If she, who during the life of her husband is married to another, be an adulteress,
even as the Lord Himself hath laid down in
the Gospel;
therefore, during the life of
over Whom death hath no more
Christ,
if she who had chosen His mardominion, 1
riage, be married to a man, she is an adulThey, who say this, are moved interess.
deed with acuteness, but fail to observe, how
great absurdity in fact follows on this reasonis praiseworthy that,
ing.
even during the life of her husband, by his
consent, a female vow continence unto Christ,
now, according to the reasoning of these persons, no one ought to do this, lest she make
Christ Himself, what is impious to imagine,
an adulterer, by being married to Him during
the life of her husband.
Next, whereas first
marriages are of better desert than second, far
be it that this be the thought of holy widows,
that Christ seem unto them as a second husFor Himself they used heretofore also
band.
to have, (when they were subject and did faithful service to their own husbands,) not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit a Husband;
unto Whom the Church herself, of which they
are members, is the wife; who by soundness
of faith, of hope, of charity, not in the virgins
alone, but in widows also, and faithful married
women, is altogether a virgin.
Forsooth unto
the universal Church, of which they all are
members, the Apostle saith, "I joined you
unto one husband a chaste virgin to present

But He knoweth how to
unto Christ." 2
make fruitful, without marring of chastity, a
wife a virgin, Whom even in the flesh itself
His Mother could without violation of chastity
But there is brought to pass by
conceive.
means of this ill-considered notion, (whereby
they think that the marriages of women who
have fallen away from this holy purpose, in
case they shall have married, are no marriages,) no small evil, that wives be separated
from their husbands, as though they were
adulteresses, not wives; and wishing to restore to continence the women thus separated,
they make their husbands real adulterers, in
that during the life of their wives they have
married others.

adulteries, not marriages;

14. Wherefore I cannot indeed say, of
females who have fallen away from a better
purpose, in case they shall have married, that
but I
they are
plainly would not hesitate to say, that departures and fallings away from a holier chastity, which is vowed unto the Lord, are worse
For if, what may no way be
than adulteries.
doubted, it pertains unto an offense against
Christ, when a member of Him keepeth not
faith to her husband; how much graver offense is it against Him, when unto Himself
faith is not kept, in a matter which He requires when offered, Who had not required
For when each
that it should be offered.
fails to render that which, not by force of
command, but by advice of counsel, he vowed,
by so much the more doth he increase the
unrighteousness of the wrong done to
his
vow, by how much the less necessity he had
These matters I for this reason treat
to vow.
of, that you may not think either that second
marriages are criminal, or that any marriages
whatsoever, being marriages, are an evil.-
Therefore let this be your mind, not that you
condemn them, but that you despise them.
Therefore the good of widowed chastity is becoming after a brighter fashio, in that in
order to make vow and profession of it, females may despise what is both pleasing and
But after profession of vow made
lawful.
they must continue to rein in, and overcome,
is no longer
what is pleasing, because it
lavvful.

15. Men are wont to move a question concerning a third or fourth marriage, and even
more numerous marriages than this. On which
to make answer strictly, I dare neither to condemn any marriage, nor to take from these the
shame of their great number. But, lest the brevity of this my answer may chance to displease
any, I am prepared to listen to my reprover

1 Rom. vi. 9.

2 2 Cor. xi. 2. [See R.V.]

ON THE GOOD OF WIDOWHOOD.

"

treating more fully.
For perhaps he alleges
some reason, why second marriages be not
For
condemned, but third be condemned.
I, as in the beginning of this discourse I
gave warning, dare not to be more wise than
For who am I, that
it behoveth to be wise. 1
I should think that that must be denned which
I see that the Apostle hath not defined ?
For he saith, "A woman is bound, so long
as her husband liveth." 2 He said not, her
first; or, second; or, third; or, fourth; 3 but,
"A woman," saith he,
is bound, so long as
her husband liveth; but if her husband shall
be dead, she is set free; let her be married to
whom she will, only in the Lord: but she
shall be more blessed, if she shall have so
I know not what can be added
continued."
to, or taken from, this sentence, so far as reNext I hear Himself
lates to this matter.
also, the Master and Lord of the Apostles
and of us, answering the Sadducees, when they
had proposed to Him a woman not oncemarried, or twice-married, but, if it can be
said, seven-married, 4 whose wife she should
For rebuking them,
be in the resurrection ?
He saith, "Ye do err, not knowing the
For in
Scriptures, nor the power of God.
the resurrection they shall neither be married,
nor marry wives; 5 for they shall not begin to
die, but shall be equal to the Angels of
Therefore He made mention of
God." 6
their resurrection, who shall rise again unto
life, not who shall rise again unto punishTherefore He might have said, Ye
ment.
do err, knowing not the Scriptures, nor the
power of God: for in that resurrection it will
not be possible that there be those that were
wives of many; and then added, that neither
But neither, as we
doth any there marry.
see, did He in this sentence show any sign of
condemning her who was the wife of so many
Wherefore neither dare I, conhusbands.
trary to the feeling of natural shame, say,
that, when her husbands are dead, a woman
marry as often as she will; nor dare I, out of
my own heart, beside the authority of holy
Scripture, condemn any number of marriages
But, what I say to a widow, who
whatever.
hath had one husband, this I say to every
widow; you will be more blessed, if you shall
have so continued.

1 6. For that also is no foolish question
which is wont to be proposed, that whoso can
may say, which widow is to be preferred in
desert; whether one who hath had one husband, who, after having lived a considerable
time with her husband, being left a widow
with sons born to her and alive, hath made
3 Al. " or any number."
6 Luke xx. 35, 36.

2 1 Cor. vii. 39, 40.
5 Matt. xxii. 29, 30,

1 Rom. xii. 3.
4 Scfitiviram.

profession of continence; or she who as a
young woman having lost two husbands within
two years, having no children left alive to
console her, hath vowed to God continence,
and in it hath grown old with most enduring
Herein let them exercise themsanctity.
selves, if they can, by discussing, and by
showing some proof to us, who weigh the
merits of widows by number of husbands, not
by the strength itself of continence.
For, if
they shall have said, that she who hath had
one husband is to be preferred to her who
hath had two; unless they shall have alleged
some special reason or authority, they will
assuredly be found to set before excellence of
soul, not greater excellence of soul, but good
Forsooth it pertained
fortune of the flesh.
unto good fortune of the flesh, both to live a
long time with her husband, and to conceive
But, if they prefer her not on this acsons.
count, that she had sons; at any rate the very
fact that she lived a long time with her husband, what else was it than good fortune of
Further, the desert of Anna herthe flesh ?
self is herein chiefly commended, in that,
after she had so soon buried her husband,
through her protracted life she long contended with the flesh, and overcame.
For
is written, "And there was Anna, a
so it
prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the
tribe of Aser; she was far advanced in many
days; and had lived with her husband seven
years from her virginity; and she was a widow
even unto eighty-four years, who used not to
depart from the Temple, by fastings and
prayers serving day and night." 7 You see
how the holy widow is not only commended
in this, that she had had one husband, but
also, that she had lived few years with a husband from her virginity, and had with so great
piety continued her office
service
of
widowed chastity even unto so great age.

of

17. Let us therefore set before our eyes
three widows, each having one of the things,
the whole of which were in her: let us suppose one who had had one husband, in whose
case is wanting both so great length of widowhood, in that she hath lived long with her
husband, and so great zeal of piety, in that
she doth not so serve with fasts and prayers:
a second, who after the very short life of her
former husband, had quickly lost a second
also, and is now long time a widow, but yet
herself also doth not so set herself to the
most religious service of fasts and prayers: a
third, who not only hath had two husbands,
but also hath lived long with each of them
singly, or with one of them, and being left a

7 Luke ii. 36, 37.

"

widow at a later period of life, wherein indeed,
in case she had wished to marry, she might
also conceive sons, hath taken upon her
widowed continence; but is more intent on
God, more careful to do always the things
that please Him, day and night, like Anna,
serving by prayers and fasts.
If a question
be raised, which of these is to be preferred in
deserts, who but must see that in this contest
the palm must be given to the greater and
more glowing piety?
So also if three others
be set, in each of whom are two of those
three, but one of the three in each wanting,
who can doubt that they will be the better,
who shall have in a more excellent manner in
their two goods pious humility, in order that
there may be lofty piety ?

18. No one indeed of these six widows
For you,
could come up to your standard.
in case that you shall have maintained this
vow even unto old age, mayest have all the
three things wherein the desert of Anna exFor both thou hast had one husband,
celled.
and he lived not long with thee in the flesh;
and, by this means, in case that thou shalt
show forth obedience to the words of the
But she who is a widow
Apostle, saying,
indeed and desolate, hath hoped in the Lord,
and persevereth in prayers night and day/' '
and with sober watchfulness shalt shun what
" But she who passes her time in defollows,
lights, living is dead," all those three goods,
But
which were Anna's, shall be thine also.
you have sons also, which haply she had not.
And yet you are not on this account to be
praised, that you have them, but that you are
zealous to nurture and educate them piously.
For that they were born to thee, was of fruitfulness; that they are alive, is of good fortune; that they be so brought up, is of your
In the former let men
will and disposal.
congratulate you, in this let them imitate
Anna, through prophetic knowledge,
you.
recognized Christ with His virgin Mother;
thee the grace of the Gospel hath made the
Therefore that
mother of a virgin of Christ.
3 whom herself willing and seekholy virgin,
ing it ye have offered unto Christ, hath added
something of virginal desert also unto the
widowed deserts of her grandmother and
For ye who have her, fail not to
mother.
have something thence; and in her ye are,
For that holy
what in yourselves ye are not.
virginity should be taken from you at your
marriage, was on this account brought to
pass, in order that she should be born of you.
19. These discussions, therefore, concern-

1 1 Tim. v. 5, 6.
3 Demetrias, whose grandmother was Proba Faltonia, her
See S. Aug. Ep. 130. and 150. Vol. I. pp. 459,

2 Potestatis.

mother, Juliana.
503, sqq.

ing the different deserts of married women,
and of different widows, I would not in this
work enter upon, if, what I am writing unto
you, I were writing only for you.
But, since
there are in this kind of discourse certain
very difficult questions, it was my wish to say
something more than what properly relates
to you, by reason of certain, who seem not to
themselves learned, unless they essay, not by
passing judgment to discuss, but by rending
to cut in pieces the labors of others: in the
next place, that you yourself also may not
only keep what you have vowed, and make
advance in that good; but also know more
carefully and more surely, that this same
good of yours is not distinguished from the
evil of marriage, but is set before the good of
For let not such, as condemn the
marriage.
marriage of widowed females, although they
exercise their continence in abstaining from
many things, which you make use of, on this
account lead you astray, to think what they
think, although you cannot do what they do.
For no one would be a madman, although he
see that the strength of a madman is greater
than of men in their sound senses.
Chiefly,
therefore, let sound doctrine both adorn and
guard goodness of purpose.
is
from this cause that catholic females, even after
that they have been married more than once,
are by just judgment preferred, not only to
the widows who have had one husband, but
There are inalso to the virgins of heretics.
deed on these three matters, of marriage,
widowhood, and virginity, many winding recesses of questions, many perplexities; and
in order by discussion to enter deeply into
and solve these, there is required both greater
care, and a fuller discourse; that either we
may have a right mind in all those things, or f
if in any matter we be otherwise minded, this
also God may reveal unto us.
However,
what there also the Apostle saith next after,
" Whereunto we have arrived, in that let us
But we have arrived, in what relates
walk.-" 4
to this matter on which we are speaking, so
far as to set continence before marriage, but
holy virginity even before widowed continence; and not to condemn any marriages,
which yet are not adulteries but marriages,
by praise of any purpose whatever of our own
Many other things on
or of our friends.
these matters we have said in a Book concerning the Good of Marriage, and in another
Book concerning Holy Virginity, and in a
Book which we composed with as great pains
as we could against Faustus the Manichee;
since, by most biting reproaches in his writ-

Forsooth it

4 Phil. iii. 15, 16.

ON THE GOOD OF WIDOWHOOD.

ings of the chaste marriages of Patriarchs and
Prophets, he had turned aside the minds of
certain unlearned persons from soundness of
faith.

20. Wherefore, forasmuch as in the beginning of this little work I had proposed certain
two necessary matters, and had undertaken
to follow them out; one which related to doctrine, the other to exhortation; and I have
not failed in the former part, to the best of
my power, according to the business which I
had undertaken; let us come to exhortation,
in order that the good which is known wisely,
may be pursued ardently. And in this matter
I give you this advice first, that, how great
soever love of pious continence you feel to
be in you, you ascribe it to the favor of God,
and give Him thanks, Who of His Holy
Spirit hath freely given unto you so much, as
that, His love being shed abroad in your
heart, the love of a better good should take
away from you the permission of a lawful
For it was His gift to you that you
matter.
should not wish to marry, when it was lawful,
in order that now it should not be lawful,
even if you wished; and that by this means
the wish not to do it might be the more settled, lest what were now unlawful be done,
which was not done even when lawful; and
that, a widow of Christ, you should so far
attain as to see your daughter also a virgin of
Christ; for whilst you are praying as Anna,
These by
she hath become what Mary was.
how much the more you know them to be
gifts of God, by so much the more are you
by the same gifts blessed; yea, rather, you
are not so otherwise than as you know from
Whom you have what you have.
For listen
to what the Apostle said on this matter,
'i But we have received not the spirit of this
world, but the Spirit Which is of God, that
we may know what things have been given to
us by God." 1
Forsooth many have many
gifts of God, and by not knowing from Whom
they have them, come to boast themselves
But there is no one
with impious vanity.
blessed with the gifts of God, who is ungrateful to the Giver. Forasmuch as, also, whereas
in the course of the sacred Mysteries we are
bidden to "
lift up our hearts," it is by His
help that we are able, by Whose bidding we
are admonished; and therefore it follows,
that, of this so great good of the heart lifted
up, we give not the glory to ourselves as of
our own strength, but render thanks unto our
For of this we are straightway
Lord God.
admonished, that "this is meet/' "this is
right." You remember whence these words

1 1 Cor. ii. 12.

are taken, you recognize by what sanction,
and by how great holiness they are commended within.
Therefore hold and have
what you have received, and return thanks to
For, although it be yours to rethe Giver.
ceive and have, yet you have that, which you
have received; forasmuch as to one waxing
proud, and impiously glorying of that which
he had, as though he had it of himself, the
Truth saith by the Apostle,
But what hast
thou, which thou hast not received ?
But, if
thou hast received, why boastest thou, as if
thou hadst not received ?

" 3

"

21. These things I am compelled to admonish by reason of certain little discourses
of some men, that are to be shunned and
avoided, which have begun to steal through
the ears unto the minds of many, being (as
must be said with tears) hostile to the grace
of Christ, which go to persuade that we count
not as necessary for us prayer unto the Lord,
that we enter not into temptation.
For they
so essay to defend the free will of man, as
that by it alone, even without help of the
grace of God, we are able to fulfill what is
commanded us of God.
And thus it follows,
that the Lord in vain said, "Watch and pray,
lest ye enter into temptation;" 4 and in vain
daily in the Lord's Prayer itself we say,
' Lead us not into temptation." 5 For if it is
of our own power alone that we be not overcome by temptation, why do we pray that we
enter not, nor be led into it ?
Rather let us
do what is of our own free will, and most absolute power; and let us mock at the Apostle,
saying, "God is faithful, Who will not suffer
" 6
you to be tempted above what ye are able;
and let us oppose him, and say, Why seek I
of the Lord, what He hath set in my own
But far be it, that he be so minded,
power ?
who is sound minded. Wherefore let us seek
that He may give, what He bids us that we
For to this end He bids us have this,
have.
which as yet we have not, to admonish as
what to seek; and that when we shall have
found the power to do what He hath bidden,
we may understand, of this also, whence we
have received it; lest, being puffed and lifted
up by the spirit of this world, we know not
what things have been given unto us of God.
Wherefore the free choice of the human will
we by no means destroy, when the Grace of
God, by which the free choice itself is helped,
we deny not with ungrateful pride, but rather
For it is ours
set forth with grateful piety.
to will: but the will itself is both admonished

2 "Intus qua sanctione" al. "inter quas actiones" "

what actions;" there are other various readings besides.

amongst

3 1 Cor. iv. 7.
5 Matt. vi. 13.

4 Matt. xxvi. 41.
6 ! Cor. x. 13.

45o

"

that it may arise, and healed, that it may have
power; 1 and enlarged, that it may receive;
For were not
and filled, that it may have.
we to will, certainly neither should we receive
the things that are given, nor should we have.
For who would have continence, (among the
rest of the gifts of God to speak of this
rather, of which I am speaking to you,) who,
I say, would have continence, unless willing?
forasmuch as also no one would receive unless
But if you ask, Whose gift it is, that
willing.
it can be by our will received and had ? listen
to Scripture; yea, rather, because thou knowest, recollect what thou hast read,
Whereas
I knew/' saith he, "that no one can be continent, unless God give it, and this itself was
of wisdom, to know whose gift it was." 2
Great are these two gifts, wisdom and continence; wisdom, forsooth, whereby we are
formed in the knowledge of God; but continence, whereby we are not conformed unto
But God bids us that we be both
this world.
wise and continent, without which goods we
cannot be just and perfect.
But let us pray
that He give what He bids, by helping and
inspiring, Who hath admonished us what to
will by commanding and calling.
Whatsoever
of this He hath given, let us pray that He
preserve; but what He hath not given as yet,
let us pray that He supply; yet let us pray
and give thanks for what we have received;
and for what we have not yet received, from
the very fact that we are not ungrateful for
what we have received, let us trust that we
For He, Who hath given
shall receive it.
power unto the faithful who are married to
adulteries and fornications,
contain from
Himself hath given unto holy virgins and
widows to contain from all sexual intercourse;
in the case of which virtue now the term inviolate chastity 3 or continence is properly
it haply that from Him indeed
used.
we have received continence, but from ourselves have wisdom ? What then is it that the
"
But if any of you lack
Apostle James saith,
wisdom, let him ask of God, Who giveth unto
all liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall
But on this question,
be given unto him.'' 4
already in other little works of ours, so far
as the Lord hath helped us, we have said
many things; and at other times, so far as
through Him we shall be able, when opportunity is given, we will speak.

22. Now it has been my wish on this account
to say something on this subject, by reason
of certain of our brethren most friendly and
dear to us, and without willful guilt indeed
in this error, but yet entangled;
entangled

Or is

J

J

who think, that, when they exhort any to
righteousness and piety, their exhortation will
not have force, unless the whole of that,
wherein they would work upon man that man
should work, they set in the power of man,
not helped by the grace of God, but put forth
by the alone choice of the free will; as though
there can be free will to perform a good work,
unless set free by the gift of God ! And they
mark not that this very thing themselves also
I have by the gift of God, that with such power
they exhort, as to excite the dull wills of men
to enter upon a good life, to enkindle the
I cold, to correct such as are in error, to convert such as are turned aside, to pacify such
For thus they are able to
as are opposed,
succeed in persuading what they would persuade to, or if they work not these things in
the wills of men, what is their work? wherefore speak they ? Let them leave them rather
to their own choice.
But if in them they
work these things, what ?
I pray, doth man,
in the will of man, work so great things by
speaking, and doth God work nothing there
by helping ? Yea rather, with how great soever power of discourse man may prevail, as
that by skill of discussion, and sweetness of
speech, he in the will of man implant truth,
nourish charity, by teaching remove error,
" Neither he
by exhortation remove sloth,
who planteth is any thing, nor he who water-
" s
eth, but God Who giveth the increase.
For in vain would the workman use all means
Creator should work
unless
the
without,
I hope therefore that this
secretly within.
letter of mine by the worthy deed 6 of your
Excellence will soon come into the hands of
such also; on this account I thought that I
ought to say something on this
subject.
Next that both you yourself, and whatsoever
other widows shall read this, or hear it read,
may know that you make more advance unto
the love and profession of the good of continence by your own prayers than by our exhortations; forasmuch as if it be any help to
you that our addresses also are supplied to
you, the whole must be assigned to His grace,
"in Whose Hand," as it
is written, "are
both we and our discourses." 7

23. If, therefore, you had not as yet vowed
unto God widowed continence, we would assuredly exhort you to vow it;
but, in that
you have already vowed it, we exhort you to
And yet I see that I must so
persevere.
speak as to lead those also who had as yet
thought of marriage to love it and to seize on
Therefore let us give ear unto the Apostle, "She who is unmarried," saith he, "is

it.

1 Or "be sound."
Intcgritas,"

"

2 Wisd. viii. 2i.
4 James i. 5.

5 1 Cor. iii. 7.

6 Merito.

7 Wisdom vii. 16.

ON THE GOOD OF WIDOWHOOD.

"

careful about the things of the Lord, to be holy
both in body and spirit; but she who is married is careful about the things of the world,
how to please her husband/' * He saith not,
is careful about the things of the world, so as
not to be holy; but certainly that that marriage holiness 2
is less, in regard of that portion of cares, which hath thought of the
pleasure of the world.
Whatever, therefore,
of earnest purpose of mind would be expended also on these things whereby she
would have to please a husband, the unmarried Christian woman ought in a certain way
to gather and bring together unto that earnest
purpose whereby she is to please the Lord.
And consider, Whom she pleases, who pleases
the Lord; and assuredly she is by so much
the more blessed by how much the more she
pleases Him; but by how much the more her
thoughts are of the things of the world, by so
much the less does she please Him.
Therefore do ye with all earnest purpose please
Him, Who is
fair of form above the sons of
men." 3 For that ye please Him, it is by His
grace which is "shed abroad on His lips."
Please ye Him in that portion of thought also,
which would be occupied by the world, in
order to please a husband.
Please ye Him,
Who displeased the world, in order that such
as please Him might be set free from the
For This One, fair of form above the
world.
sons of men, men saw on the Cross of the
Passion; "and He had not form or beauty,
but His face cast down, and His posture unYet from this unseemliness of
seemly." 4
your Redeemer flowed the price
of your
beauty, but of a beauty within, for "all the
beauty of the King's daughter is within." 3
By this beauty please ye Him, this beauty
order ye with studious care and anxious
thought. He loves not dyes of deceits; the
Truth delighteth in things that are true, and
He, if you recognize what you have read, is
"I am," saith He, "the
called the Truth.
Way, and the Truth, and the Life." 6 Run
ye to Him through Him, please ye Him of
Him; live ye with Him, in Him, of Him.
With true affections and holiest chastity love
ye to be loved by such a Husband.

24. Let the inner ear of the virgin also, thy
holy child, hear these things.
I shall see 7
how far she goes before you in the Kingdom
of That King: it is another question.
Yet
ye have found, mother and daughter, Him,
Whom by beauty of chastity ye ought to
please together, having despised, she all,

1 1 Cor. vii. 34.
2 Most mss. "but certainly that divine holiness."
3 Ps. xlv. 2.

Ps. Ixv. 13. [See R.V.]

4 Is. liii. 2.
6 John xiv. 6.

[See R.V.]

7 One ms " to see.''

with

both

you second, marriage. Certainly if there were
husbands whom ye had to please, by this
time, perhaps, you would feel ashamed to
adorn yourself together with your daughter;
now let it not shame you, to set yourselves to
do what may adorn you both together; because it is not matter of blame, but of glory,
that ye be loved both together by That One.
But white and red, feigned and laid on with
paints, ye would not use, even if ye had husbands; not thinking that they were fit persons
for you to deceive, or yourselves such as
ought to deceive; now therefore That King,
Who had longed for the beauty of His Only
Spouse, of Whom ye are members, do ye
with all truth together please, together cleave
unto; she with virginal chastity, you with
widowed
continence,
spiritual
In which beauty also her grandbeauty.
mother, and your mother-in-law, who by this
time surely hath grown old, is beautiful toForsooth whilst charity
gether with you.
carries the vigor of this beauty into things
that are before, length of years causeth not in
it a wrinkle. You have with you a holy aged
woman, both in your house and in Christ,
whom to consult concerning perseverance;
how you are to fight with this or that temptation, what you are to do, that it may be the
more easily overcome; what safeguard you
are to take, that it may not easily again lay
wait; and if there be any thing of this sort,
she teaches you, who is now by time fixed,
by love a well-wisher, by natural affection full
Do you specially,
of cares, by age secure.
do you in such things consult her, who hath
made trial of what you have made trial of.
For your child sings that song,
8 which in the
Apocalypse none save virgins can sing.
But
for both of you she prays more carefully than
for herself, but she is more full of care for
her granddaughter, for whom there remains a
longer space of years to overcome temptations; but you she sees nearer to her own age,
and mother of a daughter of such an age, as
that, had you seen her married, (which now is
not lawful, and far be it from her,) I think
you would have blushed to bear children together with her. How much then is it that
now remains to you of a dangerous age, who
are on this account not called a grandmother,
in order that together with your daughter you
may be fruitful in offspring of holy thoughts
and works ?
Therefore not without reason is
the grandmother more full of care for her,
for whom you also the mother; because both
what she hath vowed is greater, and the whole
of what she hath just now begun remains to

8 Rev. xiv. 3, 4. [See R.V.]

her. May the Lord hear her prayers, that
ye may holily follow her good deserts, who in
youth gave birth to the flesh of your husband/
in old age travaileth with the heart of your
Therefore do ye all, alike and
daughter.
with one accord, by conduct please, by prayers
press upon, That One Husband of One Wife,
in Whose Body by One Spirit ye are living.

25. The past day returns not hereafter,
and after yesterday proceeds to-day, and after
to-day will proceed to-morrow; and, lo,
all
times and the things of time pass away, that
there may come the promise that shall abide;
and "whoso shall have persevered even unto
the end, this one shall be saved." 2
If the
world is now perishing, the married woman,
for whom beareth she ? Or in heart about to
bear, and in flesh not about to bear, why doth
But if the world is still about to
she marry ?
last, why is not He more loved, by Whom the
world was made? If already enticements of
this life are failing, there is not any thing for
a Christian soul with desire to seek after; but
if they shall yet remain, there is what with
For the one of
holiness he may despise.
these two there is no hope of lust, in the other
greater glory of charity. How many or how
long are the very years, in which the flower
of carnal age seems to flourish? Some females having thoughts of marriage, and with
ardor wishing it, whilst they are being despised
or put off, on a sudden have grown old, so as
that now they would feel shame, rather than
But many having married,
desire, to marry.
their husbands having set out into distant
countries very soon after their union, have
grown aged expecting their return, and, as
though soon left widows, at times have not
even attained so as at least as old women to
receive their old men on their return.
If
therefore, when betrothed bridegrooms despised or delayed, cr when husbands were
abroad, carnal desire could be restrained
from commission of fornication or adultery,
why cannot it be restrained from commission
If it hath been repressed, when
of sacrilege ?
being deferred it was glowing, why is it not
put down, when having been cut off it had
grown cold ? For they in greater measure endure glowing of desire, who despair not of
the pleasure of the same desire.
But whoso
of unmarried persons vow chastity to God,
withdraw that very hope, which is the fuel of
love. Hence with more ease is desire bridled,
which is kindled by no expectation; and yet,
unless against this prayer be made, in order
to overcome it, itself as unlawful is the more
ardently wished for.

26. Therefore let spiritual delights succeed
to the place of carnal delights in holy chastity;
reading, prayer, psalm, good thought, frequency in good works, hope of the world to
come, and a heart upward; and for all these
giving of thanks unto the Father of lights,
from Whom, without any doubt, every good
gift, and every perfect gift, as Scripture bears
witness, cometh down. 3
For when, in stead
of the delights of married women, which they
have in the flesh of their husbands, the use of
other carnal delights is taken, as it were to
solace them, why should I speak of the evils
which follow, when the Apostle hath said in
short, that the widow, who lives in delights,
But far be it from you, that
living is dead. 4
ye be taken with lust of riches instead of lust
of marriage, or that in your hearts money
succeed to the place of love of a husband.
For looking into men's conversation, we have
often found by experience, that in certain
persons, when wantonness hath been restrained, avarice hath increased.
For, as, in
the senses themselves of the body, they who
see not hear more keenly, and discern many
things by touch, nor have such as have the
use of their eyes so great life in their touch;
and in this instance it
is understood that,
when the exertion of the power of attention 5
hath been restrained in one approach, that is,
of the eyes, it puts itself forth into other
senses, more ready with keenness to distinguish, as though it essayed to supply from
the one what was denied in the other; thus
also often carnal lust, being restrained from
pleasure of sensual intercourse, with greater
strength reaches itself forth to desire money,
and when turned away from the one, turns
itself with more glow of passion to the other.
But in you let the love of riches grow cold
together with the love of marriage, and let a
pious use of what property you possess be
directed to spiritual delights, that your liberality wax warm rather in helping such as are
in want than in enriching covetous persons.
Forsooth into the heavenly treasury are sent
not gifts to the covetous, but alms to the
needy, which above measure help the prayers
Fastings, also, and watchings,
of widows.
so far as they disturb not health, if they be
spent in praying, singing psalms, reading, and
meditating in the Law of God, even the very
things which seem laborious are turned into
For no way burdensome
spiritual delights.
are the labors of such as love, but even of
themselves delight, as of such as hunt, fowl,
fish, gather grapes, traffic, delight themselves
with some game.
It matters therefore what

1 Olibrius, see S. Jerome to Demetr. Ben. ed.

Matt. x. 22. i

3 James i. 17.

1 1 Tim. v. 6.

5 Intentionc.

ON THE GOOD OF WIDOWHOOD.

For, in the case of what is loved,
be loved.
either there is no labor, or the labor also is
loved. And consider how it should be matter
for shame and grief, if there be pleasure in
labor, to take a wild beast, to fill cask and
1 to cast a ball, and there be no pleasure
purse,
in labors to win God !

they

think.

27. Indeed in all spiritual delights, which
unmarried women enjoy, their holy conversation ought also to be with caution; lest haply,
though their life be not evil through naughtiness, their report be evil through negligence.
Nor are they to be listened to, whether they
be holy men or women, when (upon occasion of their neglect in some matter being
blamed, through which it comes to pass that
they fall into evil suspicion, from which they
know that their life is far removed) they say
that it is enough for them their conscience
before God, despising what men think of
2 but also cruelly;
them, not only imprudently
when they slay the souls of others; whether
of such as blaspheme the way of God, who
following their suspicion are displeased at
what is the chaste life of the Saints, as though
it were shameful, or of such also as make excuse, and imitate, not what they see, but
Wherefore whosoever
what
guards his life from charges of shameful and
evil deeds, does good to himself; but whosoever guards his character too, is merciful also
For unto ourselves our own
towards others.
life is necessary, unto others our character;
and certainly even what we mercifully minister unto others, for their health, abounds also
Whence not in vain the
to our own profit.
" We provide good things," saith he,
Apostle,
" 3
' ' not only before God, but also before men ;
Please ye all men through all
also he saith,
things; even as I also please all men through
all things, not seeking what is of profit unto
myself, but what unto many, that they may
be saved.'' 4
Also in a certain exhortation he
" For the rest, brethren, whatsoever
says,
things are true, whatsoever things are holy,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things are most dear,
whatsoever things are of good report; if any
virtue, if any praise, these things think on,
which ye have both learned, and received,
and heard, and seen in me." s You see how
among many things, unto which by exhortation
he admonished them, he neglected not to set,
"
" and
in two words included all things, where he
For
saith, "if any virtue, if any praise."
unto virtue pertain the good things of which

whatsoever things are of good report;

"

"

"

7 and again,

" 6 and in another place,

He made mention above; but good report
unto praise.
I think that the Apostle took
not the praise of men for any great thing,
" But to me it is the
saying in another place,
least thing, that I be judged of you, or of day
If I were
of man;
pleasing men, I should not be a servant of
" For our glory is this,
Christ;
the testimony of our conscience." 8
But of
these two, that is, of a good life, and a good
report, or as is said more shortly, of virtue and
praise, the one for his own sake he most wisely
kept, the other for the sake of others he most
as
mercifully provided.
human caution, how great soever, cannot on
every side avoid most malevolent suspicions,
when for our good report we shall have done
whatever we rightly can, if any, either by falsely
pretending evil things of us, or from believing
evil of us, endeavor to stain our fair fame, let
there be present the solace of conscience, and
clearly also the joy, in that our reward is great
in Heaven, even when men say many evil
9 and we yet live godly and
things of us,
For that reward is as the pay
righteously.
of such as serve as soldiers, through the arms
of righteousness, not only on the right hand,
but on the left also; that is to say, through
glory and mean estate, through ill report and
good report.

But, forasmuch

28. Go on therefore in your course, and
run with perseverance, in order that ye may
obtain; and by pattern of life, and discourse
of exhortation, carry away with you into this
same your course, whomsoever ye shall have
had power.
Let there not bend you from this
earnest purpose, whereby ye excite many to
follow, the complaint of vain persons, who
say, How shall the human race subsist, if all
As though it
shall have been continent ?
were for any other reason that this world is
delayed, save that the predestined number of
the Saints be fulfilled, and were this the sooner
fulfilled, assuredly the end of the world would
Nor let it stay you from your
not be put off.
earnest purpose of persuading others to the
same good ye have, if
it be said to you,
Whereas marriage also is good, how shall
there be all goods in the Body of Christ, both
the greater, forsooth, and the lesser, if all
through praise and love of continence imitate ?
In the first place, because with the endeavor
that all be continent, there will still be but
few, for "not all receive this word."
But
is written, "Whoso can reforasmuch as it
" " then do they receive
ceive, let him receive;
who can, when silence is not kept even toward
those who cannot.
Next, neither ought we

1 Cupa et sacculus.
2 al. "impudenter"
3 2 Cor. viii. 21. [See R.V.]

" with lack of modesty.'
4 1 Cor. x. 33.

5 Phil. iv. 8, 9.

6 i Cor. iv. 3.
9 Matt. v. 11, 12.

7 Gal. i. 10.
'" 2 Cor. vi. 7,

8 2 Cor. i. 12.
11 Matt. xix. 11, 12.

to fear lest haply all receive it, and some one of
lesser goods, that is, married life, be wanting
For if all shall have
in the body of Christ.
heard, and all shall have received, we ought
to understand that this very thing was predestinated, that married goods already suffice
in the number of those members which so
many have passed out of this life. For neither
now, if all shall have been continent, will they
give the honor of the continent to those who
have already borne into the garners of the
Lord the fruit thirty-fold, if that be understood of married good.
Therefore all these
goods will have there their place, although
from this time no woman wish to be married,
no man wish to marry a wife.
Therefore
without anxiety urge on whom ye can, to become what ye are; and pray with watchfulness
and fervor, that by the help of the Right
Hand of the Most High, and by the abundance of the most merciful grace of the Lord,
ye may both persevere in that which ye are,
and may make advances unto that which ye
shall be.

29. Next I entreat you, by Him, from
Whom ye have both received this gift, and

hope for the rewards of this gift, that ye be
mindful to set me also in your prayers with
all your household Church.
Forsooth it hath
come to pass in most proper order, that I
should write unto your Mother now aged a
letter 1 concerning prayer; unto her, forsooth,
it chiefly pertains by praying to contend on
your behalf, who is less full of care for herself than for you; and that for you rather
than for her I should compose this little work
concerning widowed continence; because unto
you it remaineth to overcome, what her age
But the holy virgin
hath already overcome.
your child, if she desire aught concerning
her profession from our labors, she hath a
Conlarge book on Holy Virginity to read.
cerning the reading of which I had also admonished you, forasmuch as it contains many
things necessary unto either chastity, that is,
virginal and widowed, which things on this
account I have here partly touched on lightly,
partly altogether passed over, because I there
discussed them more fully.

May you persevere in the grace of Christ.

1 Ep. 150, ad Probam. Vol. I. p. 503.

ST. AUGUSTIN:

ON LYING.

[DE MENDACIO.]

TRANSLATED BY

REV. H. BROWNE, M.A.,

OF CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, LATE PRINCIPAL OF THE DIOCESAN
COLLEGE, CHICHESTER.

ON LYING

[DE MENDACIO.]

This book appears from its place in the Retractations to have been written about A. D.
395, as it is the last work named in the first book, which contains those which he wrote beSome editions represent it as addressed to Consentius, but not the
fore he was Bishop.
The latter are probably right, as his other work on the subject was written in answer
mss.
to the inquiries of Consentius on the case of the Priscillianists many years later.
Bened. Ed.

Retractations, Book I. last Chapter.

" I have also written a Book on Lying, which though it takes some pains to understand,
contains much that is useful for the exercise of the mind, and more that is profitable to morThis also I was minded to remove from
als, in inculcating the love of speaking the truth.
my worksf because it seemed to me obscure, and intricate, and altogether troublesome ; for
which reason I had not sent it abroad. And when I had afterwards written another book,
under this title, Against Lying, much more had I determined and ordered that the former should cease to exist ; which however was not done.
Therefore in this retractation of
my works, as I have found this still in being, I have ordered that it should remain ; chiefly
because therein are to be found some necessary things which in the other are not. Why the
other has for its title, Against Lying, but this, Of Lying, the reason is this, that throughout
the one is an open assault upon lying, whereas great part of this is taken up with the discussion of the question for and against.
This
book begins thus :

Both, however, are directed to the same object.

Magna qiuestio est de Mendacio."

"

i. There is a great question about Lying,
which often arises in the midst of our every
day business, and gives us much trouble, that
we may not either rashly call that a lie which
is sometimes
is not such, or decide that it
right to tell a lie, that is, a kind of honest,
This question we
well-meant, charitable lie.
will painfully discuss by seeking with them
that seek: whether to any good purpose, we
need not take upon ourselves to affirm, for
the attentive reader will sufficiently gather

from the course of the discussion.
It is,
indeed, very full of dark corners, and hath
many cavern-like windings, whereby it
oft
eludes the eagerness of the seeker; so that
at one moment what was found seems to slip
out of one's hands, and anon comes to light
again, and then is once more lost to sight.
At last, however, the chase will* bear down
more surely, and will overtake our sentence.
Wherein if there is any error, yet as Truth is
that which setteth free from all error, and

Falsehood that which entangleth in all error,
one never errs more safely, methinks, than
when one errs by too much loving the truth,
and too much rejecting of falsehood.
For
they who find great fault say it is too much,
whereas peradventure Truth would say after
But whoso read est,
all, it is not yet enough.
thou wilt do well to find no fault until thou
have read the whole; so wilt thou have less
Eloquence thou must not look
fault to find.
for: we have been intent upon things, and
upon dispatch in putting out of hand a matter
which nearly concerns our every day life, and
therefore have had small pains, or almost
none, to bestow upon words.

2. Setting aside, therefore, jokes, which
have never been accounted lies, seeing they
bear with them in the tone of voice, and in the
very mood of the joker a most evident indication that he means no deceit, although the
thing he utters be not true: touching which
kind of discourse, whether it be meet to be
used by perfect minds, is another question
which we have not at this time taken in hand
to clear; but setting jokes apart, the first
point to be attended to, is, that a person
should not be thought to lie, who lieth not.

3. For which purpose we must see what a
For not every one who says a false
lie is.
thing lies, if he believes or opines that to be
true which he says. Now between believing
and opining there is this difference, that
sometimes he who believes feels that he does
not know that which he believes, (although
he may know himself to be ignorant of a
thing, and yet have no doubt at all concerning it, if he most firmly believes it:) whereas
he who opines, thinks he knows that which he
Now whoever utters that
does not know.
which he holds in his mind either as belief or
as opinion, even though it be false, he lies
For this he owes to the faith of his utternot.
ance, that he thereby produce that which he
holds in his mind, and has in that way in
Not that he is without
which he produces it.
fault, although he lie not, if either he believes
what he ought not to believe, or thinks he
knows what he knows not, even though it
should be true: for he accounts an unknown
Wherefore, that man
thing for a known.
lies, who has one thing in his mind and utters
another in words, or by signs of whatever
Whence also the heart of him who
kind.
lies is said to be double; that is, there is a
double thought: the one, of that thing which
he either knows or thinks to be true and
does not produce; the other, of that thing
which he produces instead thereof, knowing
Whence it comes
or thinking it to be false.
to pass, that he may say a false thing and

yet not lie, if he thinks it to be so as he says
although it be not so; and, that he may say
a true thing, and yet lie, if he thinks it to be
false and utters it for true, although in reality
For from the sense
it be so as he utters it.
of his own mind, not from the verity or falsity of the things themselves, is he to be
Therefore he
judged to lie or not to lie.
who utters a false thing for a true, which
however he opines to be true, may be called
erring and rash: but he is not rightly said to
lie; because he has not a double heart when
he utters it, neither does he wish to deceive,
But the fault of him who
but is deceived.
lies, is, the desire of deceiving in the uttering
of his mind; whether he do deceive, in that
he is believed when uttering the false thing;
or whether he do not deceive, either in that
he is not believed, or in that he utters a true
thing with will to deceive, which he does not
think to be true: wherein being believed, he
does not deceive though it was his will to deceive: except that he deceives in so far as he
is thought to know or think as he utters.

4. But it may be a very nice question
whether in the absence of- all will to deceive,
lying is altogether absent.
Thus, put the
case that a person shall speak a false thing,
which he esteems to be false, on the ground
that he thinks he is not believed, to the intent, that in that way falsifying his faith he
may deter the person to whom he speaks,
which person he perceives does not choose to
For here is a person who tells
believe him.
a lie with studied purpose of not deceiving,
if to tell a lie is to utter any thing
#otherwise
than you know or think it to be.
But if it
be no lie, unless when something is uttered
with wish to deceive, that person lies not,
who says a false thing, knowing or thinking
it to be false, but says it on purpose that the
person to whom he speaks by not believing
him may not be deceived, because the speaker
either knows or thinks the other will not believe him. Whence if it appear to be possible that a person should say a false thing on
purpose that he to whom it is said may not
be deceived, on the other hand there is this
opposite case, the case of a person saying
the truth on purpose that he may deceive.
For if a man determines to say a true thing
because he perceives he is not believed, that
man speaks truth on purpose that he may
for he knows or thinks that what
deceive:
is said may be accounted false, just because
Wherefore in saying a
it is spoken by him.
true thing on purpose that it may be thought
false, he says a true thing on purpose to deSo that it may be inquired, which
ceive.
rather lies: he who says a false thing that he

ON LYING.

a

thing

not lie

to be false which- he

other knowing or thinking that

may not deceive, or he who says a true thing
that he may deceive ? the one knowing or
false thing, and
thinking that he says
he
the
For we have already
says a true thing?
said that the person who does not know
the
utters,
if he thinks it to be true;
does
and that that person rather lies who utters
even a true thing when he thinks it false:
because it is by the sense of their mind that
they are to be judged.
Concerning these
persons therefore, whom we have set forth,
The one, who
there is no small question.
knows or thinks he says a false thing, and
says it on purpose that he may not deceive:
as, if he knows a certain road to be beset by
robbers, and fearing lest some person for
whose safety he is anxious should go by that
road, which person he knows does not trust
him, should tell him that that road has no
robbers, on purpose that he may not go by
it, as he will think there are robbers there
precisely because the other has told him
there are none, and he is resolved not to beThe other,
lieve him, accounting him a liar.
who knowing or thinking that to be true
which he says, says it on purpose that he
may deceive: for instance, if he tells a person who does not believe him, that there are
robbers in that road where he really knows
them to be, that he to whom he tells it may
the rather go by that road and so fall among
robbers, because he thinks that to be false
Which then of
which the other told him.
these lies ? the one who has chosen to say a
false thing that he may not deceive ? or the
other who has chosen to say a true thing that
he may deceive ? that one, who in saying
a false thing aimed that he to whom he
spake should follow the truth? or this one,
who in saying a true thing aimed that he to
whom he spake should follow a falsehood ?
Or haply have both lied ? the one, because
he wished to say a false thing: the other,
Or rather,
because he wished to deceive ?
not the one, because he
has neither lied ?
had the will not to deceive: not the other,
because he had the will to speak the truth?
For the question is not now which of them
sinned, but which of them lied: as indeed it
is presently seen that the latter sinned, because by speaking a truth he brought it
about that a person should fall among robbers, and that the former has not sinned, or
even has done good, because by speaking a
false thing he has been the means of a perBut then these
son's avoiding destruction.
instances may be turned the other way, so
that the one should be supposed to wish some

|

j

j

more grievous suffering to the person whom
he wishes not to be deceived; for there are
many cases of persons who through knowing
certain things to be true, have brought destruction upon themselves, if the things were
such as ought to have continued unknown to
them: and the other may be supposed to wish
some convenience to result to the person
whom he wishes to be deceived; for there
have been instances of persons who would
have destroyed themselves had they known
some evil that had really befallen those who
were dear to them, and through deeming it
false have spared themselves: and so to be
i deceived has been a benefit to them, as to
others it has been a hurt to know the truth.
The question therefore is not with what purj pose of doing a kindness or a hurt, either the
I one said a false thing that he might not deceive, or the other a true thing that he might
deceive: but, setting apart the convenience
or inconvenience of the persons spoken to,
in so far as relates to the very truth and
falsehood, the question is, whether both of
them or neither has lied.
For if a lie is an
utterance with will of uttering a false thing,
that man has rather lied who willed to say a
false thing, and said what he willed, albeit
But
he said it of set purpose not to deceive.
if a lie is any utterance whatever with will to
deceive, then not the former has lied, but
the latter, who even in speaking truth willed
to deceive. And if a lie is an utterance with
will of any falsity, both have lied; because
both the former willed his utterance to be
false, and the latter willed a false thing to
be believed concerning his utterance which
Further, if a lie is an utterance of
was true.
a person wishing to utter a false thing that
he may deceive, neither has lied; because
both the former in saying a false thing had
the will to make a true thing believed, and
the latter to say a true thing in order that he
might make a false thing believed. We shall
be clear then of all rashness and all lying, if,
what we know to be true or right to be believed, we utter when need is, and wish to
make that thing believed which we utter.
If,
however, either thinking that to be true which
is false, or accounting as known that which
is to us unknown, or believing what we ought
not to believe, or uttering it when need is
not, we yet have no other aim than to make
that believed which we utter; we do not stand
clear indeed of the error of temerity, but we
For there is no
do stand clear of all lying.
need to be afraid of any of those definitions,
when the mind has a good conscience, that it
utters that which to be true it either knows,
or opines, or believes, and that it has no wish

to make any thing believed but that which it
utters.

the Angels that

They who think it

5. But whether a lie be at some times useis a much greater and more concerning
ful,
Whether, as above, it be a lie,
question.
when a person has no will to deceive, or even
makes it his business that the person to
whom he says a thing shall not be deceived,
although he did wish the thing itself which
he uttered to be false, but this on purpose
that he might cause a truth to be believed;
whether, again, it be a lie when a person willingly utters even a truth for the purpose of
But none
deceiving; this may be doubted.
doubts that it is a lie when a person willingly
utters a falsehood for the purpose of deceiving: wherefore a false utterance put forth
But
with will to deceive is manifestly a Tie.
whether this alone be a lie, is another quesMeanwhile, taking this kind of lie, in
tion.
which all agree, let us inquire, whether it be
sometimes useful to utter a falsehood with
is, adwill to deceive.
vance testimonies to their opinion, by alleg-
* who, when she had
ing the case of Sarah,
laughed, denied to
she
laughed: of Jacob questioned by his father,
and answering that he was the elder son
Esau: 2 likewise that of the Egyptian midwives, who to save the Hebrew infants from
being slain at their birth, told a lie, and that
with God's approbation and reward: 3 and
many such like instances they pick out, of
lies told by persons whom you would not
dare to blame, and so must own that it may
sometimes be not only not blameworthy, but
even praiseworthy to tell a lie.
They add
also a case with which to urge not only those
who are devoted to the Divine Books, but all
men and common sense, saying, Suppose a
man should take refuge with thee, who by
thy lie might be saved from death, wouldest
thou not tell it?
If a sick -man should ask a
question which it
is not expedient that he
should know, and might be more grievously
afflicted even by thy returning him no answer,
wilt thou venture either to tell the truth to
the destruction of the man's life, or rather
to hold thy peace, than by a virtuous and
merciful lie to be serviceable to his weak
By these and such like arguments
health ?
they think they most plentifully prove, that
if occasion of doing good require, we may
sometimes tell a lie.

6. On the other hand, those who say that
we must never lie, plead much more strongly,
using first the Divine authority, because in
" Thou shalt
the very Decalogue it is written

1 Gen. xviii. is

2 Gen. xxvii. 19.

3 Exod. i. 19, 20.

not bear false witness;'' 4 under which genfor whoso
eral term it comprises all lying:
utters any thing bears witness to his own
But lest any should contend that
mind.
is to be called false witness,
not every lie
what will he say to that which is written,
" The mouth that lieth slayeth the soul:
" 5 and
lest any should suppose that this may be understood with the exception of some liars, let
" Thou wilt destroy
him read in another place,
6 Whence with His
all that speak leasing."
own lips the Lord saith, "Let your communication be yea, yea; nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil." 7
Hence the Apostle also in giving precept for
the putting off of the old man, under which
name all sins are understood, says straightway, "Wherefore putting away lying, speak
ye truth." 8

7. Neither do they confess that they are
awed by those citations from the Old Testament which are alleged as examples of lies:
for there, every incident may possibly be
taken figuratively, although it really did take
place: and when a thing is either done or said
figuratively, it is no lie.
For every utterance
But
is to be referred to that which it utters.
when any thing is either done or said figuratively, it utters that which it signifies to those
for whose understanding it was put forth.
Whence we may believe in regard of those
persons of the prophetical times who are set
forth as authoritative, that in all that is written
of them they acted and spoke prophetically;
and no less, that there is a prophetical meaning in all those incidents of their lives which
by the same prophetic Spirit have been accounted worthy of being recorded in writing.
As to the midvvives, indeed, they cannot say
that these women did through the prophetic
Spirit, with purpose of signifying a future
truth, tell Pharaoh one thing instead of another, (albeit that Spirit did signify something, without their knowing what was doing
but, they say that these
in their persons:)
women were according to their degree apFor if a perproved and rewarded of God.
son who is used to tell lies for harm's sake
comes to tell them for the sake of doing good,
that person has made great progress.
But it
is one thing that is set forth as laudable in
itself, another that in comparison with a worse
It is one sort of gratulation that
is preferred.
we express when a man is in sound health,
another when a sick man is getting better.
In the Scripture, even Sodom is said to be

4 Exod. xx. 16.
5 Wisdom i. 11. Os quod mentitur. "The mouth that belieth,'

E. V., <rTO/xa KaTa^euSdfiCi'oi'.

6 Psalm v. 6.

7 Matt. v. 37. [See R.V.]

8 Eph. iv. 25.

ON LYING.

justified in comparison with the crimes of the
people Israel. And to this rule they apply
all the instances of lying which are produced
from the Old Books, and are found not reprehended, or cannot be reprehended:
either
they are approved on the score of a progress
towards improvement and hope of better
things, or in virtue of some hidden signification they are not altogether lies.

"

8. For this reason, from the books of the
New Testament, except the figurative presignifications used by our Lord, if thou consider the life and manners of the Saints, their
actions and sayings, nothing of the kind can
be produced which should provoke to imitaFor the simulation of Peter
tion of lying.
and Barnabas is not only recorded, but also
reproved and corrected. 1
For it was not, as
2 out of the same simulation
some suppose,
that even Paul the Apostle either circumcised
Timothy, or himself celebrated certain ceremonies 3 according to the Jewish rite; but he
did so, out of that liberty of his mind whereby
he preached that neither are the Gentiles the
better for circumcision, nor the Jews the
Wherefore he judged that neither the
worse.
former should be tied to the custom of the
Jews, nor the Jews deterred from the custom
of their fathers. Whence are those words of
Is any man called being circumcised?
his:
let him not become uncircumcised.
Is any
let him not be circalled in uncircumcision ?
Circumcision is nothing, and uncumcised.
circumcision is nothing, but the keeping of
Let every man
the commandments of God.
abide in the same calling wherein he was
called." 4 How can a man become uncircumcised after circumcision? but let him not do
so, saith he: let him not so live as if he had
become uncircumcised, that is, as if he had
covered again with flesh the part that was
bared, and ceased to be a Jew; as in another
Thy circumcision is become
place he saith,
uncircumcision." s And this the Apostle said,
not as though he would compel either those
to remain in uncircumcision, or the Jews in
the custom of their fathers: but that neither
these nor those should be forced to the other
custom; and, each should have power of
abiding in his own custom, not necessity of
For neither if the Jew should wish,
so doing.
where it would disturb no man, to recede
from Jewish observances, would he be prohibited by the Apostle, since the object of his
counselling to abide therein was that Jews
might not by being troubled about superfluous
things be hindered from coming to those

"

1 Gal. ii. 12-21.
2 S. Jerome Ep. inter Augustinianas, 75, n. 9-1 1.
3 Sacramento..

4 1 Cor. vii. 18-20.

5 Rom. ii. 25.

necessary to

things which are
salvation.
Neither would it be prohibited by him, if any
of the Gentiles should wish to be circumcised
for the purpose of showing that he does not
detest the same as noxious, but holds it in6 the usefulness of which
differently, as a seal,
had already passed away with time; for it did
not follow that, if there were now no salvation to be had from it, there was destruction
to be dreaded therefrom. And for this reason, Timothy, having been called in uncircumcision, yet because his mother was a
Jewess and he was bound, in order to gain
his kindred, to show them that he had not
learnt in the Christian discipline to abominate
the sacraments of the old Law, was circumcised by the Apostle; 7 that in this way
they might prove to the Jews, that the reason
why the Gentiles do not receive them, is not
that they are evil and were perniciously observed by the Fathers, but because they are
no longer necessary to salvation after the
advent of that so great Sacrament, which
through so long times the whole of that ancient Scripture in its prophetical prefiguraFor he
tions did travail in birth withal.
would circumcise Titus also, when the Jews
8 but that false brethren, privily
urged this,
brought in, wished it to be done to the intent
they might have it to disseminate concerning
Paul himself as a token that he had given
place to the truth of their preaching, who said
that the hope of Gospel salvation is in circumcision of the flesh and observances of that
kind, and that without these Christ profiteth
no man: whereas on the contrary Christ would
nothing profit them, who should be circumcised because they thought that in it was salvation; whence that saying,
Behold, I Paul
say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing. 9 Out of this liberty,
therefore, did Paul keep the observances of
his fathers, but with this one precaution and
express declaration, that people should not
suppose that without these was no Christian
Peter, however, by his making as
salvation.
though salvation consisted in Judaism, was
compelling the Gentiles to judaize; as is shown
Why comby Paul's words, where he says,
pellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the
For they would be under no comJews ?
pulsion unless they saw that he observed them
in such manner as if beside them could be no
Peter's simulation therefore is
salvation.
not to be compared to Paul's liberty. And
while we ought to love Peter for that he willingly received correction, we must not bolster
up lying even by the authority of Paul, who

" IO

"

"

6 Signaculum.
9 Gal. v. 2.

7 Acts xvi. 1-3.
10 Gal. ii. 14.

8 Gal. ii. 3, 4.

both recalled Peter to the right path in the
presence of them all, lest the Gentiles through
him should be compelled to judaize; and bare
witness to his own preaching, that whereas he
w7as accounted hostile to the traditions of the
fathers in that he would not impose them on
the Gentiles, he did not despise to celebrate
them himself according to the custom of his
fathers, and therein sufficiently showed that
this has remained in them at the coming of
Christ; that neither to the Jews they are pernicious, nor to the Gentiles necessary, nor
henceforth to any of mankind means of salvation. 1

"

9. But if no authority for lying can be
alleged, neither from the ancient Books, be
it because that is not a lie which is received
to have been done or said in a figurative sense,
or be it because good men are not challenged
to imitate that which in bad men, beginning
to amend, is praised in comparison with the
worse; nor yet from the books of the New
Testament, because Peter's correction rather
than his simulation, even as his tears rather
than his denial, is what we must imitate:
then, as to those examples which are fetched
from common life, they assert much more
confidently that there is no trust to be given
For first they teach, that a lie is
to these.
iniquity, by many proofs of holy writ, especially by that which is written,
Thou, Lord,
hatest all workers of iniquity, thou shalt de2 For either
stroy them that speak leasing."
as the Scripture is wont, in the following
clause it expounds the former; so that, as
iniquity is a term of a wider meaning, leasing
is named as the particular sort of iniquity intended: or if they think there is any difference between the two, leasing is by so much
"
worse than iniquity as
For it may be
heavier than
thou hatest."
that God hates a person to that degree more
mildly, as not to destroy him, but whom He
destroys He hates the more exceedingly, by
how much He punisheth more severely. Now
He hateth all who work iniquity: but all who
speak leasing He also destroyeth.
Which
thing being fixed, who of them which assert
this will be moved by those examples, when
it is said, suppose a man should seek shelter
with thee who by thy lie may be saved from
For that death which men are fooldeath ?
ishly afraid of, who are not afraid to sin, kills
not the soul but the body, as the Lord teacheth in the Gospel; whence He charges us not
to fear that death: 3 but the mouth which lies
For in these
kills not the body but the soul.
" The mouth
words it is most plainly written,

thou wilt destroy

"

is

"

that lieth slayeth the soul." 4 How then can
it be said without the greatest perverseness,
that to the end one man may have life of the
body, it is another man's duty to incur death
of the soul ? The love of our neighbor hath
its bounds in each man's love of himself.
" Thou shall love," saith He, "thy neighbor
5 How can a man be said to love
as thyself."
as himself that man, for whom that he may
secure a temporal life, himself loseth life
Since if for his temporal life he
eternal ?
lose but his own temporal life, that is not to
love as himself, but more than himself: which
exceeds the rule of sound doctrine. Much
less then is he by telling a lie to lose his own
His own
eternal for another's terhporal life.
temporal life, of course, for his neighbor's
eternal life a Christian man will not hesitate
for this example has gone before,
to lose:
that the Lord died for us. To this point Pie
also saith, "This is my commandment, that
ye love one another as I have loved you.
Greater love hath no man than this, that a
man lay down his life for his friends/' 6
For
none is so foolish as to say that the Lord did
other than consult for the eternal salvation of
men, whether in doing what He hath charged
us to do, or in charging us to do what Himself hath done.
Since then by lying eternal
life is lost, never for any man's temporal life
must a lie be told. And as to those who take
it ill and are indignant that one should refuse
to tell a lie, and thereby slay his own soul in
order that another may grow old in the flesh;
what if by our committing theft, what if by
committing adultery, a person might be delivered from death: are we therefore to steal,
to commit whoredom ? They cannot prevail
with themselves in a case of this kind: namely,
if a person should bring a halter and demand
that one should yield to his carnal lust, declaring that he will hang himself unless his
request be granted: they cannot prevail with
themselves to comply for the sake of, as they
is absurd and
say, saving a life.
wicked, why should a man corrupt his own
soul with a lie in order that another may live
in the body, when, if he were to give his body
to be corrupted with such an object, he would
in the judgment of all men be held guilty of
nefarious
only
point to be attended to in this question is,
And since this is
whether a lie be iniquity.
asserted by the texts above rehearsed, we
must see that to ask, whether a man ought to
tell a lie for the safety of another, is just the
same as asking whether for another's safety a

Therefore the

turpitude ?

If this

1 Salutares.

Ps. v. 5, 6. [See R.V.]

3 Matt. x. 28.

4 Wisd. i. 11; "belieth," E.V.
6 John xv. 12, 13.

5 Levit. xix. 18; Matt. xxii. 39.

ON LYING.

man ought to commit iniquity.
But if the
salvation of the soul rejects this, seeing it
cannot be secured but by equity, and would
have us prefer it not only to another's, but
even to our own temporal safety: what remains, say they, that should make us doubt
that a lie ought not to be told under any circumstances whatsoever ? For it cannot be said
that there is aught among temporal goods
greater or dearer than the safety and life of
Wherefore if not even that is to
the body.
be preferred to truth, what can be put in our
way for the sake of which they who think it
is sometimes right to lie, can urge that a lie
ought to be told ?

incorruptness

10. As concerning purity of body; here
indeed a very honorable regard seems to
come in the way, and to demand a lie in its
to wit, that if the assault of the
behalf;
ravisher may be escaped by means of a lie, it
is indubitably right to tell it: but to this it
may easily be answered, that there is no
purity of body except as it depends on integrity of mind; this being broken, the other
must needs fall, even though it seem intact;
and for this reason it is not to be reckoned
among temporal things, as a thing that might
be taken away from people against their will.
By no means therefore must the mind corrupt itself by a lie for the sake of its body,
which it knows remaineth incorrupt if from
the mind itself
depart not.
For that which by violence, with no lust foregoing, the body suffereth, is rather to be
Or if
called deforcement than corruption.
all deforcement is corruption, then not every
corruption hath turpitude, but only that which
lust hath procured, or to which lust hath consented. Now by how much the mind is more
excellent than the body, so much the more
heinous is the wickedness if that be corThere, then, purity can be prerupted.
served, because there none but a voluntary
For assuredly if
corruption can have place.
the ravisher assault the body, and there is no
escaping him either by contrary force, or by
any contrivance or lie, we must needs allow
that purity cannot be violated by another's
Wherefore, since no man doubts that
lust.
the mind is better than the body, to integrity
of body we ought to prefer integrity of mind,
which can be preserved for ever. Now who
will say that the mind of him who tells a lie
hath its
rightly defined, An appetite of the mind by
which to eternal goods any temporal goods
Therefore no man
whatever are preferred.
can prove that it is at any time right to tell a
lie, unless he be able to show that any eternal
good can be obtained by a lie.
But since

Indeed lust

integrity ?

itself

is

each man departs from eternity just in so far
as he departs from truth, it is most absurd to
say, that by departing therefrom it is possible
for any man to attain to any good.
Else if
there be any eternal good which truth compriseth not, it will not be a true good, therefore neither will it be good, because it will be
But as the mind to the body, so must
false.
also truth be preferred to the mind itself, so
that the mind should desire it not only more
than the body, but even more than its own
So will the mind be more entire and
self.
chaste, when it shall enjoy the immutability
of truth rather than its own mutability. Now
being so righteous a man that he was
if Lot,
meet 2 to entertain even Angels, offered his
daughters to the lust of the Sodomites, to the
intent, that the bodies of women rather than
of men might be corrupted by them; how
much more diligently and constantly ought
the mind's chasteness in the truth to be preserved, seeing it is more truly preferable to
its body, than the body of a man to the body
of a woman ?

lie.

11. But if any man supposes that the reason why it is right for a person to tell a lie
for another is, that he may live the while, or
not be offended in those things which he
much loveth, to the end he may attain unto
eternal truth by being taught: that man doth
not understand, in the first place, that there
is no flagitious thing which he may not upon
the same ground be compelled to commit, as
has been above demonstrated; and in the next
place, that the authority of the doctrine itself
is cut off and altogether undone if those whom
we essay to bring thereunto, are by our lie
made to think that it is somewhiles right to
For seeing the doctrine which bringeth
salvation consisteth partly in things to be believed, partly in things to be understood; and
there is no attaining unto those things which
are to be understood, unless first those things
are believed, which are to be believed ; how can
there be any believing one who thinks it is
sometimes right to lie, lest haply he lie at the
moment when he teacheth us to believe ?
For how can it be known whether he have at
that moment some cause, as he thinks, for a
lie, deeming that by a false story
well-meant 3
a man may be frightened and kept from lust,
and in this way account that by telling a lie
he is doing good even in spiritual things?
Which kind of lie once admitted and approved, all discipline of' faith is subverted altogether; and this being subverted, neither
is there any attaining to understanding, for
the receiving of which that discipline nurtur-

1 Gen. xix. 8.

- " Ut mereretur.'1

3 Officiosi.

THE WORKS OF ST. AUCxUSTIN.

eth the babes: and so all the doctrine of truth
is done away, giving place to most licentious
falsehood, if a lie, even well-meant, may from
any quarter have place opened for it to enter
For either whoso tells a lie prefers temin.
poral advantages, his own or another's, to
truth; than which what can be more perverse ?
or when by aid of a lie he wishes to make a
person fit for gaining the truth, he bars the
approach to truth, for by wishing when he lies
it comes to pass that
to be accommodating,
when he speaks the truth, he cannot be deWherefore, either we must
pended upon.
not believe good men, or we must believe
those whom we think obliged sometimes to
tell a lie, or we must not believe that good men
sometimes tell lies: of these three the first is
pernicious, the second foolish;
it remains
therefore that good men should never tell lies.
12. Thus has the question been on both
sides considered and treated; and still it is
not easy to pass sentence: but we must further
lend diligent hearing to those who say, that
no deed is so evil, but that in avoidance of a
worse it ought to be done; moreover that the
deeds of men include not only what they do,
but whatever they consent to be done unto
them.
Wherefore, if cause have arisen that
a Christian man should choose to burn incense to idols, that he might not consent to
bodily
persecutor
threatened him withal, unless he should do
so, they think they have a right to ask why
he should not also tell a lie to escape so foul
For the consent itself to endure
a disgrace.
violation of the person rather than to burn incense to idols, this, they say, is not a passive
thing, but a deed; which rather than do, he
How much more
chose to burn incense.
readily then would he have chosen a lie, if
by a lie he might ward off from a holy body
so shocking a disgrace?

defilement

which

the

: '

13. In which proposition these points may
well deserve to be questioned: whether such
consent is to be accounted, as a deed:
or
whether that is to be called consent which
hath not approbation: or whether it be approbation, when it
It is expedient
is said,
this rather than do that;" and
to suffer
whether the person spoken of did right to
burn incense rather than suffer violation of
his body; and whether it would be right
rather to tell a lie, if that was the alternative
proposed, than to burn incense?
But if
such consent is to be accounted as a deed,
then are they murderers who have chosen
rather to be put to death than bear false witness, yea, what is worse, they are murderers

For why, at this rate, should
of themselves.
it not be said that they have slain themselves,
because they chose that this should be done
to them that they might not do what they
were urged to do?
Or, if it be accounted a
worse thing to slay another than himself,
what if these terms were offered to a Martyr,
that, upon his refusing to bear false witness
of Christ and to sacrifice to demons, then,
before his eyes, not some other man, but his
own father should be put to death; his father
entreating him that he would not by his persevering permit that to be done ?
Is it not
manifest, that, upon his remaining steadfast
his purpose of most faithful testimony,
in
murderers who
they alone would be the
should slay his father, and not he a parricide
into the bargain ? As therefore, in this case,
the man would be no party to this so heinous
deed, for choosing, rather than violate his
faith by false testimony, that his own father
should be put to death by others, (yea, though
that father were a sacrilegious person whose
soul would be snatched away to punishment;)
so the like consent, in the former case, would
not make him a party to that so foul disgrace,
if he refused to do evil himself, let others do
what they might in consequence of his not
For what do such persecutors say,
doing it.
but, "Do evil that we may not?"
If the
case were so, that our doing evil would make
them not to have done it, even then it would
not be our duty by doing wickedness ourselves to vote them harmless; but as in fact
they are already doing it when they say noth2 why are they to have us to
ing of the kind,
keep them company in wickedness rather
than be vile and noisome by themselves ?
For that is not to be called consent; seeing
that we do not approve what they do, always
wishing that they would not, and, as much as
in us lies, hindering them that they should
not do it, and, when it is done, not only not
committing it with them, but with all possible
detestation condemning the same.

14. "How," sayest thou, "is it not his
doing as well as theirs, when, they would not
do this, if he would do that?" Why, at this
rate we go housebreaking with house-breakers,
because if we did not shut the door, they
would not break it open: and we go and murder with highwaymen, if it chance we know
that they are going to do it, because if we
killed them out of hand, they would not kill
Or, if a person confess to us that he
others.
is going to commit a parricide, we commit it
along with him, if, being able, we do not slay
him before he can do the deed when we can-

* Aptus.

- Al. when they say such things.

ON LYING.

"

"

if he should answer,

not in some other way prevent or thwart him.
For it may be said, word for word as before,
" Thou hast done it as well as he; for he had
With
not done this, hadst thou done that."
my good will, neither ill should be done; but
only the one was in my power, and I could
take care that this should not be done; the
other rested with another, and when by my
good advice I could not quench the purpose,
I was not bound by my evil deed to thwart
It is therefore no approving of a
the doing.
sinner, that one refuses to sin for him; and
neither the one nor the other is liked by him
who would that neither were done; but in
that which pertains to him, he hath the power
to do it or not, and with that he perpetrateth
it not; in that which pertains to another, he
hath only the will to wish it or not, and with
And therefore, on
that he condemneth.
their offering those terms, and saying,
If
thou burn not incense, this shalt thou suf-
" For me, I choose
fer;
neither, I detest both, I consent unto you in
none of these things:" in uttering these and
the like words, which certainly, because they
would be true, would afford them no consent,
no approbation of his, let him suffer at their
hands what he might, to his account would
be set down the receipt of wrongs, to theirs
the commission of sins.
"Ought he then/'
to suffer his person to be
it may be asked,
violated rather than burn incense?"
If the
question be what he ought, he ought to do
For should I say that he ought to
neither.
do any of these things, I shall approve this
But if
or that, whereas I reprobate both.
the question be, which of these he ought in
preference to avoid, not being able to avoid
both but able to avoid one or other: I will
" His own sin, rather than another's;
answer,
and rather a lighter sin being his own, than
a heavier being another's."
For, reserving
for more diligent inquiry, and
the
granting in the mean while that violation of
the person is worse than burning incense, yet
the latter is his own, the former another's
deed, although he had it done to him; now,
For though
whose the deed, his the sin.
murder is a greater sin than stealing, yet it
is worse to steal than
suffer murder.
it were proposed to any man
Therefore, if
that, if he would not steal he should be killed,
that is, murder should be committed upon
him; being he could not avoid both, he would
prefer to avoid that which would be his own
sin, rather than that which would be another's.
Nor would the latter become his act for being committed upon him, and because he
might avoid it if he would commit a sin of
his own.

point

to

"

15. The whole stress, then, of this question
comes to this; whether it be true universally
that no sin of another, committed upon thee,
is to be imputed to thee, if, being able to
avoid it by a lighter sin of thine own, thou
do it not; or whether there be an exception
of all bodily defilement. No man says that
a person is defiled by being murdered, or cast
into prison, or bound in chains, or scourged,
or afflicted with other tortures and pains, or
proscribed and made to suffer most grievous
losses even to utter nakedness, or stripped of
honors, and subjected to great disgrace by
reproaches of whatsoever kind; whatever of
all these a man may have unjustly suffered,
no man is so senseless as to say that he is
But if he have filth poured
thereby defiled.
all over him, or poured into his mouth, or
crammed into him, or if he be carnally used
like a woman; then almost all men regard
him with a feeling of horror, and they call
One must conclude
him defiled and unclean.
then that the sins of others, be they what
they may, those always excepted which defile
him on whom they are committed, a man
must not seek to avoid by sin of his own,
either for himself or for any other, but rather
he must put up with them, and suffer bravely;
and if by no sins of his own he ought to
avoid them, therefore not by a lie: but those
which by being committed upon a man do
make him unclean, these we are bound to
avoid even by sinning ourselves; and for this
reason those things are not to be called sins,
which are done for the purpose of avoiding
For whatever is done, in
that uncleanness.
consideration that the not doing it were just
cause of blame, that thing is not sin.
Upon
the same principle, neither is that to be called
uncleanness when there is no way of avoiding
it; for even in that extremity he who suffers
it has what he may do aright, namely, paNow no
tiently bear what he cannot avoid.
man while acting aright can be defiled by any
For the unclean in the
corporal contagion.
sight of God is every one who is unrighteous;
clean therefore is every one who is righteous;
if not in the sight of men, yet in the sight of
God, Who judges without error.
Nay, even
in the act of suffering that defilement with
is not by the
power given of avoiding it, it
mere contact that the man is defiled; but by
the sin of refusing to avoid it when he might.
For that would be no sin, whatever might be
Whoever theredone for the avoiding of it.
fore, for the avoiding of it, shall tell a lie,
sinneth not.

16. Or, are some lies, also, to be excepted,
so that it were better to suffer this than to
commit those ?
If so, then not every thing

that is done in order to the avoiding of that
defilement ceases to be sin; seeing there are
some lies to commit which is worse than to
suffer that foul violence.
For, suppose quest
be making after a person that his body may
be deflowered, and that it be possible to
screen him by a lie; who dares to say that
even in such a case a lie ought not be told ?
But, if the lie by which he may be concealed
be one which may hurt the fair fame of another, by bringing upon him a false accusation of that very uncleanness, to suffer which
it should be
the other is sought after; as, if
said to the inquirer, "Go to such an one,"
(naming some chaste man who is a stranger
to vices of this kind,) "and he will procure
for you one whom you will find a more willing subject, for he knows and loves such;"
and thereby the person might be diverted
from him whom he sought:
I know not
whether one man's fair fame ought to be
violated by a lie, in order that another's body
may not be violated by lust to which he is a
stranger. And in general, it is never right
to tell a lie for any man, such as may hurt
another, even if the hurt be slighter than
would be the hurt to him unless such a lie
Because neither must another
were told.
man's bread be taken from him against his
will, though he be in good health, and it is to
feed one who is weak; nor must an innocent
man, against his will, be beaten with rods,
Of course,
that another may not be killed.
if they are willing, let it be done, because
they are not hurt if they be willing that so it
should be: but whether, even with his own
consent, a man's fair fame ought to be hurt
with a false charge of foul lusts, in order that
lust may be averted from another's body, is
And I know not whether
a great question.
it be easy to find in what way it can be just
that a man's fair fame, even with his consent,
should be stained with a false charge of lust,
any more than a man's body should be polluted by the lust itself against his will.

17. But yet if the option were proposed to
the man who chose to burn incense to idols
rather than yield his body to abominable lust,
that, if he wished to avoid that, he should
violate the fame of Christ by some lie; he
would be most mad to do it.
I say more:
that he would be mad, if, to avoid another
man's lust, and not to have that done upon
his person which he would suffer with no lust
of his own, he should falsify Christ's Gospel
with false praises of Christ ; more eschewing
that another man should corrupt his body,
than himself to corrupt the doctrine of sanctification of souls and bodies.
Wherefore,
from the doctrine of religion, and from those

utterances universally, which are uttered on
behalf of the doctrine of religion,
in the
teaching and learning of the same, all lies
Nor can any
must be utterly kept aloof.
cause whatever be found, one should think,
why a lie should be told in matters of this
kind, when in this doctrine it is not right to
tell a lie for the very purpose of bringing a
person to it the more easily.
For, once
break or but slightly diminish the authority
of truth, and all things will remain doubtful:
which unless they be believed true, cannot
be held as certain.
It is lawful then either
to him that discourses, disputes, and preaches
of things eternal, or to him that narrates or
speaks of things temporal pertaining to edification of religion and piety, to conceal at
fitting time whatever seems fit to be concealed: but to tell a lie is never lawful, therefore neither to conceal by telling a lie.

18. This being from the very first and
most firmly established, touching other lies
the question proceeds more securely.
But
by consequence we must also see that all lies
must be kept aloof which hurt any man unjustly: because no man is to have a wrong,
albeit a lighter one is done to him, that another may have a heavier kept from him.
Nor are
those lies to be allowed, which,
though they hurt not another, yet do nobody
any good, and are hurtful to the persons themselves who gratuitously tell them.
Indeed,
these are the persons who are properly to be
For there is a difference between
called liars.
lying and being a liar. A man may tell a
lie unwillingly; but a liar loves to lie, and
inhabits in his mind in the delight of lying.
Next to such are those to be placed who by
a lie wish to please men, not that they may
do wrong or bring reproach upon any man;
for we have already before put away that
kind; but that they may be pleasant in conThese differ from the class in
versation.
which we have placed liars in this respect,
that liars delight in lying, rejoicing in deceit
for its own sake: but these lust to please by
agreeable talk, and yet would rather please
by saying things that were true, but when
they do not easily find true things to say that
to the hearers, they choose
are
rather to tell lies than to hold their tongues.
Yet it is difficult for these sometimes to undertake a story which is the whole of it false;
but most commonly they interweave falsehood with truth, where they are at a loss for
Now these two sorts of
something sweet.
lies do no harm to those who believe them,
because they are not deceived concerning any
matter of religion and truth, or concerning
any profit or advantage of their own.
It

pleasant

ON LYING.

suffices them, to judge the thing possible
which is told, and to have faith in a man of
whom they ought not rashly to think that he
For where is the harm of beis telling a lie.
lieving that such an one's father or grandfather was a good man, when he was not ?
or that he has served with the army even in
Persia, though he never set foot out of Rome ?
But to the persons who tell these lies, they
do much harm: to the former sort, because
they so desert truth as to rejoice in deceit: to
the latter, because they want to please people
better than the truth.

19. These sorts of lies having been without
any hesitation condemned, next follows a
sort, as it were by steps rising to something
better, which is commonly attributed to wellmeaning and good people, when the person
who lies not only does no harm to another,
but even benefits somebody. Now it
is on
this sort of lies that the whole dispute turns,
whether that person does harm to himself,
who benefits another in such sort as to act
Or, if that alone may
contrary to the truth.
be called truth which illustrateth the very
minds of men with an intimate and incommutable light, at least he acts contrary to
some true thing, because although the bodily
senses are deceived, yet he acts contrary to
a true thing who says that a thing is so or not
so, whereof neither his mind nor senses nor
his opinion or belief giveth him any report.
Whether therefore he does not hurt himself
in so profiting another, or in that compensation not hurt himself in which he profiteth
If it be so, it
the other, is a great question.
should follow that he ought to profit himself
But these
by a lie which damages no man.
things hang together, and if you concede that
point, it necessarily draws in its train some
For should
very embarrassing consequences.
it be asked, what harm it does to a person
rolling in superfluous wealth, if from countless thousands of bushels of wheat he lose one
bushel, which bushel may be profitable as
necessary food to the person stealing it;
will follow that theft also may be committed
without blame, and false witness borne withThan which, what can be mentioned
out sin.
more perverse ?
Or truly,
if another had
stolen the bushel, and thou sawest it done,
and wert questioned, wouldest thou tell a lie
with honesty for the poor man, and if thou
do it for thine own poverty wilt thou be
As if it were thy duty to love anblamed ?
other more than thyself.
Both then are disgraceful, and must be avoided.

it

20. But haply some may think that there is
an exception to be added; that there be some
honest lies which not only hurt no man, but

profit some man, excepting those by which
crimes are screened and defended: so that
the reason why the aforesaid lie is disgraceis that, although it hurt no man, and
ful,
profit the poor, it screens a theft; but if it
should in such sort hurt nobody and profit
somebody as not to screen and defend any
sin, it would not be morally wrong.
As, put
the case that some one should in thy sight
hide his money that he might not lose it by
theft or violence, and thereupon being questioned thou shouldest tell a lie; thou wouldest
hurt no man, and wouldest serve him who
had need that his money were hidden, and
wouldest not have covered a sin by telling a
if a man hide his
But, if we
property which he fears to lose.
therefore sin not in telling a lie, for that,
while covering no man's sin, we hurt nobody
and do good to somebody, what are we about
For
as concerning the sin itself of a lie ?
" Thou shalt not steal,"
where it is laid down,
" Thou shalt not bear false
there is also this,
Since then each is severally prowitness." '
hibited, why is false witness culpable if
cover a theft or any other sin, but if without
any screening of sin it be done by itself, then
not culpable, whereas stealing is culpable in
Or is it so
and by itself, and so other sins ?
to do it,
that to hide a sin is not lawful;
lawful ?

is no sin

For it

lie.

it

"

'' 2

21. If this be absurd, what shall we say?
Is it so, that there is no " false witness," but
when one tells a lie either to invent a crime
against some man, or to hide some man's
crime, or in any way to oppress any man in
For a witness seems to be necesjudgment?
sary to the judge for cognizance of the cause.
But if the Scripture named a " witness
only
so far as that goes, the Apostle would not
say, "Yea, and we are found false witnesses
of God; because we have testified of God that
He raised up Christ: whom He raised not
For so he shows that it is false witup.
ness to tell a lie, yea, in faisely praising a
person.

Or peradventure, doth the person who lies
then utter false witness when he either invents
or hides any man's sin, or hurts any man in
For, if a lie spoken against a
whatever way ?
man's temporal life is detestable, how much
more one against eternal life ? as is every lie,
it take place in doctrine of religion. And
if
it is for this reason that the Apostle calls it
false witness, if a man tell a lie about Christ,
yea, one which may seem to pertain to His
praise. Now if
it be a lie that neither inventeth or hideth any man's sin, nor is an-

1 Exodus xx. 15, 16

2 1 Cor. xv. 15.

swered to a question of the judge, and hurteth
no man, and profits some man, are we to saythat it is neither false witness, nor a reprehensible lie ?

"

"

Yea, surely:

Is he to tell a lie ?

22. What then, if a homicide seek refuge
with a Christian, or if he see where the homicide have taken refuge, and be questioned of
this matter by him who seeks, in order to
bring to punishment a man, the slayer of
man ?
For how does he
not hide a sin by lying, when he for whom
he lies has been guilty of a heinous sin? Or
is it because he is not questioned concerning
his sin, but about the place where he is conSo then to lie in order to hide a
cealed ?
person's sin is evil; but to lie in order to hide
the sinner is not evil ?
says
some one: " for a man sins not in avoiding
punishment, but in doing something worthy
of punishment.
Moreover, it pertaineth to
Christian discipline neither to despair of any
man's amendment, nor to bar against any
man the way of repentance." What if thou
be led to the judge, and then questioned concerning the very place where the other is in
Art thou prepared to say, either,
hiding?
" He is not there," when thou knowest him to
or, "I know not, and have not
be there;
seen," what thou knowest and hast seen?
Art thou then prepared to bear false witness,
and to slay thy soul that a manslayer may
not be slain?
Or, up to the presence of the
judge wilt thou lie, but when the judge questions thee, then speak truth that thou be not
So then thou art going to
a false witness ?
slay a man thyself by betraying him.
Surely
the betrayer too is one whom the divine
Or haply is he no beScripture detesteth.
trayer, who in answer to the judge's interrogation gives true information; but would
be a betrayer, if, unasked, he should delate
a man to his destruction?^
Put the case with
respect to a just and innocent man, that thou
know where he is in hiding, and be questioned
by the judge; which man, however, has been
ordered to be taken to execution by a higher
power, so that he who interrogates is charged
with the execution of the law, not the author
Will it be no false witness
of the sentence ?
that thou shalt lie for an innocent man, because the interrogator is not a judge, but
only charged with the execution ? What if
the author of the law interrogate thee, or any
unjust judge, making quest of an innocent
man to bring him to punishment? What wilt
thou do ? wilt thou be false witness, or betrayer ? Or will he be a betrayer, who to a
just judge shall ultroneously delate a lurking
homicide; and he not so, who to an unjust
judge, interrogating him of the hiding-place

of an innocent man whom he seeks to slay,
shall inform against the person who has
thrown himself upon his honor ? Or between
the crime of false witness and that of betrayal,
wilt thou remain doubtful and unable to make
Or by holding thy peace or
up thy "mind ?
professing that thou wilt not tell, wilt thou
make up thy mind to avoid both ? Then why
not do this before thou come to the judge,
that thou mayest shun the lie also ?
For,
having kept clear of a lie, thou wilt escape
all false witness; whether every lie be false
witness, or not every: but by keeping clear
of all false witness in thy sense of the word,
How much
thou wilt not escape all lying.
braver then, how much more excellent, to
say,

'' I will neither betray nor lie ?

"

"

23. This did a former Bishop of the Church
of Thagasta, Firmus by name, and even more
For, when he was asked by
firm in will.
command of the emperor, through officers
sent by him, for a man who was taking refuge
with him, and whom he kept in hiding with
all possible care, he made answer to their
questions, that he could neither tell a lie, nor
betray a man; and when he had suffered so
many torments of body, (for as .yet emperors
were not Christian,) he stood firm in his purThereupon being brought before the
pose.
emperor, his conduct appeared so admirable,
that he without any difficulty obtained a pardon for the man whom he was trying to save.
What conduct could be more brave and conBut peradventure some more timid
stant?
I can be prepared to bear
person may say,
any torments, or even to submit to death,
that I may not sin; but, since it is no sin to
tell a lie such that you neither hurt any man,
witness, and benefit some
nor bear
man, it is foolish and a great sin, voluntarily
and to no purpose to submit to torments, and,
when one's health and life may haply be useful, to fling them away for nothing to people
Of whom I ask; Why he fears
in a rage."
that which is written, "Thou shalt not bear
x and fears not that which is
false witness,"
" Thou wilt destroy all them
said unto God,
" It is not
that speak leasing?
Says he,
written, Every lie: but I understand it as if
it were written, Thou wilt destroy all that
But neither there is it
speak false witness."
Yes, but it is set
said, All false witness.
" where the other things are
there," saith he,
set down which are in every sort evil." What,
is this the case with what is set down there,
" Thou shalt not kill ?
" 3
If this be in every
sort evil, how shall one clear of this crime
even just men, who, upon a law given, have

false

" -

"

1 Exod. xx. 16.

2 Ps. v. 6.

3 Exod. xx. 13.

ON LYING.

''

But," it is rejoined,

" that man
killed many ?
doth not himself kill, who is the minister of
some just command."
These men's fear,
then, I do accept, that I still think that laudable man who would neither lie, nor betray a
man, did both better understand that which is
written, and what he understood did bravely
put in practice.

25. But one sometimes comes to a case of
this kind, that we are not interrogated where
the person is who is sought, nor forced to
betray him, if he is hidden in such manner
that he cannot easily be found unless betrayed: but we are asked, whether 'he be in
If we know him to be
such a place or not.
there, by holding our peace we betray him,
or even by saying that we will in no wise tell
whether he be there or not: for from this the
questioner gathers that he is there, as, if he
were not, nothing else would be answered by
him who would not lie nor betray a man, but
So, by our either
only, that he is not there.
holding our peace, or saying such words, a
man is betrayed, and he who seeks him hath
if he have the power, and
but to enter in,
find him: whereas he might have been turned
aside from finding him by our telling a lie.
Wherefore if thou know not where he is, there
is no cause for hiding the truth, but thou
must confess that thou knowest not.
But, if
thou know where he is, whether he be in the
place which is named in the question or elsewhere; thou must not say, when it
is asked
whether he be there or not,
I will not tell
" I
thee what thou askest/' but thou must say,
know where he is, but I will never show."
For if, touching one place in particular thou
answer not and profess that thou wilt not betray, it is just as if thou shouldest point to
that same place with thy finger:
for a sure
But if at the
suspicion is thereby excited.
first thou confess that thou know where he is,
but will not tell, haply the inquisitor may be
diverted from that place, and begin now to
ply thee that the place where he is may be
betrayed. For which good faith and humanity
whatever thou shalt bravely bear, is judged to
be not only not culpable, but even laudable;
save only these things which if a man suffer
he is said to suffer not bravely, but imFor this is the last demodestly and foully.
scription of lie, concerning which we must
treat more diligently.

"

25. For first to be eschewed is that capital
lie and far to be fled from, which is done in
doctrine of religion; to which lie a man ought
The
by no consideration to be induced.
second, that he should hurt some man unjustly: which is such that it profits no man
The third, which so
and hurts some man.

are

which

honorably

profits one as to hurt another, but not in corThe fourth, that which is
poral defilement.
done through only lust of lying and deceivThe fifth,
ing, which is an unmixed lie.
what is done with desire of pleasing by agreeableness in talk.
All these being utterly
eschewed and rejected, there follows a sixth
sort which at once hurts nobody and helps
somebody; as when, if a person's money is
to be unjustly taken from him, one who
knows where the money is, should say that
he does not know, by whomsoever the quesThe seventh, which hurts none
tion be put.
and profits some: except if a judge interrogate: as when, not wishing to betray a man
who is sought for to be put to death, one
should lie; not only a just and innocent, but
also a culprit; because it belongs to Christian
discipline neither to despair of any man's
amendment, nor to bar the way of repentance
Of which two sorts, which are
against any.
wont to be attended with great controversy,
we have sufficiently treated, and have shown
what was our judgment; that by taking the
and
consequences,
bravely borne, these kinds also should be
eschewed by brave and faithful and truthful
men and women.
The eighth sort of lie is
that which hurts no man, and does good in
the preserving somebody from corporal defilement, at least that defilement which we have
For even to eat with unmentioned above.
washen hands the Jews thought defilement.
Or if a person think this also a defilement,
yet not such that a lie ought to be told to
But if the lie be such as to do an
avoid it.
injury to any man, even though it screen a
man from that uncleanness which all men
abhor and detest; whether a lie of this kind
may be told provided the injury done by the
lie be such as consists not in that sort of uncleanness with which we are now concerned,
is another question: for here the question is
no longer about lying, but it is asked whether
an injury ought to be done to any man, even
otherwise than by a lie, that the said defilement may be warded off from another.
Which I should by no means think: though
the case proposed be the slightest wrongs, as
that which I mentioned above, about a single
measure of wheat; and though it be very embarrassing whether it be our duty not to do
even such an injury to any man, if thereby
another may be defended or screened from a
But, as I
lustful outrage upon his person.
said, this is another question: at present let
us go on with what we have taken in hand:
whether a lie ought to be told, if even the
inevitable condition be proposed that we
either do this, or suffer the deed of lust or

4/0

some execrable pollution; even though by
lying we do no man harm.

26. Touching which matter, there will be

some place open for consideration, if
first
the divine authorities which forbid a lie be
diligently discussed : for if these give no place,
we vainly seek a loophole; for we are bound
to keep in every way the command of God,
and the will of God in all that through keeping His command we may suffer, it is our duty
with an even mind to follow: but if by some
relaxation any outlet be allowed, in such a
The reason
case we are not to decline a lie.
why the Divine Scriptures contain not only
God's commands, but the life and character
of the just, is this: that, if haply it be hidden
in what way we are to take that which is enjoined, by the actions of the just it may be
With the exception, therefore,
understood.
of those actions which one may refer to an
allegorical significance, although none doubts
that they really took place, as is the case with
almost all the occurrences in the books of the
For who can venture to
Old Testament.
affirm of any thing there, that it does not
pertain to a figurative foretelling ?
Seeing the
Apostle, speaking of the sons of Abraham,
of whom of course it is most easily said that
they were born and did live in the natural
order of propagating the people, (for not
monsters and prodigies were born, to lead the
mind to some presignification,) nevertheless
asserteth that they signify the two Testaments; 1 and saith of that marvellous benefit
which God bestowed upon His people Israel
to rescue them out of the bondage in which
they in Egypt were oppressed, and of the
punishment which avenged their sin on their
journey, that these things befell them in a
2 what actions wilt thou find, from
figure:
which thou mayest set aside that rule, and
take upon thee to affirm that they are not to
to some figure ?
be
Excepting
therefore these, the things which in the New
Testament are done by the Saints, where
there is a most evident commending of manners to our imitation, may avail as examples
for the understanding of the Scriptures, which
things are digested in the commands.
the Gospel,
" Thou hast received a blow in the face,
make ready the other cheek." 3 Now as an
example of patience can none be found than
that of the Lord Himself more potent and
excellent; but He, when smitten on the cheek,
said not, Behold here is the other cheek, but
" If I have spoken ill, bear witness
He said,
of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou

27. As, when we read

reduced

in

1 Gal. iv. 22-24.

2 1 Cor. x. 1-11.

3 Matt. v. 39.

28. It is alsq written,

I say unto you, Swear not at all:"

Me?" 4 Where He shows that the preparation of the other cheek is to be done in the
Which also the Apostle Paul knew,
heart.
for he, too, when he was smitten on the face
before the high priest, did not say, Smite the
other cheek: but, "God," saith he, "shall
thee, thou whited wall: and sittest
smite
thou to judge me according to law, and con-
" s
trary to law commandest me to be smitten ?
with most deep insight beholding that the
priesthood of the Jews was already become
such, that in name it outwardly was clean
and fair, but within was foul with muddy
lusts; which priesthood he saw in spirit to be
ready to pass away through vengeance of the
Lord, when he spake those words: but yet he
had his heart ready not only to receive other
blows on the cheek, but also to suffer for the
truth any torments, whatever, with love of
them from whom he should suffer the same.
" But I say unto you,
Swear not at all."
But the Apostle himself
6 And so he
has used oaths in his Epistles.
shows how that is to be taken which is said,
"
that is,
lest by swearing one come to a facility in
swearing, from facility to a custom, and so
from a custom there be a downfall into perjury. And therefore he is not found to have
sworn except in writing, where there is more
wary forethought, and no precipitate tongue
withal. And this indeed came of evil, as it
is said, "Whatever is more than these is of
" 7 not however from evil of his own, but
evil:
from the evil of infirmity which was in them,
in whom he even in this way endeavored to
work faith.
For that he used an oath in
speaking, while not writing, I know not that
any Scripture has related concerning him.
"
And yet the Lord says,
for He hath not granted license thereof to
Howbeit, because to propersons writing.
nounce Paul guilty of violating the commandment, especially in Epistles written and sent
forth for the spiritual life and salvation of
the nations, were an impiety, we must understand that word which is set down, "At all,"
to be set down for this purpose, that as much
as in thee lies, thou affect not, love not, nor
as though it were for a good thing, with any
delight desire, an oath.

Swear not at all:

29. As that, "Take no thought for the
morrow," and, "Take therefore no thought
what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, or
what ye shall put on." 8 Now when we see
that the Lord Himself had a bag in which
9 that it might be
was put what was given,

"

4 John xviii. 22, 23.
6 Rom. ix. 1 ; Phil. i. 8; Gal. i. 20.
8 Matt. vi. 34, 31.

5 Acts xxiii. 3.

9 John xii. 6. [See R.V.]

7 .Matt. v. 34 37.

ON LYING.

kept for necessary uses as the time should
require; and that the Apostles themselves
made much provision for the indigence of
the brethren, not only for the morrow, but
even for the more protracted time of impending dearth, as we read in the Acts of the
is sufficiently clear that these
Apostles;
precepts are so to be understood, that we are
to do nothing of our work as
matter of
necessity, through love of obtaining temporal
things, or fear of want.

it

30. Moreover, it was said to the Apostles
that they should take nothing with them for
their journey, but should live by the Gospel.
And in a certain place too the Lord Himself
signified why He said this, when He added,
" 3 where
" The laborer is worthy of his hire:
He sufficiently shows that this is permitted,
not ordered; lest haply he who should do
this, namely, that in this work of preaching
the word he should take aught for the uses
of this life from them to whom he preached,
should think he was doing any thing unlawful.
And yet that it may more laudably not be
done is sufficiently proved in
the Apostle
Paul: who, while he said, "Let him that is
taught in the word, communicate unto him
that teacheth in all things," 4 and showed in
many places that this is wholesomely done
by them to whom he preached the word,
"Nevertheless," saith he, "I have not used
The Lord, therefore, when
this power." 3
He spake those words, gave power, not bound
men by a command.
So in general, what in
words we are not able to understand, in the
actions
meet to be taken, which would easily be
drawn to the other side, unless it were recalled by an example.
" The mouth
" 6 of what mouth
that lieth, slayeth the soul;
For in general
it speaketh, is the question.
when the Scripture speaks of the mouth, it
signifies the very seat of our conception 7 in
the heart, where is approved and decreed
whatever also by the voice, when we speak
the truth, is uttered: so that he lieth with the
heart who approveth a lie; yet that man may
possibly not lie with the heart, who uttereth
other than is in his mind, in such sort that he
knows it to be for the sake of avoiding a
greater evil that he admitteth an evil, disapproving withal both the one and the other.
And they who assert this, say that thus also
is to be understood that which is written,
" He that speaketh the truth in his heart: 8
because always in the heart truth must be

of the Saints we gather how it

31. Thus then what is written,

is

spoken; but not always in the mouth of the
body, if any cause of avoiding a greater evil
require that other than is in the mind be
And that there is
uttered with the voice.
indeed a mouth of the heart, may be understood even from this, that where there is
speech, there a mouth is with no absurdity
understood: nor would it be right to say,
'Who speaketh in his heart," unless it were
right to understand that there is also a mouth
in the heart.
Though in that very place
where it is written, "The mouth that lieth,
slayeth the soul," if the context of the lesson
be considered, it may peradventure be taken
for no other than the mouth of the heart.
For there is an obscure response there, where
it is hidden from men, to whom the mouth of
the heart, unless the mouth of the body sound
But that mouth,
therewith, is not audible.
the Scripture in that place saith, doth reach
to the hearing of the Spirit of the Lord, Who
hath filled the whole earth; at the same time
mentioning lips and voice and tongue in that
place; yet all these the sense permitteth not
to be taken, but concerning the heart, because
it saith of the Lord, that what is spoken is
not hidden from Him: now that which is
spoken with that sound which reacheth to our
ears, is not hidden from men either.
Thus,
it written: "The Spirit of wisnamely, is
dom is loving, and will not acquit an evilspeaker of his lips: for of his reins God is
witness, and of his heart a true searcher, and
For the Spirit of the
of his tongue a hearer.
Lord hath filled the whole earth, and that
which containeth all things hath knowledge
Therefore he that speaketh
of the voice.
unrighteous things cannot be hid: but neither
shall the judgment when it punisheth pass by
For in the thoughts of the ungodly
him.
shall there be interrogation; and the hearing
of his words shall come from the Lord, to the
For the ear
punishment of his iniquities.
of jealousy heareth all things, and the tumult
Therefore
of murmurings will not be hid.
keep yourselves from murmuring, which profiteth nothing, and from backbiting refrain
because an obscure response
your tongue:
But the mouth
will not go into the void. 10
that lieth, slayeth the soul." "
It seems then
to threaten them who think that to be obscure
and secret, which they agitate and turn over
And this, it would show, is
in their heart.
so clear to the ears of God, that it even calls
it "tumult."

32. Manifestly also in the Gospel we find

1 Acts xi. 28-30.
4 Gal. vi. 6.
7 Conceptaculum.

2 I.uke ix. 3; x. 4, 7.
3 Matt. x. 10.
5 1 Cor. ix. 12. [See R.V.] 6 Wisd. i. 11.
8 Ps. xv. 2.

" unto the Lord." E. V.

9 A Domino,
Ic Obscurum resftonsum in vacuum non ibit,
" Wisd. i. 6-1 1.

word so secret that shall go for nought.'' E. V.

'There is no

the mouth of -the heart: so that in one place
the Lord is found to have mentioned the
mouth both of the body and of the heart,
" Are ye also yet without unwhere he saith,
derstanding ? Do ye not yet understand, that
whatsoever entereth in at the mouth, goeth
into the belly, and is cast out into the draught ?
but those things which proceed out of the
mouth come forth from the heart, and they
For out of the heart proceed
defile the man.
fornicaevil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
tions, thefts, false witness, blasphemies: these
are the things which defile a man. " '
Here
if thou understand but one mouth, that of the
" Those
body, how wilt thou understand,
things which proceed out of the mouth, come
"
forth from the heart;
since spitting also
the mouth ?
and vomiting proceed out of
Unless peradventure a man is but then defiled when he eateth aught unclean, but is
But if this be
defiled when he vomits it up.
most absurd, it remains that we understand
the mouth of the heart to have been ex-
" The
pounded by the Lord, when He saith,
things which proceed out of the mouth, come
For being that theft
forth from the heart.''
also can be, and often is, perpetrated with
silence of the bodily voice and mouth; one
must be out of his mind so to understand it
as then to account a person to be contaminated by the sin of theft, when he confesses
or makes it known, but when he commits it
and holds his peace, then to think him unBut, in truth, if we refer what is
defiled.
said to the mouth of the heart, no sin whatever can be committed tacitly: for it
is not
committed unless it proceed from that mouth
which is within.

"

33. But, like as it is asked of what mouth
" The mouth that lieth,
the Scripture saith,
slayeth the soul," so it may be asked, of
For it seems to speak of that lie
what lie.
particular, which consists in detraction.
in
Keep yourselves from murmuring,
It says,
which profiteth nothing, and from detraction
refrain your tongue." Now this detraction
takes place through malevolence, when any
man not only with mouth and voice of the
body doth utter what he forgeth against any,
but even without speaking wisheth him to be
thought such; which is in truth to detract with
the mouth of the heart; which thing, it saith,
cannot be obscure and hidden from God.

34. For what is written in another place,
"Wish not to use every lie;"
they say is
not of force for this, that a person is not to

1 Matt. xv. 16-20.
2 Ecclus. vii. 13.

/J.V; 6e\e i^eiiSeo-Cat itav 'I'eGSo;, noli velle
mentiri omne mendacium. " Use not to make any manner of lie,"
E. V.
any."

is used for "

"

Every

"

"

"

"

Therefore, when one man shall
use any lie.
say, that according to
testimony of
this
Scripture we must to that degree hold every
sort and kind of lie in detestation, that even
if a man wish to lie, yea, though he lie not,
the very wish is to be condemned; and to this
sense interpreteth, that it is not said, Do not
" Do not wish to use every
use every lie, but,
that one must not dare not only to tell,
lie;
but not even to wish to tell, any lie whatever:
Nay, in that it saith, Do
saith another man,
not wish to use ever)'- lie, it willeth that from
the mouth of the heart we exterminate and
estrange lying: so that while from some lies
we must abstain with the mouth of the body,
as are those chiefly which pertain to doctrine
of religion; from some, we are not to abstain
with the mouth of the body, if reason of
avoiding a greater evil require; but with the
mouth of the heart we must abstain utterly
Where it behoveth to be
from every lie."
said, "Do not wish:"
understood what is
namely, the will itself is taken as it were the
mouth of the heart, so that it concerneth not
the mouth of the heart when in shunning a
greater evil we lie unwillingly.
There is also
a third sense in which thou mayest so take
not every/' that, except some
this word,
Like as if
lies, it giveth thee leave to lie.
he should say, wish not to believe every man:
he would not mean to advise that none should
be believed; but that not all, some however,
And that which follows,
should be believed.
" For assiduity thereof will not profit for
good," sounds as if, not lying, but assiduous
lying, that is, the custom and love of lying,
should seem to be that which he would proTo which that person will assuredly
hibit.
slide down, 3 who either shall think that every
lie may be boldly used (for so he will shun
not that even which is committed in the doctrine of piety and religion; than which what
more abominably wicked thing canst thou
easily find, not among all lies, but among all
sins ?) or to some lie (no matter how easy,
how harmless,) shall accommodate the inclination of the will; so as to lie, not unwiilingly
for the sake of escaping a greater evil, but
willingly and with liking.
So, seeing there
be three things which may be understood in
"
Every lie, not only tell
this sentence, either
thou not, but do not even wish to tell:
or,
" Do not wish, but even unwillingly tell a lie
when aught worse is to be avoided:" or,
"Not every," to wit, that except some lies,
the rest are admitted: one of these is found
to make for those who hold that one is never
to lie, two for those who think that sometimes

"

3 Abutendum.

ON LYING.

profit

35. Moreover what is written,

But yet what follows,
one may tell a lie.
" For assiduity thereof will not
to
good," I know not whether it can countenance
the first sentence of these three; except haply
so, that while it is a precept for the perfect
not only not to lie, but not even to wish; assiduity of lying is not permitted even to beAs if, namely, on laying down the
ginners.
rule at no time whatever not merely to lie but
so much as to have a wish to lie, and this being gainsaid by examples, in regard that there
are some lies which have been even approved
by great authority, it should be rejoined that
those indeed are lies of beginners, which
have, in regard of this life, some kind of duty
of mercy; and yet to that degree is every lie
evil, and by perfect and spiritual minds in
every way to be eschewed, that not even beginners are permitted to have assiduous cusFor we have already spoken
tom thereof.
concerning the Egyptian midwives, that it is
in respect of the promise of growth and proficiency to better things that they while lying
are spoken of with approval: because it
is
some step towards loving the true and eternal
saving of the soul, when a person doth mercifully for the saving of any man's albeit mortal life even tell a lie.
" Thou wilt
" * one saith
destroy all that speak leasing:
is here excepted, but all conthat no lie
Another saith: Yea verily: but
demned.
they who speak leasing from the heart, as we
disputed above; for that man speaketh truth
in his heart, who hateth the necessity of lying, which he understands as a penalty of the
Another saith: All indeed will
mortal life.
God destroy who speak leasing, but not all
leasing: for there is some leasing which the
Prophet was at that time insinuating, in which
none is spared; that is, if refusing to confess
each one his sins, he defend them rather, and
2 so that not content to
will not do penance,
work iniquity, he must needs wish to be
thought just, and succumb not to the medicine of confession: as the very distinction of
the words may seem to intimate no other,
' Thou hatest all that work iniquity;" 3 but
wilt not destroy them if upon repenting they
speak the truth in confession, that by doing
that truth they may come to the light; as is
But
said in the Gospel according to John,
he that doeth truth cometh unto the light.
Thou wilt destroy all who "
not only work
"
what Thou hatest, but also
speak leasing;" s
in holding out before them false righteousness, and not confessing their sins in penitence.

"

1 Ps. v. 6.
4 John lii. 21.

2 Agere pcenitentiam.
5 Ps. v. 6, 7.

3 Ps. v. 5.

36. For, concerning false witness, which is
set down in the ten commands of the Law,
it can indeed in no wise be contended that
love of truth may at heart be preserved, and
false witness brought forth .to him unto whom
For, when it is said to
the witness is borne.
God only, then it is only in the heart that the
truth is to be embraced: but when it is said
to man, then must we with the mouth also of
the body bring forth truth, because man is
not an inspector of the heart.
But then,
touching the witness itself, it is not unreasonably asked, to whom one is a witness ?
For
not to whomsoever we speak unto are we witnesses, but to them to whom it is expedient
and due that they by our means should come
to know or believe the truth; as is a judge,
that he may not err in judging; or he who is
taught in doctrine of religion, that he may
not err in faith, or by very authority of the
But when the perteacher waver in doubt.
son who interrogates thee or wishes to know
aught from thee seeks that which concerneth
him not, or which is not expedient for him to
know, he craveth not a witness, but a beTherefore if to him thou tell a lie,
trayer.
from false witness peradventure thou wilt be
clear, but from a lie assuredly not.
So then
with this salvo, that to bear false witness is
never lawful, the question is, whether it be
lawful sometimes to tell a lie.
it be
is to be seen
false witness to lie at all, it
whether it admit of compensation, to wit, that
it be said for the sake of avoiding a greater
sin: as that which is written, "Honor father
and mother," 6 under stress of a preferable
duty is disregarded; whence the paying of
the last honors of sepulture to a father, is
forbidden to that man who by the Lord Himself is called to preach the kingdom of God.

Or if

37. Likewise, touching that which is written, "A son which receiveth the word shall
be far from destruction:
but receiving, he
receiveth it for himself, and no falsehood
proceedeth out of his mouth:" 7 some one
may say, that what is here set down, "A son
which receiveth the word/' is to be taken for
no other than the word of God, which is
Therefore, "A son receiving the truth
truth.
shall be far from destruction," refers to that
" Thou wilt destroy all that
which is written,
But when it follows, "Respeak leasing.''
ceiving he receiveth for himself," what other
doth this insinuate than what the Apostle
" But let every man prove his own
saith,
work, and then he shall have glorying in him-

6 Exod. xx. 12.
7 Prov. xxix. 27. Lat.

Not in the Hebrew, but LXX. xxiv. 23.
kto<; e<TTat Se^o/jcepo? Se eSe'<XTO
MifSer' \|/ei)6os oltt'o y\u}ao"q<; ^a<riAeu>s AeyeV^tu, Kai ov6ev

\6yov 4>vka.fjo6ixsvQs tubs a7riuAeia?
(lvtov.
iptv&os ano yAuicr(n)S auToC ov firj eftAfjj.

it

"

for

himself.

received

self and not in another ?" '
For he that receiveth the word, that is, truth, not for himself, but for men-pleasing, keepeth it not
when he sees they can be pleased by a lie.
But whoso receiveth it for himself, no falsehood proceedeth out of his mouth: because
even when the way to please men is to lie,
that man lieth not, who receiving the truth
not thereby to please them but to please God,
Therefore
hath
there is no reason why it should be said here,
He will destroy all who speak leasing, but not
all leasing: because all lies, universally, are
cut off in this saying, "And no falsehood proceedeth out of his mouth."
But another
saith, it is to be so taken as the Apostle Paul
But I say unto you,
took our Lord's saying,
For here also all swearSwear not at all." 2
ing is cut off; but from the mouth of the
heart, that it should never be done with approbation of the will, but through necessity
" from
of the weakness of another; that is,
the evil" of another, when it shows that he
cannot otherwise be got to believe what is
said, unless faith -be wrought by an oath;
our own, that
or,
while as yet involved in the skins of this
mortality we are not able to show our heart:
which thing were we able to do, of swearing
there were no need.
Though moreover in
this whole sentence, if the saying, "A son
receiving the word shall be far from destruction,'' be said of none other than that Truth, 3
by Whom all things were made, which remaineth ever incommutable; then, because
the doctrine of Religion strives to bring men
to the contemplation of this Truth, it may
seem that the saying, "And no falsehood
proceedeth out of his mouth," is said to this
purpose, that he speaketh no falsehood that
Which sort of lie is
pertaineth to doctrine.
upon no compensation whatever to be gone
into, and is
to be
Or if the saying, "No falseeschewed.
hood," is absurdly taken if it be not referred
" From his mouth,"
to every lie, the saying,
should, as was argued above, be taken to
mean the mouth of the heart, in the opinion
of him who accounts that sometimes one may
tell a lie.

utterly and before all

from that "evil" of

38. Certain it is, albeit all this disputation
go from side to side, some asserting that it is
never right to lie, and to this effect reciting
others gainsaying, and
divine testimonies:
even in the midst of the very words of the
divine testimonies seeking place for a lie; yet
no man can say, that he finds this either in
example or in word of the Scriptures, that

any lie should seem a thing to be loved, or
not had in hatred ; howbeit sometimes by telling a lie thou must do that thou hatest, that
what is more greatly to be detested may be
But then here it is that people err;
avoided.
For
they put the precious beneath the vile.
when thou hast granted that some evil is to
be admitted, that another and more grievous
may not be admitted; not by the rule of
truth, but by his own cupidity and custom
doth each measure the evil, accounting that
to be the more grievous, which himself more
greatly dreads, not which is in reality more
greatly to be fled from.
All this fault is engendered by perversity of loving.. For being
there are two lives of ours; the one eternal,
which is promised of God; the other temporal, in which we now are: when a man shall
have begun to love this temporal more than
that eternal, for the sake of this which he
loveth he thinks all things right to be done;
and there are not any, in his estimation, more
grievous sins than those which do injury to
this life, and either take away from it any
commodity unjustly and unlawfully, or by
And
inflicting of death take it utterly away.
so thieves, and robbers, and ruffians, and torturers, and slayers, are more hated of them
than lascivious, drunken, luxurious men, if
For they do not unthese molest no man.
derstand or at all care, that these do wrong
to God; not indeed to any inconvenience of
Him, but to their own pernicious hurt; seeing
they corrupt His gifts bestowed upon them,
even His temporal gifts, and by their very
corruptions turn away from eternal
gifts:
above all, if they have already begun to be the
Temple of God; which to all Christians the
" Know ye not that ye
Apostle saith thus:
are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of
God dwelleth in you ? Whoso shall corrupt
God's temple, God will corrupt him.
For the
temple of God is holy: which temple are ye."
39. And all these sins, truly, whether such
whereby an injury is done to men in the comlife, or whereby men corrupt
forts of this
themselves and hurt none against his will: all
these sins, then, even though they seem to
mean well by this temporal life to the procuring of any delight or profit, (for no man
commits any of these things with any other
purpose and end;) yet in regard of that life
which is forever and ever, they do entangle
But there are some
and in all ways hinder.
of these that hinder the doers only, others
likewise those on whom they are done.
For
as to the things which people keep safe for
the sake of utility to this life, when these are

,

1 Gal. vi. 4.
3 Or "

of Him who is Truth itself."

= Matt. v.

4 1 Cor. iii. 16, 17.

ON LYING.

taken away by injurious persons, they alone
sin and are hindered from eternal life who do
this, not they to whom they do it.
Therefore, even if a person consent to the taking of
them from him, either that he may not do
some evil, or that he may not in these very
things suffer some greater inconvenience; not
only does he not sin, but in the one case he
acts bravely and laudably, in the other usefully and unblameably.
But as to those
things which are kept for the sake of sanctity
and religion, when injurious persons wish to
violate these, it is right, if the condition be
proposed and the means given, to redeem
them even by sins of lesser moment, yet not
by wrongs to other men. And then do these
things thenceforth cease to be sins, which are
undertaken in order to the avoidance of
For as in things useful, for ingreater sins.
stance in pecuniary or any other corporal
commodity, that is not called a loss which is
parted with in order to a greater gain; so in
things holy, that is not called sin which is
Or if
admitted lest a worse be admitted.
that is called loss, which one foregoes that he
may not forego more; let this also be called
sin, while however the necessity of undertaking it in order to the eschewing of a greater
is no more to be doubted, than that, in order
to avoid a greater loss, it is right to suffer a
smaller one.

40. Now the things which are to be kept
safe for sanctity's sake are these: pudicity of
body, and chastity of soul,
1 and verity of docPudicity of body, without consent and
trine.
permission of the soul, doth no man violate.
For, whatever against our will and without
our empowering the same is by greater force
Howdone upon our body, is no lewdness.
beit, of permitting there may be some reason,
For we consent,
but of consenting, none.
when we approve and wish: but we permit
even not willing, because of some greater
turpitude to be eschewed.
Consent, truly,
to corporal lewdness violates also chastity of
mind.
chastity consists in a
good will and sincere love, which is not corrupted, unless when we love and desire that
which Truth teaches ought not to be loved
and desired. We have therefore to guard the
sincerity of love toward God and our neighbor; for in this is chastity of mind sanctified:
and we must endeavor with all the strength
in our power, and with pious supplication,
that, when the pudicity of our body is sought
to be violated, not even that outermost sense
of the soul, 3 which is entangled with the flesh,
may be touched with any delight; but if

For the mind's 2

it

its

cannot this, at least the mind and thought 4 in
not consenting may have
chastity preserved entire. Now what we have to guard
is, as pertaining to the
in chastity of mind, 5
love of our neighbor, innocence and benevolence; as pertaining to the love of God, piety.
Innocence is that we hurt no man; benevolence, that we also do good to whom we can;
piety, that we worship God.
But as for verity
of doctrine, of religion and piety, that is not
violated unless by a lie; whereas the highest
and inmost Verity Itself, Whose that doctrine
is, can in no wise be violated: which Truth
to attain unto, and in It on every wise to remain, and to It thoroughly to cleave, will not
be permitted, but when this corruptible shall
have put on incorruption, and this mortal
shall have put on immortality.
But, because
all piety in this life is practice by which we
tend to that life, which practice hath a guidance afforded unto it from that doctrine,
which in human words and signs
6 of corporal
sacraments doth insinuate and intimate Truth
for this cause this also, which by lyherself:
ing is possible to be corrupted, is most of all
to be kept incorrupt; that so, if aught in that
chastity of mind be violated, it may have that
' For once
wherefrom it may be repaired.
corrupt authority of doctrine, and there canbe none either course or recourse to chastity
of mind.
, 41. There resulteth then from all these this
sentence, that a lie which doth not violate the
doctrine of piety, nor piety itself, nor innocence, nor benevolence, may on behalf of
pudicity of body be admitted. And yet if
any man should propose to himself so to love
truth, not only that which consists in contemplation, but also in uttering the true thing,
which each in its own kind of things is true,
and no otherwise to bring forth with the
mouth of the body his thought than in the
mind it is conceived and beheld; so that he
should prize the beauty of truth-telling honesty, not only above gold and silver and jewels
and pleasant lands, but above this temporal
life itself altogether and every good thing of
the body, I know not whether any could
And if he
wisely say that that man errs.
should prefer this and prize it more than all
that himself hath of such things; rightly also
would he prefer it to the temporal things of
other men, whom by his
innocence and
benevolence he was bound to keep and to
For he would love perfect faith, not
help.
only of believing aright those things which
by an excellent authority and worthy of faith
should to himself be spoken, but also of faith-

1 Animee.

2 Animi.

4 Animee.

4 Mentis.

5 Animi.

6 Signaculis.

4/6

fully uttering what himself should judge right
For faith
to be spoken, and should speak.
hath its name in the Latin tongue, from that
the thing is done which is said: 1 and thus it
is manifest that one doth not exhibit when
And even if this faith be less
telling a lie.
violated, when one lies in such sort that he is
believed to no inconvenience and no pernicious hurt, with added intention moreover
life or corporal
of guarding either one's
purity; yet violated it is, and a thing is violated which ought to be kept safe in chastity
Whence we are conand sanctity of mind.
strained, not by opinion of men, which for
the most part is in error, but by truth itself,
truth which is eminent above all, and alone
is most invincible, to prefer even to purity of
For chastity of mind is,
body, perfect faith.
love well ordered, which does not place the
greater below the smaller. Now it
is less,
whatever in the body than whatever in the
For assuredly when
mind can be violated.
for corporal chasteness a man tells a lie, he
sees indeed that his body is threatened with
corruption, not from his own, but from another's lust, but is cautious lest by permitting
That permission,
at least, he be a party.
however, where is it but in the mind ?
So
then, even corporal chasteness cannot be corrupted but in the mind; which not consenting nor permitting, it can by no means be
rightly said that corporal chasteness is violated, whatever in the body be perpetrated
by another's lust.
is gathered,
that much more must the chastity of the mind
be preserved in the mind, in the which is the
guardianship of the pudicity of the body.
Wherefore, what in us lies, both the one and
the other must by holy manners and conversation be walled and hedged round, lest
from another quarter it be violated.
But
when both cannot be, which is to be slighted
in comparison of which, who doth not see ?
when he seeth which to which is to be preferred, the mind to the body, or the body to
the mind; and which is more to be shunned
among sins, the permitting of another's deed,
or the committing of the deed thyself.

Whence it

42. It clearly appears then, all being discussed, that those testimonies of Scripture
have none other meaning than that we must
never at all tell a lie: seeing that not any examples of lies, worthy of imitation, are found
in the manners and. actions of the Saints, as
regards those Scriptures which are referred
tc no figurative signification, such as is the
For all
history in the Acts of the Apostles.
those sayings of our Lord in the Gospel,

which to more ignorant minds seem lies, are
figurative significations. And as to what the
Apostle says: "lam made all things to all
2 the right unmen, that I might gain all;"
derstanding is, that he did this not by lying,
but by sympathy; so that he dealt with them
in liberating them with so great charity, as if
he were himself in that evil from which he
wished to make them whole.
There must
therefore be no lying in the doctrine of piety:
it is a heinous wickedness, and the first sort
There must be no lying of
of detestable lie.
the second sort; because no man must have
a wrong done to him.
There must be no lying of the third sort; because we are not to
consult any man's good to the injury of anThere must be no lying of the fourth
other.
sort, that is, for the lust of lying, which of
There must be no lying of
itself is vicious.
the fifth sort, because not even the truth itself
is to be uttered with the aim of men-pleasing,
how much less a lie, which of itself, as a lie,
There must be no lying of
is a foul thing ?
is not right that even
the sixth sort; for it
the truth of testimony be corrupted for any
man's temporal convenience and safety.
But
unto eternal salvation none is to be led by
For not by the ill manners of
aid of a lie.
them that convert him is he to be converted
to good manners: because if it is meet to be
done towards him, himself also ought when
converted to do it* toward others; and so is
he converted not to good, but to ill manners,
seeing that is held out to be imitated by him
when converted, which was done unto him in
Neither in the seventh sort
converting him.
must there be any lying; for it is meet that
not any man's commodity or temporal welfare be preferred to the perfecting of faith.
Not even if any man is so ill moved by our
right deeds as to become worse in his mind,
and far more remote from piety, are right
deeds therefore to be foregone: since what
we are chiefly to hold is that whereunto we
ought to call and invite them whom as our
own selves we love; and with most courageous
mind we must drink in that apostolic sen-
" To some we are a savor of life unto
tence:
life, to others a savor of death unto death;
" 3 Nor
and who is sufficient for these things ?
in the eighth sort must there be lying: because both among good things chastity of
mind is greater than pudicity of body; and
among evil things, that which ourselves do,
than that which we suffer to be done.
In
these eight kinds, however, a man sins less
when he tells a lie, in proportion as he emerges
to the eighth: more, in proportion as he di-

1 "

Fides, quia fit quod diciiur. 1 '

Cor.

3 2 Cor. n. 16.

ON LYING.

But whoso shall think
verges to the first.
there is any sort of lie that is not sin, will deceive himself foully, while he deems himself
honest as a deceiver of other men.

43. So great blindness, moreover, hath occupied men's minds, that to them it is too little
if we pronounce some lies not to be sins; but
they must needs pronounce it to be sin in some
things if we refuse to lie: and to such a pass
have they been brought by defending lying,
that even that first kind which is of all the
most abominably wicked they pronounce to
For in
have been used by the Apostle Paul.
the Epistle to the Galatians, written as it was,
like the rest, for doctrine of religion and
piety, they say that he has told a lie, in the
passage where he says concerning Peter and
" When I saw that they walked not
Barnabas,
uprightly according to the truth of the GosFor, while they wish to defend Peter
pel."
from error, and from that pravity of way into

*

is

In which they do not see that it

which he had fallen; the very way of religion
in which is salvation for all men, they by
breaking and mincing the authority of the
Scriptures do endeavor themselves to overthrow.
not only lying, but perjury that they lay to
the charge of the Apostle in the very doctrine
of piety, that is, in an Epistle in which he
preaches the Gospel; seeing that he there
" What I
saith, before he relates that matter,
write unto you, behold, before God, I
lie
But it is time that we set bounds to
not." 2
in the consideration and
this disputation:
treatment whereof altogether there is nothing
more meet to be, before all else, borne in
mind and made our prayer, than that which the
same Apostle saith: "God is faithful, Who
will not suffer you to be tempted above that
ye are able to bear, but will with the temptation make also a way to escape, that ye may
be able to bear it." 3

1 Gal. ii. 14.

Gal. i. 20.

3 1 Cor. x. 13.

ST. AUGUSTIN:

TO

CONSENTIUS: AGAINST LYING.

[CONTRA MENDACIUM.]

TRANSLATED BY THE

REV. H. BROWNE, M.A.,

OF CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, LATE PRINCIPAL OF THE DIOCESAN

COLLEGE. CHICHESTER.

TO CONSENTIUS: AGAINST LYING.
[CONTRA MENDACIUM.]

From the Retractations, Book II. Chap. 60.
" Then x also I wrote a Book against Lying, the occasion of which work was this.
In
order to discover the Priscillianist heretics, who think it right to conceal their heresy not
only by denial and lies, but even by perjury, it seemed to certain Catholics that they ought
to pretend themselves Priscillianists, in order that they might penetrate their lurking places.
It begins : Malta mihi lege?ida misIn prohibition of which thing, I composed this book.

t'sti."

1. A great deal for me to read hast thou
sent, my dearest brother Consentius: a great
deal for me to read: to the which while I am
preparing an answer, and am drawn off first
by one, then by another, more urgent occupation, the year has measured out its course,
and has thrust me into such straits, that I
must answer in what sort I may, lest the time
for sailing being now favorable, and the bearer
desirous to return, I should too long detain
Having therefore unrolled and read
him.
through all that Leonas, servant of God,
brought me from thee, both soon after I received it, and afterwards when about to dictate this reply, and having weighed it with
all the consideration in my power, I am
greatly delighted with thy eloquence, and
memory of the holy Scripture, and cleverness
of wit, and the resentment with which thou
bitest negligent Catholics, and the zeal with
against even latent
which
But I am not persuaded that it is
heretics.
right to unearth them out of their hiding
For to what end
places by our telling lies.
do we take such pains in tracking them out
and running them down, but that having taken

gnashest

thou

1 i. e. A.D. 420, the work mentioned just before belonging to
Consentius is thought to be the writer
the early part of that year.
of ep. no, to Augustin, and ep. 120, and 205, are addressed to
This is the work referred to in the Enchiridion, ch. 18, p.
him.

243.

"

them and brought them forth into open day,
we may either teach them the truth, or at
least having convicted them by the truth,
may not allow them to hurt others ? to this
end, therefore, that their lie may be blotted
out, or shunned, and God's truth increased.
How then by a lie shall I rightly be able to
prosecute lies ? Or is
it by robbery that
robberies, and by sacrilege that sacrileges,
and by adultery that adulteries, are to be
But if the truth of God shall
prosecuted ?
abound by my lie," are we too to say,
Let
us do evil that good may come ?" 2 A thing
which thou seest how the Apostle detesteth.
" Let us lie, that we mayFor what else is,
Let
bring heretic liars to the truth," but,
us do evil that good may come ?
Or, is a
lie sometimes good, or sometimes a lie not
" Thou hatest,
evil? Why then is it written,
Lord, all that work iniquity; Thou wilt deFor he hath
stroy all that speak leasing." 3
not excepted
said
indefinitely,
"Thou wilt destroy them that speak leasso as to permit some, not all, to
ing;
be understood: but it
is an universal sen-
" Thou
tence that he hath passed, saying,
wilt destroy all who speak leasing."
Or, be-

some,

or

"

"

"

"

2 Rom. iii. 7, 8.
3 Psalm v. 6, 7.

speak a lie," Heb. travTas tous XaXovvras to i/zeOoos, LXX.

[See R.V.]

" Thou wilt destroy them that

4 3:

cause it is not said, Thou wilt destroy all who
speak all leasing, or, who speak any leasing
whatsoever; is it therefore to be thought that
there is place allowed for some lie; to wit,
that there should be some leasing, and them
who speak it, God should not destroy, but
destroy them all which speak unjust leasing,
not what lie soever, because there is found
also a just lie, which as such ought to be
matter of praise, not of crime ?

of

to

the

by the

Priscillianists

2. Perceivest thou not how much this reathe very persons whom as
soning aideth
great game we make ado to catch by our
For, as thyself hast shown, this is the
lies ?
sentiment of
prove
which, they apply testimonies from the Scriptures
exhorting their followers to
as
lie,
though
examples
Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Angels; not hesitating
to add even the Lord Christ Himself; and
deeming that they cannot otherwise prove
their falsehood truthful, unless they pronounce Truth to be a liar.
It must be refuted, this; not imitated: nor ought we to be
partners with the Priscillianists in that evil in
which they are convicted to be worse than
For they alone, or at least
other heretics.
they in the greatest degree, are found to
make a dogma of lying for the purpose of
hiding their truth, as they call it: and this so
great evil therefore to esteem just, because
they say that in the heart must be held that
which is true, but with the mouth to utter
unto aliens a false thing, is no sin; and that
this is written, "Who speaketh the truth in
his heart: "* as though this were enough for
righteousness, even though a person do with
his mouth speak a lie, when not his neighbor
but a stranger is he that heareth it. On this
account they think the Apostle Paul, when
he had said,
Putting away lying, speak ye
truth," to have immediately added, "Every
man with his neighbor, for we are members
Meaning, that with them
one of another." 2
who are not our neighbors in society of the
truth, nor, so to say, our co-members, 3 it
lawful and right to speak a lie.

"

is

3. Which sentence dishonoreth the holy
Martyrs, nay rather taketh away holy martyrdoms altogether.
For they would do more
justly and wisely, according to these men, not
to confess to their persecutors that they were
Christians, and by confessing make them
murderers: but rather by telling a lie, and denying what they were, should both themselves keep safe the convenience of the flesh
and purpose of the heart, and not allow those
to accomplish the wickedness which they had

1 Ps. XV. 2.

Eph. iv. 25.

3 Commembres.

For they were not
conceived in their mind.
their neighbors in the Christian faith, that
with them it should be their duty to speak
the truth in their mouth which they spake in
their heart; but moreover enemies of Truth
For if Jehu (whom it seems they do
itself.
prudently to single out unto themselves to
look unto as an example of lying) falsely gave
himself out for a servant of Baal, that he
might slay Baal's servants: how much more
justly, according to their perversity, might,
in time of persecution, the servants of Christ
falsely give themselves out for servants of
demons, that the servants of demons might
not slay servants of Christ; and sacrifice to
idols that men might not be killed, if Jehu
sacrificed to Baal that he might kill men ?
For what harm would it do them, according
to the egregious doctrine of these speakers
of lies, if they should lyingly pretend a worship of the Devil in the body, when the
worship of God was preserved in the heart?
But not so have the Martyrs understood the
Apostle, the true, the holy Martyrs.
They
saw and held that which is written, "With
the heart man believeth unto righteousness,
and with the mouth confession is made unto
In their mouth was found
salvation;
no lie:" 5 and so they departed irreproachable, to that place where to be tempted by liars
any further they will not fear; because they
will not have liars any more in their heavenly
assemblies, either for strangers or neighbors.
As for that Jehu, by an impious lie and a
sacrilegious sacrifice making inquisition for
impious and sacrilegious men for
kill
them, they would not imitate him, no, not
though the Scripture had said nothing concerning him, what manner of man he was.
But, seeing it is written that he had not his
heart right with God; 6 what profited it him,
that for some obedience which, concerning
the utter destruction of the house of Ahab,
he exhibited for the lust of his own domination, he received some amount of transitory
wages in a temporal kingdom ?
Let, rather,
the truth-telling sentence of the Martyrs be
thine to defend: to this I exhort thee, my
brother, that thou mayst be against liars, not .
a- teacher of lying, but an asserter of truth.
For, I pray thee, attend diligently to what I
say, that thou mayest find how needful to be
shunned is that which, with laudable zeal indeed towards impious men, that they may be
caught and corrected, or avoided, but yet too
incautiously, is thought fit to be taught.

" 4 and,

to

"

4. Of lies are many sorts, which indeed

4 Rom. x. 10.
5 Rev. xiv. 5.
6 2 Kings x. 31.

\pevSos, Griesbach; 5oAos, text rec; guile, E. V.

c

TO CONSENTIUS: AGAINST LYING.

For there

all, universally, we ought to hate.
is no lie that is not contrary to truth.
For,
as light and darkness, piety and impiety,
sin and right-doing,
justice and iniquity,
health and weakness, life and death, so are
truth and a lie contrary the one to the other.
Whence by how much we love the former, by
so much ought we to hate the latter.
Yet in
truth there be some lies which to believe does
no harm: although even by such sort of lie to
wish to deceive, is hurtful to him that tells it,
As though, if
not to him that believes it.
that brother, the servant of God, Fronto, in
the information which he gave thee, should
(though far be the thought !) say some things
falsely; he would have hurt himself assuredly,
not thee, although thou, without iniquity of
thine, hadst believed all, upon his telling it.
Because, whether those things did so take
place or not so, yet they have not any thing,
which if a person believe to have been so,
though it were not so, he by the rule of truth
and doctrine of eternal salvation should be
judged worthy of blame.
Whereas, if a person tell a lie which if any believe he will be
an heretic against the doctrine of Christ, by
so much is he who tells the lie more hurtful,
by how much he that believes it
is more
See then, what manner of thing
miserable.
it is, if against the doctrine of Christ we shall
tell a lie which whoso believes shall perish, in
order that we may catch the enemies of the
same doctrine, to the end we may bring them
to the truth, while we recede from it; nay
rather, when we catch liars by lying, teach
For it is one thing what they say
worse lies.
when they lie, another when they are deFor, when they teach their heresy,
ceived.
they speak the things in which they are deceived; but when they say that they think
what they do not think, or that they do not
think what they do think, they say the things in
which they lie.
In that any believeth them,
what though he do not find them out, himself
For it is no receding from the
perisheth not.
catholic rule, if, when a heretic lyingly professes the catholic doctrines, one believes him
to be a catholic: and therefore it is not pernicious to him; because he is mistaken in the
mind of a man, of which, when latent, he
cannot judge, not in the faith of God which
it is his duty to keep safe planted within him.
Moreover, when they teach their heresy,
whoso shall believe them, in thinking it truth,
will be partaker, as of their error, so of their
So it comes to pass, that when
damnation.
they fable their nefarious dogmas in which
they are with deadly error deceived, then
whoso believeth them is lost: whereas when
we preach catholic dogmas, in which we hold

the right faith, then if he shall believe, that
man is found, whoso was lost.
But when,
they being Priscillianists, do, in order that
they may not betray their venom, lyingly give
themselves out to be of us; whoever of us
believes them, even while they escape detection, himself perseveres a Catholic: we on the
other hand, if, in order to attain to the discovery of them, we falsely give ourselves out
for Priscillianists, because we shall praise
their dogmas as though they were our own,
whoso shall believe the same, will either be
confirmed among them, or will be transferred
to them in the meantime straightway: but what
the coming hour may bring forth, whether they
shall be afterwards set free therefrom by us
when speaking true things, who were deceived
by us when speaking false; and whether they
will be willing to hear one teaching whom
they have thus experienced telling a lie, who can
know for certain ? who can be ignorant that
this is uncertain ? Whence it is gathered, that
it is more pernicious, or to speak more mildly,
that it is more perilous for Catholics to lie
that they may catch heretics, than for heretics
to lie that they may not be found out by
Because, whoso believes Catholics
Catholics.
when they tell a lie to tempt people, is either
I made or confirmed a heretic; but whoso believes heretics when they tell a lie to conceal
themselves, doth not cease to be a Catholic.
But that this may become more plain, let us
propose some cases by way of example, and
from those writings in preference which thou
hast sent me to read.

Priscillian,

5. Well then, let us set before our eyes a
cunning spy as he makes up to the person
whom he has already perceived to be a Priscillianist; he begins with Dictinius the bishop,
and lyingly bepraises either his life, if he
knew him, or his fame, if he knew him not;
this is more tolerable thus far, because Dictinius is accounted to have been a Catholic,
and to have been corrected of that error.
Then, passing on to
(for this
comes next in the art of lying,) he shall make
reverend mention of him, of an impious and
detestable person, condemned for his nefarious wickedness and crimes !
In which reverend mention, if haply the
for
whom this sort of net is spread, had not been
a firm Priscillianist, by this preaching of him,
But when the spy shall
he will be confirmed.
go on to discourse of the other matters, and
saying that he pities them whom the author
of darkness hath involved in such darkness
of error, that they acknowledge not the honor
of their own soul, and the brightness of their
divine ancestry: then speaking of Dictinius's
" the Pound," because it
Book, which is called

person

4 s 4

"

treats, first and last, of a dozen questions,
being as the ounces which go to the pound,
shall extol it with such praise, as to protest
that such a " Pound "
(in which awful blasphemies are contained) is more precious than
many thousands of pounds of gold; truly,
this astuteness of him who tells the lie slays
the soul of him who believes it, or, that being
slain already, doth in the same death sink,
and hold it down. But, thou wilt say,
afterwards it shall be set at liberty." What if it
come not to pass, either upon something intervening that prevents what was begun from
being completed, or through obstinacy of an
heretical mind denying the same things over
again, although of some it had already begun
to make confession ?
especially' because, if
he shall find out that he has been tampered
with by a stranger, he will just the more boldy
study to conceal his sentiments by a lie, when
he shall have learned much more certainly
that this is done without blame, even by the
example of the very person who tampered
This, truly, in a man who thinks
with him.
right to hide the truth by telling a lie,
with what face can we blame, and dare to
condemn what we teach ?

it

!)

a common dogma.

6. It remains, then, that what the Priscillianists think, according to the nefarious
falsity of their heresy, of God, of the soul,
of the body, and the rest, we hesitate not
with truthful pity to condemn; but what they
think of the right of telling a lie to hide the
truth is to be to us and them (which God forThis 'is so great an
bid
evil, that even though this attempt of ours,
whereby we desire by means of a lie to catch
them and change them, should so prosper
that we do catch and change them, there is
no gain that can compensate the damage of
making ourselves wrong with them in order
to set them right.
For through this lie shall
both we be in that respect perverse, and they
but half corrected; seeing that their thinking
it right to tell a lie on behalf of the truth is a
fault which we do not correct in them, because we have learned and do teach the same
thing, and lay it down that it is fit to be done,
in order that we may be able to attain to the
amending of them. Whom yet we amend
not, for their fault, with which they think
right to hide the truth, we take not away,
rather we make ourselves faulty when by such
a fault we seek them; nor do we find how we
can believe them, when converted, to whom,
while
lest haply
what was done to them that they might be
caught, they do to us when caught; not only
because to do it hath been their wont, but

perverted, we have lied;

because in us also, to whom they come, they
find the same.

7. And, what is more miserable, even they,
already made as it were our own, cannot find
how they may believe us.
For if they suspect that even in the catholic doctrines themselves we speak lyingly, that we may conceal
I know not what other thing which we think
true; of course to one suspecting the like thou
shalt say, I did this then only to catch thee:
but what wilt thou answer when he says,
Whence then do I know whether thou art not
doing it even now, lest thou be caught by
me ? Or indeed, can any man be made to
believe that a man does not lie not to be
caught, who lies to catch ? Seest thou whither
this evil tends ? that is, that not only we to
them, and they to us, but every brother to
every brother shall not undeservedly become
suspected ? And so while that which is aimed
at by means of the lie, is that faith may be
taught, the thing which is brought about is,
rather, that there shall be no having faith in
For if we speak even against God
any man.
when we tell a lie, what so great evil will
people be able to discover in any lie, that, as
though it were a most wretched thing, we
should be bound in every way to eschew it ?

8. But now observe how more tolerable in
comparison with us is the lying of the Priscillianists, when they know that they speak
deceitfully: whom by our own lying we think
right to deliver from those false things in
which they by erring are deceived. A Priscillianist saith, that the soul is a part of God, and
of the same nature and substance with Plim.
This is a great and detestable blasphemy.
For it follows that the nature of God may be
taken captive, deceived, cheated, disturbed,
and defiled, condemned and tortured.
But
if that man also saith this, who from so great
an evil desires to deliver a man by a lie, let
us see what is the difference between the one
blasphemer and the other.
"Very much,"
sayest thou: " for this the Priscillianist saith,
also believing it so: but the catholic not so
The one,
believing, though so speaking."
then, blasphemes without knowing, the other
with knowledge: the one against science, the
other against conscience; the one hath the
things, but in
blindness of thinking false
them hath at least the will of saying true
things; the other in secret seeth truth, and
"But the one,"
willingly speaketh false.
" teacheth this, that he may
thou wilt say,
make men partakers of his error and madness:
the latter saith it, that from that error and
madness he may deliver men." Now I have
already shown above how hurtful is this very

TO CONSENTIUS: AGAINST LYING.

thing which people believe will do good: but
meanwhile if we weigh in these two the present
evils, (for the future good which a catholic
seeks from correcting a heretic is uncertain,)
who sins worse ? he who deceives a man without knowing it, or he who blasphemes God,
Assuredly which is the worse,
knowing it?
that man understands, who with solicitous
piety preferreth God to man. Add to this,
that, if God may be blasphemed in order that
we may bring men to praise Him, without
doubt we do by our example and doctrine
invite men not only to praise, but also to
blaspheme God: because they whom through
blasphemies against God we plot to bring to
the praises of God, verily, if we do bring
them, will learn not only to praise, but also
These be the benefits we conto blaspheme.
fer on them whom, by blaspheming not ignorantly but with knowledge, we deliver from
heretics ! And whereas the Apostle delivered
men to Satan himself that they might learn not
to blaspheme, 1 we endeavor to rescue men
from Satan, that they may learn to blaspheme
not with ignorance, but with knowledge. And
upon ourselves, their masters, we bring this
so great bane, that, for the sake of catching
heretics, we first become, which is certain,
blasphemers of God, in order that we may
for the sake of delivering them, which is uncertain, be able to be teachers of His truth.

9. When therefore we teach ours to blaspheme God that the Priscillianists may believe
them theirs, let us see what evil themselves
say when they therefore lie that we may believe them ours.
They anathematize Priscillian, and detest him according to our mind;
they say that the soul is a creature of God,
not a part; they execrate the Priscillianists'
false martyrdoms; the catholic bishops by
whom that heresy has been stripped, attacked,
prostrated, they extol with great praises, and
so forth.
Behold, themselves speak truth
when they lie: not that the very thing which
is a lie can be true at the same time; but when
in one thing they lie, in another they speak
for when, in saying they are of us,
truth:
they lie, of the catholic faith they speak truth.
And therefore they, that they may not be
found out for Priscillianists, speak in lying
manner the truth: but we, that we may find
them out, not only speak lyingly, that we
may be believed to belong to them; but we
also speak false things which we know to
belong to their error. Therefore as for them,
when they wish to be thought of us, it is both
false in part, and true in part, what they say;
is false that they are of us, but true
for it

that the soul is not a part of God: but as for
us, when we wish to be thought to belong to
them, it is false, both the one and the other
that we say, both that we are Priscillianists,
and that the soul is a part of God.
They,
then, praise God, not blaspheme, when they
conceal themselves; and when they do not
so, but utter their own sentiments, they know
So that if they be
not that they blaspheme.
converted to the catholic faith, they console
themselves, because they can say what the
Apostle said: who when among other things
he had said,
I was before a blasphemer;
but," saith he, "I obtained mercy, because
" 2 We on the contrary,
I did it ignorantly.
in order that they may open themselves to
us, if we utter this as if it were a just lie for
deceiving and catching them, do assuredly
both say that we belong to the blaspheming
Priscillianists, and that they may believe us,
do without excuse of ignorance blaspheme.
For a catholic, who by blaspheming wishes to
be thought a heretic, cannot say,
I did it
ignorantly.''

"

"

10. Ever, my brother, in such cases, it behoves with fear to recollect, "Whoso shall
deny Me before men, I will deny him before
My Father which is in heaven." 3 Or truly
is it no denying of Christ before men, to deny
Him before Priscillianists, that when they
hide themselves, one may by a blasphemous
But who
lie
doubts, I pray thee, that Christ is denied,
when so as He is in truth, we say that He is
not; and so as the Priscillianist believes Him,
we say that He is ?

strip them and catch them ?

11. "But, hidden wolves," thou wilt say,
"clad in sheep's clothing, and privily and
grievously wasting the Lord's flock, can we
no otherwise find out." Whence then have
the Priscillianists become known, ere this
way of hunting for them with lies was exWhence was their very author,
cogitated ?
more cunning doubtless, and therefore more
Whence so many
covert, got at in his bed ?
and so great persons made manifest and condemned, and the others innumerable partly
corrected, partly as if corrected, and in the
Church's compassion gathered into her fold ?
For many ways giveth the Lord, when He
hath compassion, whereby we may come to
the discovery of them: two of which are more
happy than others; namely, that either they
whom they have wished to seduce, or they
whom they had already seduced, shall, when
they repent and are converted, point them out.
Which is more easily effected, if their nefarious error, not by lying tricks, but by truthful

1 1 Tim. i. 20.

- 1 Tim. i. 13.

3 Matt. x. 33.

"

But," thou wilt say,

reasonings be overthrown.
In the writing of
which it behoves thee to bestow thy pains,
since God hath bestowed the gift that thou
which wholesome writings
canst do this:
whereby their insane perversity is destroyed,
becoming more and more known, and being
by catholics, whether prelates who speak in
the congregations, or any studious men full
of zeal for God, every where diffused, these
will be holy nets in which they may be caught
For
truthfully, not with lies hunted after.
so being taken, either, of their own accord,
they will confess what they have been, and
others whom they know to be of the evil
correct, or
fellowship they will either kindly
Or else, if they shall be
mercifully betray.
ashamed to confess what with long-continued
simulation they have concealed, by the hidden
hand of God healing them shall they be made
whole.
" we more easily
12.
penetrate their concealment if we pretend to
be ourselves what they are."
If this were
lawful or expedient, Christ might have instructed His sheep that they should come
clad in wolves' clothing to the wolves, and by
the cheat of this artifice discover them: which
He hath not said, no, not when He foretold
that He would send them forth in the midst
They needed
of wolves. 2 But thou wilt say:
not at that time to have inquisition made for
them, being most manifest wolves; but their
bite and savageness were to be endured."
What, when foretelling later times, He said
that ravening wolves would come in sheep's
clothing ? Was there not room there to give
this advice and say, And do ye, that ye may
find them out, assume wolves' clothing, but
Not this saith He:
within be ye sheep still?
but when He had said,
Many will come to
you in sheep's clothing, but within are ravening wolves;" 3 He went on to say, not, By your
By their fruits ye shall know
lies, but,
By truth must we beware of, by
them."
truth must we take, by truth must we kill,
Be it far from us, that the blasphemies
of the ignorant we by wittingly blaspheming
should overcome: far from us, that the evils of
deceitful men we by imitating should guard
For how shall we guard against
against.
them if in order to guard against them we
For if in order that he
shall have them ?
may be caught who blasphemes unwittingly,
I shall blaspheme wittingly, worse is the thing
I do than that which I catch.
If in order that
he may be found who denies Christ unwittingly, I shall deny Him wittingly, to his undoing will he follow me whom I shall so find,

lies.

"

"

"

since in order that I may find him out, I first
am undone.

13. Or haply is it so, that he who plots in
this way to find out Priscillianists, denies not
Christ, forasmuch as with his mouth he utters
what with his heart he believes not ?
As if
truly (which I also said a little above) when
it was said, "With the heart man believeth
unto righteousness," it was added to no purpose, "with the mouth confession is made
unto salvation ?" 4
Is it not so that almost
all who have denied Christ before the persecutors, held in their heart what they believed
of Him ? And yet, by not confessing with
the mouth unto salvation, they perished, save
they which through penitence have lived
again ? Who can be so vain, 5 as to think that
the Apostle Peter had that in his heart which
he had on his lips when he denied Christ ?
Surely in that denial he held the truth within
and uttered the lie without. Why then did
he wash away with tears the denial which he
uttered with his mouth, if that sufficed for
salvation that with the heart he believed ?
Why, speaking the truth in his heart, did he
punish with so bitter weeping the lie which
he brought forth with his mouth, unless because he saw it to be a great and deadly evil,
that while with his heart he believed unto
righteousness, with his mouth he made not
confession unto salvation?

14. Wherefore, that which is written,

" Who
speaketh the truth in his heart,"
is not so to
be taken, as if, truth being retained in the
heart, in the mouth one may speak a lie.
But
the reason why it
is said, is, because it is
possible that a man may speak with his mouth
a truth which profiteth him nothing, if he hold
it not in his heart, that is, if what he speaketh, himself believe not; as the heretics, and,
above all, these same Priscillianists do, when
they do, not indeed believe the catholic faith,
but yet speak it, that they may be believed
to be of us.
They speak therefore the truth
in their mouth, not in their heart. On this
account were they to be distinguished from
" He that speaketh
him of whom it is written,
' Now this truth the catholic
truth in his heart.
as in his heart he speaketh, because so he
believeth, so also in his mouth ought he, that
so he may preach it; but against it, neither in
heart nor in mouth have falsehood, that both
with the heart he may believe unto righteousness, and with the mouth may make confesFor also in that psalm,
sion unto salvation.
" Who speaketh truth
after it had been said,
" Who
in his heart," presently this is added,
hath used no deceit in his tongue." 7

'

* " Concorditer
2 Matt. x. 16.

"

-" Misericorditer."

3 Matt. vii. is, 16.

4 Rom. x. 10.
6 Ps. xv. 2.

5 Evanescat.
7 Ps. xv. 2.

TO CONSENTIUS: AGAINST LYING.

15. And as for that saying of the Apostle,
"Putting away lying, speak every man truth
with his neighbor,, for we are members one of
1 far be it that we should so underanother/'
stand it, as though he had permitted to speak
a lie with those who are not yet with us memBut the reason
bers of the body of Christ.
is said, is, because each one of us
why it
ought to account every man to be that which
he wishes him to become, although he be not
yet become such; as the Lord showed the
alien Samaritan to be neighbor to him unto
whom he showed mercy." - A neighbor then,
and not an alien, is that man to be accounted,
with whom our concern is that he remain not
an alien; and if, on the score of his not being
yet made partaker of our Faith and Sacrament, there be some truths that must be concealed from him, yet is that no reason why
false things should be told him.

16.
times

For there were even in the Apostles'
some who preached the truth not in
that is, not with truthful mind: of
truth,
whom
the Apostle saith that they preached
Christ not chastely, but of envy and strife.
And on this account even at that time some
were tolerated while preaching truth not with
a chaste mind: yet not any have been praised
as preaching falsehood with a chaste mind.
Lastly, he saith of those, "Whether in pre-
" 3 but
tence or in truth Christ be preached:
in no wise would he say, In order that Christ
may after be preached, let Him be first
denied.

17. Wherefore, though there be
indeed
many ways in which latent heretics
may be
sought out, without vituperating the catholic
faith or praising
heretical
impiety, yet if
there were no other way at all of drawing out
heretical impiety from its caverns, but that
the catholic tongue should deviate from the
straight path of truth; more tolerable were it
that that should be hid, than that this should
be precipitated; more tolerable that the foxes
should lurk in their pits unseen, than for the
sake of catching them the huntsmen should
fall into the pit of blasphemy; more tolerable
that the perfidy of Priscillianists should be
covered with the veil of truth, than that the
faith of catholics, lest it should of lying Priscillianists be praised, should
of
believing
For if lies, not of whatcatholics be denied.
soever kind, but blasphemous lies, are therefore just because they are committed with
intent to detect hidden heretics;
it will be
possible at that rate, if they be committed
with the same intention, that there should be
For put the case that of a
chaste adulteries.

unjust: or

number of lewd Priscillianists, some woman
should cast her eye upon a catholic Joseph,
and promise him that she will betray their
hidden retreats if she obtain from him that he
lie with her, and it be certain that if he consent unto her she will make good her promise:
Or
shall we judge that it ought to be done?
shall we understand that by no means must
such a price be paid in purchase of that kind
of merchandise ? Why then do we not rout
out heretics, in order to their being caught,
by the flesh committing lasciviousness
in
adultery, and yet think right to rout them
out by a mouth committing fornication in
For either it will be lawful to
blasphemy?
defend both the one and the other with equal
reason, that these things be therefore said to
be not unjust, because they were done with
intention of finding out the
if
sound doctrine willeth not even for the sake
of finding out heretics that we should have to
do with unchaste women, albeit only in body,
not in mind, assuredy not even for the sake
of finding out heretics willeth it that by us,
albeit only in voice not in mind, either unclean heresy were preached, or the chaste
Catholic Church blasphemed.
Because even
the very sovereignty of the mind, to which
every inferior motion of the man ought to be
obedient, will not lack deserved opprobrium,
when a thing is done that ought not to be
done, whether by member or by word.
Although even when it
done by member: because the tongue is a
member, by which the word is made; nor is
any deed of ours by any member brought to
is first conceived in the
the birth unless it
heart; or rather being by our inwardly thinking upon and consenting unto
it already
brought forth
brought to
abroad in our doing of it, by a member.
It
is therefore no excusing the mind from the
deed, when any thing is said to be done not
after the purpose of the mind, 4 which yet were
not done, unless the mind decreed it to be
done.

is done by word, it

the birth,

is

is

it

18. It does indeed make very much difference, for what cause, with what end, with
what intention a thing be done: but those
things which are clearly sins, are upon no
plea of a good cause, with no seeming good
end, no alleged good intention, to be done.
Those works, namely, of men, which are not
in themselves sins, are now good, now evil,
according as their causes are good or evil;
as, to give food to a poor man is a good work,
if it be done because of pity, with right faith;
as to lie with a wife, when it is done for the

Eph.

Luk e x. 30-37.

3 Phil. i. T5-1?

4 Ex animo.

.

sake of generation, if it be done with faith to
These and
beget subjects for regeneration.
the like works according to their causes are
good or evil, because the self-same, if they
have evil causes, are turned into sins: as, if
for boasting sake a poor man is fed; or for
lasciviousness a man lies with his wife; or
children are begotten, not that they may be
nurtured for God, but for the devil.
When,
however, the works in themselves are evil,
such as thefts, fornications, blasphemies, or
other such; who is there that will say, that
upon good causes they may be done, so as
either to be no sins, or, what is more absurd,
Who is there that would say,
just sins ?
That we may nave to give to the poor, let us
commit thefts upon the rich: or, Let us sell
false witness, especially if innocent men are
not hurt thereby, but rather guilty men are
rescued from the judges who would condemn
them ?
For two good things are done by
selling of this lie, that money may be taken
wherewith a poor man may be fed, and a
judge deceived that a man be not punished.
Even in the matter of wills, if we can, why
not suppress the true, and forge false wills,
that inheritances or legacies may not come
to unworthy persons, who do no good with
them; but rather to those by whom the hunfed, the naked clothed, strangers
gry are
Churches
redeemed,
entertained,
For why should not
builded ?
those evil
things be done for the sake of these good
things, if, for the sake of these good things,
those are not evil at all?
Nay, further, if
lewd and rich women are likely to enrich
moreover their lovers and paramours, why
should not even these parts and arts be undertaken by a man of merciful heart, to use
them for so good a cause as that he may have
whence to bestow upon the needy; and not
Let him that stole
hear the Apostle saying,
steal no more, but rather let him labor, working with his hands that which is good, that he
may have to give to him that needeth ?
If
indeed not only theft itself, but also false
witness and adultery and every evil work will
be not evil but good, if it be done for the sake
Who can
of being the means of doing good
except one who endeavors
say these things.
to subvert human affairs and all manners and
For of what most heinous deed, what
laws?
most foul crime, what most impious sacrilege,
may it not be said that it is possible for it to
be done rightly and justly; and not only
with impunity, but even gloriously, that in
only no punishperpetrating thereof not
ments should be feared, but there should be

captives

" *

"

found to

hope even of rewards: if once we shall concede in all evil works of men, that not what
is done, but wherefore done, must be the
question; and this, to the end that whatever
have been done for good
are
causes, not even they should be judged to be
But if justice deservedly punisheth a
evil?
thief, albeit he shall say and shew that he
therefore withdrew superfluities from a rich
that he might afford necessaries to a poor
man; if deservedly she punisheth a forger,
albeit he prove that he therefore corrupted
another's will, that he might be heir, who
should thence make large alms, not he who
should make none; if deservedly she punisheth an adulterer, yea, though he shall demonstrate that of mercy he did commit adultery,
that through her with whom he did it he
might deliver a man from death; lastly, to
draw nearer to the matter in question, if deservedly she punisheth him who hath with
that intent mixed in adulterous embrace with
some woman, privy to the turpitude of the
Prisciliianists, that he might enter into their
concealments; I pray thee, when the Apostle
Neither yield ye your members insaith,
unrighteousness unto sin;" 2
struments of
and therefore neither hands, nor members of
generation, nor other members, can it be
right to yield unto flagitious deeds with intent that we may be able to find out Prisciliianists; what hath our tongue, what our whole
mouth, what the organ of the voice, offended
us, that we should yield these as instruments
to sin, and to so great a sin, in which, that
we may apprehend and rescue Prisciliianists
from blaspheming in ignorance, we, without
excuse of ignorance, are to blaspheme our
God?

"

19. Some man will say,

So then any thief
whatever is to be accounted equal with that
thief who steals with will of mercy?" Who
would say this ?
But of these two it does not
follow that any is good, because one is worse.
He is worse who steals through coveting,
than he who steals through pity: but if all
theft be sin, from all theft we must abstain.
For who can say that people may sin, even
though one sin be damnable, another venial ?
but now we are asking, if a man shall do this
or that, who will not sin or will sin ? not, who
For even
will sin more heavily or lightly.
thefts themselves are more lightly punished
by law than crimes of lust: they are, however, both sins, albeit the one lighter, the
other heavier; so that a theft which is committed of concupiscence is held to be lighter
than an act of lust which is committed for

"

1 Eph. iv. 28.

- R can. vi. 13.

TO CONSENTIUS: AGAINST LYING.

Namely, in their own
doing a good turn.
kind these become lighter than other sins of
the same kind, which appear to be committed
with a good intention; when yet the same
compared with sins of another kind lighter in
respect of the kind itself, are found to be
It is a heavier sin to commit theft
heavier.
of avarice, than of mercy; and likewise it is a
heavier sin to perpetrate lewdness of luxury,
than of mercy; and yet is it a heavier sin to
commit adultery of mercy, than to commit
it our concern now,
theft of avarice.
what is lighter or what heavier, but what
For no man can say
are sins or are not.
that it was a duty for a sin to be done, where
is clearly a sin; but we say that it
is a
duty, if the sin were done so or so, to forgive
or not to forgive.

Nor is

it

*'

I have

20. But, what must be confessed, to human
minds certain compensative sins do cause
they are even
such embarrassment, that
thought meet to be praised, and rather to be
For who can doubt it to
called right deeds.
be a great sin, if a father prostitute his own
daughters to the fornications of the impious ?
And yet hath there arisen a case in which a
just man thought it his duty to do this, when
the Sodomites with nefarious onset of lust
For he said,
were rushing upon his guests.
two daughters which have not
known man; I will bring them out to you,
and do ye to them as is good in your eyes:
only unto these men do ye no wrong, for that
they have come under covering of my roof." *
What shall we say here ? Do we not so abhor the wickedness which the Sodomites were
attempting to do to the guests of the just
man, that, whatever were done so this were
not done, he should deem right to be done ?
Very much also moveth us the person of the
doer, which by merit of righteousness was
obtaining deliverance from Sodom, to say
that, since it is a less evil for women to suffer
lewdness than for men, it even pertained to
the righteousness of that just man, that to
his daughters he chose this rather to be
done, than to his guests; not only willing
this in his mind, but also offering it in word,
and, if they should assent, ready to fulfill it
But then, if we shall open this way
in deed.
to sins, that we are to commit less sins, in
order that others may not commit greater;
by a broad boundary, nay rather, with no
boundary at all, but with a tearing up and
removing of all bounds, in infinite space, will
For, when it
all sins enter in and reign.
shall be defined, that a man is to sin less,
that another may not sin more; then, of

course, by our committing thefts shall other
men's committing of lewdness be guarded
against, and incest by lewdness; and if any
impiety shall seem even worse than incest, even
incest shall be pronounced meet to be done by
us, if in such wise it can be wrought that that
impiety be not committed by others: and in
each several kind of sins, both thefts for
thefts, and lewdness for lewdness, and incest
for incest, shall be accounted meet to be
done: our own sins for other men's, not only
it come to the
less for greater, but even if
very highest and worst, fewer for more; if
the stress of affairs so turns, that otherwise
other men would not abstain from sin unless
by our sinning, somewhat less indeed, but
still sinning; so that in every case where an
enemy who shall have power of this sort shall
Unless thou be wicked, 1 will be more
say,
wicked, or unless thou do this wickedness,
I will do more such/' we must seem to admit
wickedness in ourselves, if we wish to refrain
To be wise in
(others) from wickedness.
this sort, what is
it but to lose one's wits, or
rather, to be downright mad ?
Mine own
iniquity, not another's, whether perpetrated
upon me or upon others, is that from which
I must beware of damnation.
the soul
that sinneth, it shall die. 2

For

"

"

impiety of

21. If then to sin, that others ma)' not
commit a worse sin, either against us or
against any, without doubt we ought not; it
is to be considered in that which Lot did,
whether it be an example which we ought to
imitate, or rather one which we ought to
For it seems meet to be more looked
avoid.
into and noted, that, when so horrible an evil
from the most flagitious
the
Sodomites was impending over his guests,
which he wished to ward off and was not able,
to such a degree may even that just man's
mind have been disturbed, that he was willing to do that which, not man's fear with its
misty tempest, but God's Law in its tranquil
it be consulted by us, will cry
serenity, if
aloud, must not be done, and will command
rather that we be so cautious not to sin ourselves, that we sin not through fear of any
For that just
sins whatever of other men.
man, by fearing other men's sins, which candefile except such as consent thereto,
not
was so perturbed that he did not attend to
his own sin, in that he was willing to subject
his daughters to the lusts of impious men.
These things, when we read in holy Scriptures, we must not, for that we believe them
done, therefore believe them meet to be
done; lest we violate precepts while we indis-

1 Gen. xix. 8.

2 Ezek. xviii. 4.

49Q

In short, if

follow precedents.
Or, truly,
criminately
because David swore to put Nabal to death,
and, upon more considerate clemency, did it
l shall we therefore say that he is to be
not,
imitated, so that we may swear to do a thing
which afterwards we may see to be not meet
to be done?
But as fear perturbed the one,
so that he was willing to prostitute his daughters, so did anger the other, that he swore
it were allowed us to
rashly.
inquire of them both, by asking them to tell
us why they did these things, the one might
Fearfulness and trembling came
answer,
upon me, and darkness covered me;" 2 the
" Mine eye was troubled
other too might say,
through wrath: 3 "
so that we should not
marvel either that the one in the darkness of
fear, or the other with troubled eye, saw not
what was meet to have been seen, that they
might not do what was not meet to have
been done.

"

22. And to holy David indeed it might
more justly be said, that he ought not to have
been angry; no, not with one however ungrateful and rendering evil for good; yet if,
as man, anger did steal over him, he ought
not to have let it so prevail, that he should
swear to do a thing which either by giving way
to his rage he should do, or by breaking his
But to the other, set as
oath leave undone.
he was amid the libidinous frenzy of the
Sodomites, who would dare to say, "Although
thy guests in thine own house, whither to
enter in thou by most violent humanity hast
compelled them, be laid hold upon by lewd
men, and being deforced be carnally known
as women, fear thou not a whit, care for it not
a whit, have no dread, no horror, no tremWhat man, even a companion of
bling?"
those wretches, would dare to say this to the
But assuredly it would be most
pious host?
" Do what thou canst, that the
rightly said,
thing be not done which thou deservedly
fearest: but let not this fear of thine drive
thee to do a thing which if thy daughters be
willing that it be done unto them, they will
through thee do wickedness with the Sodomites, if unwilling, will through thee from the
Commit not thou
Sodomites suffer violence.
a great crime of thine own, while thou dreadest a greater crime of other men; for be the
difference as great as thou wilt between thine
own and that of others, this will be thine
own, that other men's." Unless perchance in
defending this man one should so crowd him-
" Since to receive
self into a corner, as to say,
a wrong is better than to do one, and those

1 t Sam. xxv. 22-35.
3 Ps. vi. 7, turbatus est ftrae Sm, as in LXX. " Mine eye is
E. V.

consumed because of grief."

2 Ps. Iv. 5.

guests were not about to do but to suffer a
wrong, that just man chose that his daughters
should suffer wrong rather than his guests,
acting upon his rights as his daughters' lord;
and he knew that it would be no sin in them,
if the thing were done, because they would
but bear them which did the sin, not consenting unto them, and so without sin of their
own.
In fine, they did not offer themselves
(albeit better females than males) to be carnally known instead of those guests, lest they
should be rendered guilty, not by the suffering of others'' lust, but by consenting of their
own will: nor yet did their father permit it to
be done unto himself, when they essayed to
do it, because he would not betray his guests
to them, (albeit there had been less of evil,
if it were done to one man than to two;) but
as much as he could he resisted, lest himself
also should be defiled by any assent of his
own, though even if the frenzy of others' lust
had prevailed by strength of body, it would
not have defiled him so long as he consented
Now as the daughters sinned not,
not.
neither did he sin in their persons, because
he was not making them to sin, if they should
be deforced against their will, but only to bear
them that did the sin.
Just as if he should
offer his slaves to be beaten by ruffians, that
his guests might not suffer the wrong of beatOf which matter I shall not dispute,
ing."
because it would take long to argue, whether
even a master may justly use his right of
power over his slave, so as to cause an unoffending slave to be smitten, that his unoffending friend may not be beaten in his
house by violent bad men.
But certainly, as
concerning David, it is no wise right to say
that he ouirht to have sworn to do a thing;
which afterwards he would perceive that he
Whence it is clear that we
ought not to do.
ought not to take all that we read to have
been done by holy or just men, and transfer
the same to morals, but hence too we must
learn how widely that saying of the Apostle
extends, and even to what persons it reaches:
Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault,
ye which are spiritual restore such an one in
the spirit of meekness, considering thyself
The being
also, lest thou be tempted." 4
overtaken in a fault happens, either while one
does not see at the time what is right to be
done, or while, seeing it, one is overcome;
that is, that a sin is done, either for that the
truth is hidden, or for that infirmity compelleth.

23. But in all our doings, even good men
are very greatly embarrassed in the matter

'

4 Gal. vi. 1.

TO CONSENTIUS: AGAINST LYING.

49 1

"

of compensative sins; so that these are not
esteemed to be sins, if they have such causes
for the which they be done, and in the which
it may seem to be rather sin, if they be left
And chiefly as concerning lies hath
undone.
it come to this pass in the opinion of men,
that those lies are not accounted sins, nay
rather are believed to be rightly done, when
one tells a lie for the benefit of him for whom
it is expedient to be deceived, or lest a person should hurt others, who seems likely to
hurt unless he be got rid of by lies.
In defense of these kinds of lies, very many examples from holy Scripture are accounted to
lend their support.
It is not, however, the
same thing to hide the truth as it is to utter
For although every one who lies wishes
a lie.
to hide what is true, yet not every one who
For
wishes to hide what is true, tells a lie.
in general we hide truths not by telling a lie,
For the Lord lied
but by holding our peace.
not when He said,
I have many things to
say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now." "
He held His peace from true things, not
spake false things; for the hearing of which
truths He judged them to be less fit.
But if
He had not indicated this same to them, that
is, that they were not able to bear the things
which He was unwilling to speak, He would
indeed hide nevertheless somewhat of truth,
but that this may be rightly done we should
peradventure not know, or not have so great
an example to confirm us.
Whence, they
who assert that it is sometimes meet to lie, do
not conveniently mention that Abraham did
this concerning Sarah, whom he said to be his
For he did not say, She is not my
sister.
wife, but he said, "She is my sister;
''- because she was in truth so near akin, that she
Which
might without a lie be called a sister.
also afterwards he confirmed, after she had
been given back by him who had taken her,
answering him and saying, "And indeed she
is my sister, by father, not by mother;" that
is, by the father's kindred, not the mother's.
Somewhat therefore of truth he left untold,
not told aught of falsehood, when he left wife
untold, and told of sister.
This also did his
son Isaac: for him too we know to have gotten
It is not then a lie, when
a wife near of kin. 3
by silence a true thing is kept back, but when
by speech a false thing is put forward.

24. Touching Jacob, however, that which
he did at his mother's bidding, so as to seem
to deceive his father, if with diligence and in
faith it be attended to, is no lie, but a mysall
tery.
parables also, and figures designed for the

The which if we shall call lies,

1 John xvi. 12.

2 Gen. xx. 2. 12.

3 Gen. xxvi. 7, and xxiv.

"

signifying of any things soever, which are not
to be taken according to their proper meaning, but in them is one thing to be understood
from another, shall be said to be lies: which
For he who thinks
be far from us altogether.
this, may also in regard of tropical expressions of which there are so many, bring in
upon all of them this calumny; so that even
metaphor, as it is called, that is, the usurped
transferring of any word from its proper object to an object not proper, may at this rate
For when he speaks of wavbe called a lie.
ing corn-fields, of vines putting forth gems, 4
of the bloom of youth, of snowy hairs; without doubt the waves, the gems, the bloom,
the snow, for that we find them not in those
objects to which we have from other transferred these words, shall by these persons be
And Christ a Rock, and the
accounted lies.
stony heart of the Jews; also, Christ a Lion,
and the devil a lion, and innumerable such
like, shall be said to be lies. 5
Nay, this
tropical expression reaches even to what is
called antiphrasis, as when a thing is said to
abound which does not exist, a thing said to
lucus quod non
be sweet which is
sour;
Of which
luceat, Parcce quod non parcatit.''
If he will not
kind is that in holy Scripture,
bless 6 Thee to Thy face;
which the devil
saith to the Lord concerning holy Job, and
curse." By which word also
the meaning is
the feigned crime of Naboth is named by his
calumniators; for it is said that he
blessed 7All these modes
the king," that is, cursed.
of speaking shall be accounted lies, if figurative speech or action shall be set down as lyBut if it be no lie, when things which
ing.
signify one thing by another are referred to
the understanding of a truth, assuredly not
only that which Jacob did or said to his father
that he might be blessed, but that too which
Joseph spoke as if in mockery of his brothers,
and David's feigning of madness, 9 must be
judged to be no lies, but prophetical speeches
and actions, to be referred to the understanding of those things which are true; which are
covered as it were with a garb of figure on
purpose to exercise the sense of the pious inquirer, and that they may not become cheap
by lying bare and on the surface.
Though
even the things which we have learned from
other places, where they are spoken openly
and manifestly, these, when they are brought
out from their hidden retreats, do, by our (in
some sort) discovering of them, become re-

"

"

"

"

4 " Gemmare."
5 1 Cor. x. 4 ; Ezek. xxxvi. 26 ; Rev. v. 5 ;
6 Job ii. 5, benedixerit : as LXX. uAo-y>j<7ei : E. V. "curse."*
7 1 Kings xxi. 10, 13. LXX. eii\6yr]Ka<; : E. V. " didst blas-

1 Pet. v. 8.

pheme."

8 Gen. xlii.

9 1 Sam. xxi. 13.

49 2

are

that

Nor is it that
newed, and by renewal sweet.
they are begrudged to the learners, in that
they are in these ways obscured; but are presented in a more winning manner, that being
as it were withdrawn, they may be desired
more ardently, and being desired may with
Yet true things,
more pleasure be found.
not false, are spoken; because true things,
not false, are signified, whether by word or
the things
by deed;
signified
namely, those are the things spoken.
They
are accounted lies only because people do not
understand that the true things which are signified are the things said, but believe that
To make
false things are the things said.
this plainer by examples, attend to this very
With skins of the kids,
thing that Jacob did.
no doubt, he did cover his limbs; if we seek
the immediate cause, we shall account him to
have lied; for he did this, that he might be
thought to be the man he was not: but if this
deed be referred to that for the signifying of
which it was really done, by skins of the kids
are signified sins; by him who covered himself therewith, He who bare not His own, but
others' sins. The truthful signification, therefore, can in no wise be rightly called a lie.
And as in deed, so also in word.
Namely,
when his father said to him, "Who art thou,
my son?'' 1 he answered, "I am Esau, thy
This, if it be referred to those
first-born."
two twins, will seem a lie; but if to that for
the signifying of which those deeds and words
are written, He is here to be understood, in
His body, which is His Church, Who, speaking
" When ye shall see
of this
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
prophets in the kingdom of God, and yourselves cast out. And they shall come from
the east and from the west and from the north
and from the south, and shall sit down in the
kingdom of God; and, behold, there are last
which shall be first, and there are first which
For so in a certain sort the
shall be last." 2
younger brother did bear off the primacy of
the elder brother, and transfer it to himself.
Since then things so true, and so truthfully,
be signified, what is there here that ought to
be accounted to have been done or said lyFor when the things which are signiingly ?
fied are not in truth things which are not, but
which are, whether past or present or future,
without doubt it is a true signification, and no
But it takes too long in the matter of
iie.
this prophetical signification by stripping off
3 wherein truth hath
the shell to search out all,
the palm, because as by being signified they

thing,

saith,

1 Gen. xxvii. 16-19.
3 Enucleate cuncta rimari.

2 Luke xiii. 28-30.

were fore-announced, so by ensuing have they
become clear.

it

25. Nor have I undertaken that in the
present discourse, as it more pertains to thee,
who hast laid open the hiding-places of the
Priscillianists, so far as relates to their false
and perverse dogmas; that they may not seem
to have been in such sort investigated as if
they were meet to be taught, not to be argued
Make it therefore more thy work
against.
that they be beaten down and laid low, as
thou hast made it, that they should be betrayed and laid open; lest while we wish to
get at the discovery of men practising falsehood, we allow the falsehoods themselves, as
if insuperable, to stand their ground; when
we ought rather even in the hearts of latent
heretics to destroy falsehoods, than by sparing falsehoods to find out the deceivers who
practise falsehood.
Moreover, among those
dogmas of theirs which are to be subverted,
is this which they dogmatize, namely, that in
order to hide religion religious people ought
to lie, to that degree that not only concerning
other matters, not pertaining to doctrine of
religion, but concerning religion itself,
is
meet to lie, that it may not become exposed
to aliens; to wit, that one may deny Christ,
in order that one may in the midst of His
enemies be in secret a Christian.
This impious and nefarious dogma do thou likewise,
I beseech thee, overthrow;
to bolster up
which they in their argumentations do gather
from the Scriptures testimonies to make it
appear that lies are not only to be pardoned
and tolerated, but even honored. To thee
therefore it pertains, in refuting that detestable sect, to show that those testimonies of
Scripture are so to be received, that either
thou shalt teach those to be no lies which are
accounted to be such, if they be understood
in that manner in which they ought to be understood; or, that those are not to be imitated
which be manifestly lies; or in any wise at
last, that concerning those matters at least
which pertain to doctrine of religion, it is in no
wise meet to tell a lie. For thus are they truly
from the very foundation overthrown, while
that is overthrown wherein they lurk: that in
that very matter they be judged least fit for
us to follow, most fit to be shunned, in that
they, for the hiding of their heresy, do proThis it is in them that
fess themselves liars.
must from the very first be assaulted, this
which is, as it were, their fitting bulwark must
with blows of Truth be battered and cast
Nor must we afford them another
down.
lurking-place, which they had not, wherein
they may take refuge, to wit, that being perhaps betrayed of them whom they have es-

TO CONSENTIUS: AGAINST LYING.

sayed to seduce but could not, they should
" We only wanted to try them, because
say,
prudent Catholics have taught that to find
out heretics it is right to do this."
But it is
necessary with somewhat more earnest bespeaking of thy favor to say why this seems
to me a tripartite method of disputing against
those who want to apply the divine Scriptures
as advocates of their lies; to wit, by showing
that some which are there accounted to be
lies, are not what they are accounted, if
rightly understood; next, that if there be
there any manifest lies, they are not meet to
be imitated; thirdly, contrary to all opinions
of all persons who think it pertains to the
duty of a good man sometimes to lie, that it
must in every way be held that in doctrine of
religion there must in no wise a lie be told.
For these are the three things to follow up
which I shortly before recommended, and in
some sort enjoined thee.

26. To show then that some things in the
Scriptures which are thought to be lies are
not what they are thought, if they be rightly
understood, let it not seem to thee to tell
little against them, that it is not from Apostolic but from Prophetical books that they
For all
find as it were precedents of lying.
those which they mention by name, in which
each lied, are read in those books in which
not only words but many deeds of a figurative meaning are recorded, because it was also
in a figurative sense that they were done.
But in figures that which is spoken as a seeming lie, being well understood, is found to be
The Apostles, however, in their
a truth.
Epistles spoke in another sort, and in another
sort are written the Acts of the Apostles, to
wit, because now the New Testament was revealed, which was veiled in those prophetic
all those Apostolic
figures.
Epistles, and in that large book in which
their acts are narrated with canonical truth,
we do not find any person lying, such that
from him a precedent can be set forth by these
men for license of lying.
For that simulation of Peter and Barnabas with which they
were compelling the Gentiles to Judaize, was
deservedly reprehended and set right, both
that it might not do harm at the time, and
that it might not weigh with posterity as a
For when the Apostle
thing to be imitated.
Paul saw that they walked not uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, he said to
Peter in the presence of them all,
If thou,
being a Jew, livest as the Gentiles; and not
as do the Jews, how compellest thou the
But in that which
Gentiles to Judaize?" 1

In short, in

"

himself did, to the intent that by
retainingand acting upon certain observances of the
law after the Jewish custom he might show
that he was no enemy to the Law and to the
Prophets, far be it from us to believe that he
As indeed concerning this
did so as a liar.
matter his sentence is sufficiently well known,
whereby it was settled that neither Jews who
then believed in Christ were to be prohibited
from the traditions of their fathers, nor Gentiles when they became Christians to be compelled thereunto: in order that those sacred
rites 2 which were well known to have been of
God enjoined, should not be shunned as sac-
(rileges; nor yet accounted so necessary, now
that the New Testament was revealed, as
though without them whoso should be conFor
verted unto God, could not be saved.
there were some who thought so and preached,
albeit after Christ's Gospel received; and to
these had feignedly consented both Peter and
Barnabas, and so were compelling the GenFor it was a compelling, to
tiles to Judaize.
preach them to be so necessary as if, even
after the Gospel received, without them were
no salvation in Christ.
This the error of certain did suppose, this Peter's fear did feign,
What
this Paul's liberty did beat down.
I am made all things to
therefore he saith,
all, that I might gain all," 3 that did he, by
For each
suffering with others, not by lying.
becomes as though he were that person whom
he would fain succor, when he succoreth with
the same pity wherewith he would wish himself to be succored, if himself were set in the
same misery.
Therefore he becomes as
though he were that person, not for that he
deceives him, but for that he thinks himself
Whence is that of the Apostle,
as him.
which I have before rehearsed, "Brethren, if
a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are
spiritual restore such an one in the spirit of
meekness, considering thyself lest thou also
For if, because he said,
be tempted." 4
" To the Jews became I as a Jew, and to
them which were under the law as under the
law," 5 he is therefore to be accounted to
have in a lying manner taken up the sacraments of the old law, he ought in the same
manner to have taken up, in a lying way, the
idolatry of the Gentiles, because he hath said
that to them which were without law he became as without law; which thing in any wise
For he did not any where sacrihe did not.
fice to idols or adore those figments and not
rather freely as a martyr of Christ show that
they were to be detested and eschewed.
From no apostolic acts or speeches, there-

"

1 Gal. ii. 13, 14.

2 ll Sacramento..
4 Gal. vi. 1.

3 1 Cor. ix. 22. LSee R.V.J
5 1 Cor. ix. 20.

fore, do these men allege things meet for
From proimitation as examples of lying.
phetical deeds or words, then, the reason why
they seem to themselves to have what they
may allege, is only for that they take figures
prenunciative to be lies, because they are
sometimes like unto lies. But when they are
referred to those things for the signifying of
which they were so done or said, they are
found to be significations full of truth, and
A lie,
therefore in no wise to be lies.
namely, is a false signification with will of
But that is no false signification,
deceiving.
where, although one thing is signified by another, yet the thing signified is a true thing,
if it be rightly understood.

27. There are some things of this sort even
of our Saviour in the Gospel, because the
Lord of the Prophets deigned to be Himself
Such are those where, conalso a Prophet.
cerning the woman which had an issue of
" Who touched Me?"' and
blood, He said,
" Where have ye laid him?" 2
of Lazarus.
He asked, namely, as if not knowing that
And He did on
which in any wise He knew.
this account feign that He knew not, that He
might signify somewhat else by that His
seeming ignorance: and since this signification was truthful, it was assuredly not a lie.
For those were signified, whether by her
which had the issue, or by him which had
been four days dead, whom even He Who
knew all things did in a certain sort know not.
For both she bore the type of the people of
the Gentiles, whereof the prophecy had gone
before, "A people whom I have not known
hath served Me:'' 3 and Lazarus, removed
from the living, did as it were in that place
lie in significative similitude where He lay,
Whose voice that is, "I am cast out of the
sight of thine eyes." 4 And with that intent,
as though it were not known by Christ, both
who she was, and where he was laid, by His
words of interrogating a figure was enacted,
and by truthful signification all lying left
apart.

28. Hence is also that which thou hast
mentioned that they speak of, that the Lord
Jesus, after He was risen, walked in the way
with two disciples; and upon their drawing
near to the village whither they were going,
He made as though He would have gone
" But
farther: where the Evangelist, saying,
He Himself feigned
that He would go
further," s hath put that very word in which
liars too greatly delight, that they may with
impunity lie: as if every thing that is feigned

Nor is

is a lie, whereas in a truthful way, for the
sake of signifying one thing by another, so
many things use to be feigned.
If then there
had been no other thing that Jesus signified,
in that He feigned to be going further, with
reason might it be judged to be a lie: but
then if it be rightly understood and referred
to that which He willed to signify, it
is a
Else will all things be lies which,
mystery.
on account of a certain similitude of things
to be signified, although they never were done,
Of which
are related to have been done.
sort is that concerning the two sons of one
man, the elder who tarried with his father,
and the younger who went into a far country,
which is narrated so much at length.
In
which sort of fiction, men have put even
human deeds or words to irrational animals
and things without sense, that by this sort of
feigned narrations but true significations, they
might in more winning manner intimate the
things which they wished.
it only in
authors of secular letters, as in Horace, 7 that
mouse speaks to mouse, and weasel to fox,
that through a fictitious narration a true signification may be referred to the matter in
hand; whence the like fables of ^Esop being
referred to the same end, there is no man so
untaught as to think they ought to be called
lies: but in Holy Writ also, as in the book of
Judges, the trees seek them a king, and speak
to the olive, to the fig and to the vine and to
the bramble. 8
all
feigned, with intent that one may get to the
thing which is intended, by a feigned narration indeed, yet not a lying one, but with a
This I have said on
truthful signification.
account of that which is written concerning
Jesus, "And Hmself feigned to be going
further:" lest any from this word, like the
Priscillianists, wishing to have license of lying,
should contend that beside others even Christ
But whoso would understand what
did lie.
He by feigning that did prefigure, let him
attend to that which He by acting did effect.
For when afterwards He did go further, above
all heavens, yet deserted He not His disciples.
In order to signify this which in the future
He did as God, at the present He feigned to
do that as Man. And therefore was a veritable signification caused in that feigning to go
before, because in this departure the verity
Let
of that signification did follow after.
him therefore contend that Christ did lie by
feigning, who denieth that He fulfilled by
doing that which He signified.

Which, in any wise,

is

29. Because, therefore, lying heretics find
not in the books of the New Testament any

1 Luke viii. 44 Ps. xxxi. 22.

2 John xi. 34.
5 Luke xxiv. 2S

3 Ps. xviii. 44" Scrvivit."
" Finxit."

6 Luke xv. 11-32.

7 Serra. ii. 6

; Epist. i. 7.

8 Judg. ix. 8-15.

TO CONSENTIUS: AGAINST LYING.

precedents of lying which are meet to be
imitated, they esteem themselves to be most
their disputation wherein they
copious in
opine that it is right to lie, when from the old
prophetical books, because it doth not appear
therein, save to the few who understand, to
what must be referred the significative sayings
and doings which as such be true, they seem
to themselves to find out and allege many that
But desiring to have, wherewith they
be lies.
may defend themselves, precedents of deceit
seemingly meet to be imitated, they deceive
themselves, and "their iniquity lieth unto
Those persons, however, of whom it
itself. 1
is not there to be believed that they wished
to prophesy, if in doing or saying they feigned
aught with will of deceiving, however it may
be that from the very things also which they
did or said somewhat prophetical may be
shapen out, being by His omnipotence afore
deposited therein as a seed and pre-disposed,
Who knoweth how to turn to good account
even the ill-deeds of men, yet as far as regards the persons themselves, without doubt
But they ought not to be esteemed
they lied.
meet for imitation simply for that they are
found in those books which are deservedly
called holy and divine: for those books contain the record of both the ill deeds and the
good deeds of men; the one to be eschewed,
the other to be followed after: and some are
so put, that upon them is also sentence passed;
some, with no judgment there expressed, are
left permitted for us to judge of: because it
was meet that we should not only be nourished
by that which is plain, but exercised by that
which is obscure.

30. But why do these persons think they may
imitate Tamar telling a lie, and not think they
may imitate Judah committing fornication ?
For there they have read both, and nought
of these hath that Scripture either blamed or
praised, but has merely narrated both, and to
our judgment dismissed both: but it is marvellous if it hath permitted aught of these to
For, that Tamar
be imitated with impunity.
not through lust of playing the harlot, but
through wish of conceiving seed, did tell the
lie, we know.
But fornication also, howbeit
Judah's was not such, yet some man's may
be such whereby to procure that a man may
be delivered, just as her lie was in order that
a man might be conceived; is
it right then
to commit fornication on this account, if on
that account it is thought that it was right to
Not therefore concerning lying only,
he ?

1 Ps. 26 (Heb. xxvii ), 12.

" Mentitur eorztin iniquitas sibi."
LXX. itpevo-aro i) aSiicCa. eauTrj. Heb. and E. V. "And such as
breathe out cruelty."

2 Gen. xxxviii. 14-18.

but concerning all works of men in which
there arise as it were compensative sins, must
we consider what sentence we ought to pass;
lest we open a way not only to small sins
whatsoever, but even to all wickednesses, and
there remain no outrageous, flagitious, sacrilegious deed, in which there may not arise
a cause upon which it may rightly seem a
thing meet to be done, and so universal probity of life be by that opinion subverted.

"

31. But he who says that some lies are just,
must be judged to say no other than that
some sins are just, and therefore some things
are just which are unjust: than which what
can be more absurd ?
For whence is a thinga sin, but for that it is contrary to justice?
Be it said then that some sins are great, some
small, because it is true; and let us not listen
to the Stoics who maintain all to be equal:
but to say that some sins are unjust, some
just, what else is it than to say that there be
When
some unjust, some just iniquities?
Every man who
the Apostle John saith,
doeth sin, doeth also iniquity, and sin
is
iniquity." 3
It is impossible therefore that a
sin should be just, unless when we put the
name of sin upon another thing in which one
doth not sin, but either doeth or suffereth
Namely, both sacrifices for
aught for sin.
I sins are named "
sins,'' and the punishments
of sins are sometimes called sins.
These
doubtless can be understood to be just sins,
when just sacrifices are spoken of, or just
But those things which are
punishments.
done against God's law cannot be just.
It is
"
said unto God,
Thy law is truth:" 4 and consequently, what is against truth cannot be
just. Now who can doubt that every lie
is
Therefore there can be no
against truth ?
Again, what man doth not see
just lie.
clearly that every thing which is just is of the
" No lie is of
truth? And John crieth out,
" s No lie therefore is just. Wherethe truth.
fore, when from holy Scriptures are proposed
to us examples of lying, either they are not
lies, but are thought to be so while they are
not understood; or, if lies they be, they are
not meet to be imitated, because they cannot
be just.

32. But, as for that which is written, that
God did good to the Hebrew midwives, and
to Rahab the harlot of Jericho,
6 this was not
because they lied, but because they were
That therefore
merciful to God's people.
which was rewarded in them was, not their
deceit, but their benevolence; benignity of
For, as it would
mind, not iniquity of lying.
not be marvellous and absurd if God on ac-

3 1 John iii. 4. [See R.V.]
6 Exod. i. 17-20 ; Josh, ii., and vi. 25.

4 Ps. cxix. 142.

5 1 John. ii. 21.

7 .Mentis, mcntientis.

count of good works after done by them should
be willing to forgive some evil works at anis not to
other time before committed, so it
be marvelled at that God beholding at one
time, in one cause, both these, that is, the
thing done of mercy and the thing done of
deceit, did both reward the good, and for the
For if
sake of this good forgive that evil.
sins which are done of carnal concupiscence,
not of mercy, are for the sake of after works
1 why are not those through
of mercy remitted,
merit of mercy remitted which of mercy itself
For more grievous is a sin
are committed ?
which with purpose of hurting, than that which
with purpose of helping, is wrought. And
consequently if that is blotted out by a work
of mercy thereafter following, why is this,
which is less heinous, not blotted out by the
mercy itself of the man, both going before
that he may sin, and going along with him
So indeed it may seem: but
while he sins?
in truth it is one thing to say, "I ought not to
have sinned, but I will do works of mercy
whereby I may blot out the sin which I did
" I ought to sin,
" and another to say,
before;
because I cannot else show mercy."
It is, I
" Because we have alsay, one thing to say,
ready sinned, let us do good," and another to
" Let us sin, that we may do good." There
say,
" Let us do good, because we have
it is said,
done evil;" but here, "Let us do evil that
good may come." 2 And, consequently, there
we have to drain off the sink of sin, here to
beware of a doctrine which teacheth to sin.

33. It remains then that we understand as
concerning those women, whether in Egypt
or in Jericho, that for their humanity and
mercy they received a reward, in any wise
temporal, which indeed itself, while they wist
not of it, should by prophetical signification
But whether it
prefigure somewhat eternal.
be ever right, even for the saving of a man's
life, to tell a lie, as it is a question in resolving which even the most learned do weary
themselves, it did vastly surpass the capacity
of those poor women, set in the midst of
those nations, and accustomed to those manTherefore their ignorance in this as
ners.
well as in those other things of which they
were alike unknowing, but which are to be
known by the children not of this world but
of that which is to come, the patience of God
did bear withal: Who yet, for their human
kindness which they had shown to His servants, rendered unto them rewards of an
earthly sort, albeit signifying somewhat of an
And Rahab, indeed, delivered out
heavenly.
of Jericho, made transition into the people

1 Dimittuntur.

Rom. iii. 8.

"

"

of God, where, being proficient, she might
attain to eternal and immortal prizes which
Yet at that
are not to be sought by any lie.
time when she did for the Israelite spies that
good, and, for her condition of life, laudable
work, she was not as yet such that it should
In your mouth let Yea
be required of her,
But as for those midbe yea, Nay nay." 3
wives, albeit Hebrewesses, if they savored
only after the flesh, what or how great is the
good they got of their temporal reward in
that they made them houses, unless by making proficiency they attained unto that house
of which is sung unto God,
Blessed are they
that dwell in thine house; for ever and ever
" 4 It must be confessed,
they will praise thee ?
it approacheth much unto
however, that
righteousness, and though not yet in reality,
yet even now in respect of hopefulness and
disposition that mind is to be praised, which
never lies except with intention and will to
do good to some man, but to hurt no man.
But as for us, when we ask whether it be the
part of a good man sometimes to lie, we ask
not concerning a person pertaining to Egypt,
or to Jericho, or to Babylon, or still to Jerusalem itself, the earthly, which is in bondage
with her children; 5 but concerning a citizen of
that city which is above and free, our mother,
And to our asking
eternal in the heavens.
" No lie is of the truth. ' ,6 The
it is answered,
sons of that city, are sons of the Truth. That
city's sons are they of whom it
is written,
"
" 7 son of
In their mouth was found no lie:
that city is he of whom is also written, "A
son receiving the word shall be far from destruction: but receiving, he hath received that
for himself, and nothing false proceedeth out
of his mouth.'' 8 These sons of Jerusalem on
high, and of the holy city eternal, if ever, as
they be men, a lie of what kind soever doth
worm itself into them, they ask humbly for
pardon, not therefrom seek moreover glory.

34. But some man will say, Would then
those midwives and Rahab have done better
if they had shown no mercy, by refusing to
lie ? Nay verily, those Hebrew women, if
they were such as that sort of persons of
whom we ask whether they ought ever to tell
a lie, would both eschew to say aught false,
and would most frankly refuse that foul serBut, thou wilt say,
vice of killing the babes.
Yea, but see what
themselves would die.
They would die with an heavenly
follows.
habitation for their incomparably more ample
reward than those houses which they made
them on earth could be: they would die, to

3 Matt. v. 37.
6 1 John 11. 21.
8 Prov. xxix. 27. Lat. (not in Hebrew).

4 5 Ps. lxxxiv. 4.
7 Rev. xiv. 5.

5 Gal. iv, 25, 26.

TO CONSENTIUS: AGAINST LYING.

But, thou wilt say,

be in eternal felicity, after enduring of death
What of her in
for most innocent truth.
Could she do this? Would she
Jericho?
not, if she did not by telling a lie deceive the
inquiring citizens, by speaking truth betray
the lurking guests ? Or could she say
* to their
questionings, I know where they are; but I
fear God, I will not betray them ?
She could
indeed say this, were she already a true
Israelitess in whom was no guile:
2 which thing
she was about to be, when through the mercy
of God passing over into the city of God.
But they, hearing this (thou wilt say), would
But did
slay her, would search the house.
it follow that they would also find them, whom
For in the
she had diligently concealed ?
foresight of this, that most cautious woman
had placed them where they would have been
able to remain undiscovered if she, telling a
So both she, if
lie, should not be believed.
after all she had been slain by her countrymen for the work of mercy, would have ended
this life, which must needs come to an end,
by a death precious in the sight of the Lord, 3
and towards them her benefit had not been in
" What if the men
vain.
who sought them, in their thorough-going
search, had come to the place where she had
concealed them ?
In this fashion it may be
said: What if a most vile and base woman,
not only telling, but swearing a lie, had not
got them to believe her ? Of course even so
would the things have been like to come to
pass, through fear of which she lied. And
where do we put the will and power of God ?
or haply was He not able to keep both her,
neither telling a lie to her own townsmen, nor
betraying men of God, and them, being His,
safe from all harm ? For by Whom also after
the woman's lie they were guarded, by Him
could they, even if she had not lied, have in
any wise been guarded.
Unless perchance
we have forgotten that this did come to pass
in Sodom, where males burning towards males
with hideous lust could not so much as find
the door of the house in which were the men
they sought; when that just man, in a case
altogether most similar, would not tell a. lie
for his guests, whom he knew not to be
Angels, and feared lest they should suffer a
violence worse than death. And doubtless,
he might have given the seekers the like answer as that woman gave in Jericho.
For it
was in precisely the like manner that they
But that just persought by interrogating.
son was not willing that for the bodies of his
guests his soul should be spotted by his own

"

1 mps. and edd. "An posset ;'' but Ben. ed. propose

" an non

" " Could she not ?"

posset

2 John i. 47.

telling of a lie, for which bodies he was willing
that the bodies of his daughters by iniquity
of others' lust should be deforced. 4 Let then
a man do even for the temporal safety of
men what he can; but when it comes to that
point that to consult for such saving of them
except by sinning is not in his power, thenceforth let him esteem himself not to have what
he may do, when he shall perceive that only
to be left him which he may not rightly do.
Therefore, touching Rahab in Jericho, because she entertained strangers, men of God,
because in entertaining of them she put herself in peril, because she believed on their
God, because she diligently hid them where
she could, because she gave them most faithful counsel of returning by another way, let
her be praised as meet to be imitated even
But
by the citizens of Jerusalem on high.
in that she lied, although somewhat therein
as prophetical be intelligently expounded, yet
not as meet to be imitated is
it wisely propounded: albeit that God hath those good
things memorably honored, this evil thing
mercifully overlooked.

35. Since these things are so, because it
were too long to treat thoroughly of all that
in that " Pound " 5 of Dictinius are set down as
precedents of lying, meet to be imitated, it
seemeth to me that this is the rule to which
not only these, but whatever such there be,
Namely, either what is
must be reduced.
believed to be a lie must be shown not to be
such; whether it be where a truth is left untold, and yet no falsehood told; or where a
true signification willeth one thing to be understood of another, which kind of figurative
either sayings or doings abounds in the proOr, those which are conphetical writings.
victed to be lies, must be proved to be not
meet to be imitated: and if any (as other sins)
should stealthily creep in upon us, we are not
to attribute righteousness to them, but to ask
So indeed it seems to me,
pardon for them.
and to this sentence the things above disputed
do compel me.

36. But for that we are men and among
men do live, and I confess that I am not yet
in the number of them whom compensative sins
embarrass not, it oft befalleth me in human
affairs to be overcome by human feeling, nor
am I able to resist when it
is said to me,
Lo, here is a sick man in peril of his life with
a grievous disease, whose strength will no
more be able to bear it, if the death of his
only and most dear son be announced to
him; he asks of thee whether his son liveth,
and thou knowest that he is departed this

' '

3 Ps. cxvi. 15.

4 Gen. xix. 5-11.

5 Or " Balance."

life; what wilt thou reply, when, whatever
thou shalt say beside one of these three;
either, He is dead; or, He liveth; or, I know
not; he believes no other than that he is
dead; which thing he perceives thee to be
afraid to tell, and unwilling to tell a lie ?"
It
comes to the same thing, if thou altogether
But of those three, two are
hold thy peace.
false, He liveth, and, I know not; and they
cannot be said by thee but by telling a lie.
Whereas if thou shalt say that one thing
which is true, that is, that he is dead, and
the man be so perturbed that death follow,
people will cry out that thou hast killed him.
And who can bear men casting up to him
what a mischief it is to shun a lie that might
save life, and to choose truth which murders
I am moved by these objections exa man ?
ceedingly, but it were marvellous whether
For, when I shall set before the
also wisely.
eyes of my heart (such as they be) the intellectual ' beauty of Him out of Whose mouth
nothing false proceedeth, albeit where truth
in her radiance doth more and more brighten
upon me, there my weak and throbbing sense
is beaten back: yet I am with love of that surpassing comeliness so set on fire, that I despise all human regards which would thence
But it is much that this affection
recall me.
persevere to that degree, that in temptation
Nor doth it move me,
it lack not its effect.
while contemplating that luminous Good in
which is no darkness of a lie, that, when we
refuse to lie, and men through hearing of a
truth do die, truth is called a murderer.
For,
if a lewd woman crave of thee the gratification of her lust, and, when thou consentest
not, she perturbed with the fierceness of her
love should die, will chastity also be a mur-
" We are
Or, truly, because we read,
derer?
a sweet savor of Christ in every place, both
in them which are saved and in them which
2 to the one, indeed, a savor of life
perish;"
unto life, to others a savor of death unto
death; shall we pronounce even the savor of
Christ to be a murderer?
But, for that we,
being men, are in questions and contradictions of this sort for the most part overcome
or wearied out by our feeling as men, for that
very reason hath the Apostle also presently
subjoined, "And who is sufficient for these
things ?

37. Add to this, (and here is cause to cry
out more piteously,) that, if once we grant it
to have been right for the saving of that sick
man's life to tell him the lie, that his son was
alive, then, by little and little and by minute
degrees, the evil so grows upon us, and by

"

slight accesses to such a heap of wicked lies
does it, in its almost imperceptible encroachments, at last come, that no place can ever
be any where found on which this huge mischief, by smallest additions rising into boundless strength, might be resisted.
Wherefore,
most providently is it written, "He that despiseth small things shall fall by little and
little." 3 Nay more: for these persons who
are so enamored of this life, that they hesitate
not to prefer it to truth, that a man may not
die, say rather, that a man who must some
time die may die somewhat later, would have
us not only to lie, but even to swear fasely;
to wit, that, lest the vain health of man should
somewhat more quickly pass away, we should
take the name of the Lord our God in vain !
And there are among them learned men who
even fix rules, and set bounds when it
is a
duty, when not a duty, to commit perjury !
O, where are ye, fountains of tears? And
what shall we do ? whither go ? where hide us
from the ire of truth, if we not only neglect
to shun lies, but dare moreover to teach perFor look they well to it, who uphold
juries ?
and defend lying, what kind, or what kinds,
of lying they shall delight to justify: at least
in the worship of God let them grant that
at least let them
there must be no lying;
keep themselves from perjuries and blasphemies; at least there, where God's name,
where God as witness, where God's oath 4 is
interposed, where God's religion is the matter
of discourse or colloquy, let none lie, none
praise, none teach and enjoin, none justify a
lie: of the other kinds of lies let him choose
him out that which he accounteth to be the
mildest and most innocent kind of lying, he
who will have it to be right to lie.
This I
know, that even he who teaches that it is
meet to tell lies, wishes to be thought to teach
For if it be false which he teaches,
a truth.
who would care to give heed to false doctrine,
in which both he deceives that teaches and he
But if, in order that
is deceived that learns ?
he may be able to find some disciple, he upholds that he teaches a truth when he teaches
that it is meet to lie, how will that lie be of
the truth, when the Apostle John reclaimeth,
" No lie is of the truth ?
It is therefore not
true, that it is sometimes right to lie; and
that which is not true to no man is at all to
be persuaded.

( 38. But infirmity pleadeth its

part, and
with favor of the crowds proclaims itself to
Where it contrahave a cause invincible.
" What way is there among
dicts, and says,
men, who without doubt by being deceived

" 5

1 Intelligibilem.

2 2 Cor. ii. 15, 16. [See R.V.]

3 Ecclus. xix. 1.

4 " Sacraiuentitm?

5 1 John ii. 21.

TO CONSENTIUS: AGAINST LYING.

is

are turned aside from a deadly harm to others
or themselves, to succor men in peril, if our
affection as men may not incline us to lie?"
If it will hear me patiently, this crowd of
mortality, crowd of infirmity, I will say somewhat in answer on the behalf of truth.
Surely
at the least pious, true, holy chastity is not
otherwise than of the truth: and whoso acts
against it, acts against truth. Why then, if
otherwise it be not possible to succor men in
peril, do I not also commit whoredom, which
is therefore contrary to truth, for that it
contrary to chastity, and yet, to succor men
in peril, do speak a lie which most openly is
Wherein hath chascontrary to truth itself?
tity so highly deserved at our hands, and
truth offended us ? When all chastity is of
the truth, and not the body's but the mind's
chastity is truth, yea, in the mind dwelleth
even the body's chastity.
Lastly, as I shortly
before said, and say again, whoever for the
recommending and defending of any lie
speaks against me, what speaks he, if he
speaks not truth ? Now if he is therefore to
be heard because he speaks truth, how wishes
he to make me, by speaking truth, a liar?
How does lying take unto itself truth as its
Or, is it for her own adversary
patroness ?
that she conquers, that by herself she may be
conquered ? Who can bear this absurdity ?
In no wise therefore may we say, that they
who assert that it is sometimes right to lie, in
asserting that are truthful; lest, what is most
absurd and foolish to believe, truth should
For what sort of thing
teach us to be liars.
is it, that no man learns of chastity that we
may commit adultery; that we may offend
God none learns of piety; that we may do
any man harm, none learns of kindness; and
that we may tell lies, we are to learn of truth !
But then if this thing truth teaches not, it is
if not true, it is not meet to be
not true;
learned; if not meet to be learned, never
therefore is it meet to tell a lie.
39. But, some man will say,
Strong meat
is for them that are perfect."
For in many
things a relaxation by way of indulgence is
allowed to infirmity, although in her utmost
sincerity the things be nowise pleasing to
Let him say this, whoever dreads not
truth.
the consequences which are to be dreaded, if
once there shall be in any way any lies perIn nowise, however, must they be
mitted.
permitted to climb up to such a height as to
reach to perjuries and blasphemies: nor must
any plea whatever be held out, for which it
should be right that perjury should be committed, or, what is more execrable, that God

"

'

should be blasphemed. For it does not follow
that because the blaspheming is only in pretence and a lie, therefore He is not blasFor at this rate it might be said
phemed.
that perjury is not committed, because it is
by a lie that it is committed: for who can be
So also by truth can no
by truth a perjurer ?
man be a blasphemer.
Doubtless it
is a
milder kind of false swearing, when a person
does not know that thing to be false and believes it to be true, which he swears: like as
also Saul blasphemed more excusably, beBut the reason
cause he did it ignorantly.
why it is worse to blaspheme than to perjure
one's self, is, that in false swearing God is
taken to witness a false thing, but in blaspheming false things are spoken of God
Himself. Now by so much is a man more inexcusable, whether perjurer or blasphemer,
by how much the more, while asserting the
things wherein they perjure or blaspheme,
they know or believe them to be false. Whoever therefore says that for an imperilled
man's temporal safety or life a lie may be
told, doth too much himself swerve from the
path of eternal safety and life, if he says that
on that behalf one may even swear by God,
or even blaspheme God.

40. But sometimes a peril to eternal salvation itself is put forth against us; 3 which peril,
they cry out, we by telling a lie, if otherwise
it cannot be, must ward off.
As, for instance,
if a person who is to be baptized be in the
power of impious and infidel men, and cannot
be got at that he may be washed with the laver
of regeneration, but by deceiving his keepers
From this most invidious cry, by
with a lie.
which we are compelled, not for a man's
wealth or honors in this world which are fleeting by, not for the life itself of this present
time, but for the eternal salvation of a human
being, to tell a lie, whither shall I betake me
for refuge but unto thee, O truth ? And by
For
thee is put forth before me, 4
why, if those keepers may be enticed to admit
us to baptize the man, by our committing
lewdness, do we refuse to do things contrary
to chastity, and yet, if by a lie they may be
deceived, consent to do things contrary to
truth ? when without doubt no man would
faithfully think chastity amiable, but because
So then, to get at a
it is enjoined of truth ?
man to baptize him, let the keepers be deBut how can
ceived by lying, if truth bid it.
truth bid in order that a man may be baptized, that we should tell a lie,
if chastity
biddeth not, in order that a man be baptized,
Now
that we should commit whoredom ?

Chastity.

1 Heb. v. 14.

*iTiim. 1. 13.

3 Qp/>om'tier.

4 Yxoponitur.

5o

is adverse to

why doth chastity not bid this, but because
If then, save what
this truth teacheth not ?
truth teacheth, we ought not to do, when truth
teacheth not even for the sake of baptizing a
man to do what is contrary to chastity, how
shall she teach us to do for the sake of baptizing a man what is contrary to herself, the
But like as eyes not strong enough to
truth ?
look upon the sun yet do gladly look upon
the objects which are by the sun enlightened,
so, souls which have already strength to delight in the beauty of chastity are yet not
straightway able to consider in her very self
that truth whence chastity hath her light, insomuch that when it cometh to the doing of
somewhat that
truth, they
should so start back in horror as they do start
back in horror if aught be proposed to be
done that is adverse to chastity.
But that
son, who, receiving the word shall be far from
perdition, and nothing false cometh forth of
his mouth, 1 accounts it as much debarred from
him if, to the succoring of his fellow man he
be urged to pass through a lie, as if
it were
And the
through the deed of lewdness.
Father heareth and granteth his prayer that
he may avail without a lie to succor whom the
Father Himself, Whose judgments are unsearchable, willeth to be succored.
Such a
son therefore so keeps watch against a lie, as
For indeed sometimes
he doth against sin.
the name of lie
is put for the name of sin:
whence is that saying, "All men are liars.'' 3
For it is so said, as if it were said, "All men
are sinners." And that:
But if the truth of
God hath abounded through my lie." 3 And
therefore, when he lies as a man he sins as a
man, and will be held by that sentence in
which it is said, "All men are liars;" and,
"
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive
ourselves, and the truth is not in us." 4
But
when nothing false cometh forth of his mouth,
according to that grace will it so be, of which
" He that is born of God, sinneth
is said:
For were this nativity by itself alone
not." s
in us, no man would sin: and when it shall
be alone, no man will sin.
But now, we as
yet drag on that which we were born corruptible: although, according to that which we are
new-born, if we walk aright, from day to day we
6 But when this corruptare renewed inwardly.
ible shall have put on incorruption, life will
swallow it up wholly, and not a sting of death
will remain. 7 Now this sting of death is sin.
41. Either then we are to eschew lies by
right doing, or to confess them by repenting:
but not, while they unhappily abound in our
living, to make them more by teaching also.

"

1 Prov. xxix. 27. Lat.
3 Rom. iii. 7.
6 2 Cor. iv. 16.

2 Ps. cxvi. 11.
4 1 John i. 8.
7 1 Cor. xv. 53-56. [See R.V.]

[See R. V.]

5 1 John iii. 9.

But let him who thinks
this, choose out
whereby he may help his fellow man being in
peril, to what safety he will, what kinds soever
of lies; provided yet even of such men we
obtain our demand, that upon no cause must
we be carried on to false-swearing and to
These wickednesses at least
blaspheming.
let us judge either greater than deeds of lewdFor indeed it
ness, or certainly not smaller.
is worth thinking of, that very often men,
where they suspect them of adultery, challenge their wives to an oath: which surely
they would not do, unless they believed that
even they who were not afraid to perpetrate
Beadultery, might be afraid of perjury.
cause in fact also some lewd women who were
not afraid by unlawful embraces to deceive
their husbands, have been afraid to call God
deceitfully to witness unto those same husbands whom they had deceived. What cause
then can there be, that a chaste and religious
person should be unwilling by adultery to
help a man to baptism, yet be willing to help
him by perjury, which even adulterers are
wont to dread ? And then, if it be shocking
to do this by perjuring one's self, how much
Far be it then from
rather by blaspheming?
a Christian to deny and blaspheme Christ,
that he may make another man a Christian;
and by losing himself seek to find one, whom,
if he teach him such things, he may cause to
The book then which is
be lost when found.
called "the Pound," thou must in this method
refute and destroy; namely, that head of it
in which they dogmatize that for the purpose
of concealing religion a lie may be told, this
thou shalt understand must be the first to be
amputated; in such manner, that their testimonies by which they labor to advance the
Holy Books as patrons of their lies, thou
must demonstrate partly not to be lies, partly,
even those which are such, to be not meet to
be imitated: and if infirmity usurps to herself
thus much, that somewhat shall be venially
permitted unto her which truth approve not,
yet that thou unshakenly hold and defend,
that in divine religion it is at no time whatAnd, as for conever right to tell a lie.
cealed heretics, that, as we are not to find out
concealed adulterers by committing of adulteries, nor murderers by committing of murders, nor practisers of black arts 8 by practising of black arts, so neither must we seek to
find out liars by telling lies or blasphemers
by blaspheming: according to the reasonings
which we have in this volume so copiously
set forth, that unto the goal of the same,
which we fixed to be in this place, we have
with difficulty come at last.

8 Malefuos.

ST. AUGUSTIN:

OF

THE WORK OF MONKS.

fDE OPERE MONACHORUM.]

TRANSLATED BY

REV. H. BROWNE, M.A.,

OF CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE; LATE PRINCIPAL OF THE DIOCESAN
COLLEGE, CHICHESTER.

OF THE WORK OF MONKS.
[DE OPERE MONACHORUM.]

From the Retractations, ii. 21.

To write the Book on the Work of Monks, the need whicti compelled me was this.
When at Carthage there had begun to be monasteries, some maintained themselves by their
own hands, obeying the Apostle ; but others wished so to live on the oblations of the faithful, that doing no work whence they might either have or supply the necessaries of life, they
thought and boasted that they did rather fulfill the precept of the Gospel, where the Lord
saith, Behold the fowls of heaven, and the lilies of the field, (Matt. vi. 26). Whence also among
laics of inferior purpose, but yet fervent in zeal, there had begun to arise tumultuous contests, whereby the Church was troubled, some defending the one, others the other part.
Add to this, that some of them who were for not "working, wore their hair long. Whence
contentions between those who reprehended and those who justified the practice, were,
according to their party affections, increased. On these accounts the venerable old Aurelius,
Bishop of the Church of the. same city, desired me to write somewhat of this matter ; and I
Jussioni tuae, sancte frater Aureli."
did so.

This Book begins,

"

This work is placed in the Retractations next after that " On the Good of Marriage," which
belongs to the year 401.

that I should hereof write somewhat unto
thee. May He therefore Himself be present
with me also, that I may obey in such sort
that from His gift, in the very usefulness of
fruitful labor, I may understand that I am
indeed obeying Him.

1. Thy bidding, holy "brother Aurelius, it
was meet that I should comply withal, with
so much the more devotion, by how much the
more it became clear unto me Who, out of
For our Lord
thee, did speak that bidding.
Jesus Christ, dwelling in thine inner part,
and inspiring into thee a solicitude of fatherly
2. First then, it is to be seen, what is said
by persons of that profession, who will not
and brotherly charity, whether our sons and
brothers the monks, who neglect to obey J
work: then, if we shall find that they think
blessed Paul the Apostle, when he saith,
If \ not aright, what is meet to be said for their
any will not work, neither let him eat,"
of this
to have that license permitted unto them; corporal work in which either husbandmen or
He, assuming unto His work thy will and
handicraftsmen labor, that the Apostle gave
tongue, hath commanded me out of thee,
precept, when he said,
' If any will not work,
neither let him eat.' ''
For he could not be
| contrary to the Gospel, where the Lord Him-

It is not," say they,

x are ' correction ?

1 2 Thess. iii. 10. [SeeR.v.]

"

"

"

.

"

the

fowls

raiment?

Therefore I say unto you, be not
self saith,
solicitous for your life, what ye shall eat,
neither for your body, what ye shall put on.
Is not the life more than meat, and the body
Consider
than
of
heaven, that they sow not, nor reap, nor
gather into barns; and your heavenly Father
Are not ye rather of more
feedeth them.
But who of you by taking
worth than they ?
thought can add to his stature one cubit?
And concerning raiment, why are ye solicitConsider the lilies of the field, how
ous ?
they grow; they labor not, neither spin; but
I say unto you, that not even Solomon in all
his glory was arrayed like one of these.
But
if the grass of the field, which to-day is, and
to-morrow is cast into the oven, God so clotheth; how much more you, (O ye) of little
Be not therefore solicitous, saying,
faith !
What shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or
wherewithal shall we be clad ? for all these
And your
things do the Gentiles seek.
heavenly Father knoweth that ye need all
But seek ye first the kingdom of God,
these.
and His righteousness, and all these shall be
Be not therefore solicitous
added unto you.
for the morrow: for the morrow will
be
Sufficient unto the day
solicitous for itself.
is the evil thereof." 1 Lo, say they, where the
Lord biddeth us be without care concerning
our food and clothing: how then could the
Apostle think contrary to the Lord, that he
should instruct us that we ought to be in such
sort solicitous, what we shall eat, or what we
be
shall
clothed, that he should even burden us with
labors of handicraftsmen ?
the
Wherefore in that he saith, "If any will not
" works spiritual,
work, neither let him eat;
say they, are what we must understand: of
which he saith in another place, "To each
one according as the Lord hath given: I have
planted, Apollos hath watered; but God gave
the increase." 2 And a little after, "Each
one shall receive his reward according to his
own labor. We are God's fellow-workers;
God's husbandry, God's building are ye: according to the grace which is given unto me,
as a wise masterbuilder* I have laid
the
As therefore
foundation."
Apostle
worketh in planting, watering, building, and
foundation-laying, in that way whoso will not
work, let him not eat.
For what profiteth in
eating spiritually to be fed with the word of
God, if he do not thence work others' edification ? As that slothful servant, what did it
profit to receive a talent and to hide it, and
not work for the Lord's gain ? Was it that it

or wherewithal we shall

drink,

cares,

arts,

the

should be taken from him at last, and himself cast into outer darkness ?
So, say they,
do we also. We read with the brethren, who
come to us fatigued from the turmoil of the
world, that with us, in the word of God, and
prayers, psalms, hymns, and spiritual
in
songs, they may find rest. We speak to them,
console, exhort, building up in them whatever unto their life, according to their degree,
we perceive to be lacking.
Such works if we
wrought not, with peril should we receive of
the Lord our spiritual sustenance itself.
For
If any one will
it the Apostie said,
this is
Thus do
not work, neither let him eat.''
these men deem themselves to comply with
the apostolic and evangelic sentence, when
both the Gospel they believe to have given
precept concerning the not caring for the
corporal and temporal indigence of this life,
and the Apostle concerning spiritual work and
food to have said,
If any will not work,
neither let him eat."

"

"

3. Nor do they attend to this, that if another should say, that the Lord indeed,
speaking in parables and in similitudes concerning spiritual food and clothing, did warn
that not on these accounts should His ser-
(as He saith, "When
vants be solicitous;
they shall drag you to judgment-seats, take
no thought what ye shall speak. For it will be
given you in that hour what ye shall speak:
but it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of
your Father that speaketh in you." 3 For the
discourse of spiritual wisdom is that for which
He would not that they should take thought,
promising that it should be given unto them,
nothing solicitous thereof;) but the Apostle
now, in manner Apostolical, more openly discoursing and more properly, than figuratively
speaking, as is the case with much, indeed wellin his Apostolic Epistles, said it
nigh all,
properly of corporal work and food,
If any
will not work, neither let him eat:" by those
would their sentence be rendered doubtful,
unless, considering the other words of the
Lord ; they should find somewhat whereby they
might prove it to have been of not caring for
corporal food and raiment that He spake when
" Be not solicitous what ye shall eat,
He said,
or what ye shall drink, or wherewithal ye shall
As, if they should observe what
be clothed."
" For all these things do the GenHe saith,
"
for there He shows that it was of
tiles seek;
very corporal and temporal things that He
So then, were this the only thing that
spake.
the Apostle has said on this subject,
If any
will not work, neither let him eat;" these
words might be drawn over to another mean-

"

J '

1 Matt. vi. 25-34.

2 1 Cor. iii. 5-10.

3 Matt. x. 19, 20.

OF THE WORK OF MONKS.

ing: but since in many other places of his
Epistles, what is his mind on this point, he
most openly teaches, they superfluously essay
to raise a mist before themselves and others,
that what that charity adviseth they may not
only refuse to do, but even to understand it
themselves, or let it be understood by others;
" He would
not fearing that which is written,
not understand that he might do good." *

"

4. First then we ought to demonstrate that
the blessed Apostle Paul willed the servants
of God to work corporal works which should
have as their end a great spiritual reward, for
this purpose that they should need food and
clothing of no man, but with their own hands
should procure these for themselves: then, to
show that those evangelical precepts from
which some cherish not only their sloth but
even arrogance, are not contrary to the Apostolical precept and example.
Let us see then
whence the Apostle came to this, that he
If any will not work, neither let
should say,
him eat," and what he thereupon joineth on,
that from the very context 2 of this lesson may
appear his declared sentence. "We command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves
from every brother that walketh unquietly,
and not according to the tradition which they
have received 3 of us. For yourselves know how
ye ought to imitate us; for we were not unquiet among you, neither ate we bread of any
man for nought, but in labor and travail
night and day working that we might not
burden any of you: not for that we have not
power, but that we might give ourselves as a
pattern to you in which ye should imitate us.
For also when we were with you, we gave you
this charge, that if any will not work, let him
For we have heard that certain
not eat.
among you walk unquietly, working not at
all, but being busy-bodies. Now them that
are such we charge and beseech in our Lord
Jesus Christ, that with silence they work, and
eat their own bread." 4 What can be said to
these things, since, that none might thereafter have license to interpret this according
to his wish, not according to charity, he by
his own example hath taught what by precept
he hath enjoined ? To him, namely, as to an
Apostle, a preacher of the Gospel, a soldier of
Christ, a planter of the vineyard, a shepherd
of the flock, had the Lord appointed that he
should live by the Gospel; and yet himself
exacted not the pay which was his due, that
he might make himself a pattern to them
which desired what was not their due; as he
" Who goeth a warsaith to the Corinthians,

1 Ps. xxxvi. 3, (35, 4,)
2 " Circumstantial

3 "

" noluit intelligere tit bene ageret."

Acceperunt."

4 2 Thess. iii. 6-12.

it that he saith,

fare at any time at his own charges ? Who
planteth a vineyard, and of its fruit eateth
not? Who feedeth a flock, and of the milk
" 5 Therefore, what
of the flock partaketh not ?
was due to him, he would not receive, that
by his example they might be checked, who,
although not so ordained in the Church, did
deem the like to be due to themselves.
For
" Neither ate we
what is
bread of any man for naught, but in labor
and travail night and day working that we
might not burden any of you; not for that we
have not power, but that we might give ourselves as a pattern to you wherein ye should
follow us?"
Let them, therefore, hear to
whom he hath given this precept, that is, they
which have not this power which he had, to
wit, that while only spiritually working they
should eat bread by corporal labor not earned :
and as he says, "We charge and beseech in
Christ that with silence they work and eat
their own bread," let them not dispute against
the most manifest words of the Apostle, because this also pertaineth to that "silence"
with which they ought to work and eat their
own bread.

5.

I would, however, proceed to a more
searching 7 and diligent
consideration and
handling of these words, had I not other
places of his Epistles much more manifest,
by comparing which, both these are made
more clearly manifest, and if these were not
To
in existence, those others would suffice.
the Corinthians, namely, writing of this same
thing, he saith thus, "Am I not free? am I
8 Flave I not seen Christ Jesus
not an Apostle ?
our Lord ? Are not ye my work in the Lord ?
If to others I am not an Apostle, to you asFor the seal of mine Apostlesuredly I am.
ship are ye in the Lord. My defense to them
which interrogate me is this.
Have we not
Have we not
power to eat and to drink?
power to lead about a woman who is a sister,
as also the other Apostles, and the brethren
See how first
of the Lord, and Cephas?"
he shows what is lawful to him, and therefore
For with
lawful for that he is an Apostle.
that he began, "Am I not free? am I not an
" and proves himself to be an AposApostle ?
" Have I not seen Christ Jesus
tle, saying,
our Lord ? Are not ye my work in the Lord t"
Which being proved, he shows that to be lawful to him which was so to the other Apostles;
that is, that he should not work with his
hands, but live by the Gospel, as the Lord
appointed, which in what follows he has most

5 1 Cor. ix. 1-7.
8 So Griesbach and Lachmann. But text recept. "Am I not an

7 Enucleatius.

*> Gratuitum.

Apostle ? am I not free ?

" Sorore?n mu/ierem."

"

openly demonstrated; for to this end did also
faithful women which had earthly substance
go with them, and minister unto them of their
substance, that they might lack none of those
things which "pertain to the necessaries of this
Which thing blessed Paul demonstrates
life.
to be lawful indeed unto himself, as also the
other Apostles did it, but that he had not
chosen to use this power he afterwards menThis thing some not understanding,
tions.
"
a woman which is a
have interpreted not
" Have we not power
sister," when he said,
to lead about a sister a woman;" but, "a
They were misled by the amsister a wife."
biguity of the Greek word, because both
"
is expressed in Greek
by the same word.
Though indeed the
Apostle has so put this that they ought not to
have made this mistake; for that he neither
says "a woman" merely, but "a sister
woman;" nor ''to take'' (as in marriage),
but "to take about" (as on a journey).
Howbeit other interpreters have not been
misled by this ambiguity, and they have interpreted "woman" not "wife."

" and " woman "

wife

6. Which thing whoso thinks cannot have
been done by the Apostles, that with them
women of holy conversation should go about
wheresoever they preached the Gospel, that
of their substance they might minister to
their necessities, let him hear the Gospel, and
learn how in this they did after the example
Our Lord, namely, acof the Lord Himself.
cording to the wont of His pity, sympathizing with the weak, albeit Angels might minister unto Him, had both a bag in which should
be put the money which was bestowed doubtless by good and believing persons, as necessary for their living, (which bag He gave in
charge to Judas, that even thieves, if we could
not keep clear of such, we might learn to
tolerate in the Church.
He, namely, as is
written of him, "stole 1 what was put therein:")
and He willed that women should follow Him
for the preparing and ministering what was
necessary, showing what was due to evangelists
and ministers of God as soldiers, from the
people of God as the provincials; so that if
any should not choose to use that which is
due unto him, as Paul the Apostle did not
choose, he might bestow the more upon the
Church, by not exacting the pay which was
due to him, but by earning his daily living of
his own labors.
For it had been said to the
inn-keeper to whom that wounded man was
" Whatever thou layest out more, at
brought,
my coming again I will repay thee." - The
lay out more," 3 in
Apostle Paul, then, did

"

it

that he, as himself witnesseth, did at his own
In the Gospel, namely,
charges go a warfare.
is written, "Thereafter also Himself was
making a journey through cities and villages
preaching and evangelizing of the kingdom
of God; and the twelve with Him, and certain women which had been healed of evil
spirits and infirmities: Mary who is called
Magdalene, out of whom seven devils had
gone forth, and Joanna wife of Chuza Herod's
steward, and Susanna, and many others, who
ministered unto Him of their substance." 4
This example of the Lord the Apostles did
imitate, to receive the meat which was due
unto them; of which the same Lord most
openly speaketh: "As ye go," saith He,
"
preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is
at hand.
raise the dead,
Freely have
cleanse lepers, cast out devils.
Possess not gold
ye received, freely give.
nor silver nor money in your purses, neither
scrip on your journey, neither two coats,
neither shoes, neither staff: for the workman
is worthy of his meat." 5
Lo, where the Lord
appointeth the very thing which the Apostle
For to this end He told them
doth mention.
not to carry all those things, namely, that
where need should be, they might receive
them of them unto whom they preached the
kingdom of God.

Heal the sick,

is

7. But lest any should fancy that this was
granted only to the twelve, see also what
Luke relateth:
"After these things," saith
he, "the Lord chose also other seventy and
two, and sent them by two and two before
His face into every city and place whither He
was about to come. And He said unto them,
The harvest indeed
plentiful, but the
laborers few: ask ye therefore the Lord of
the harvest, that He would send forth laborers
into His harvest. Go your ways: behold, I
send you as lambs in the midst of wolves.
Carry neither purse nor scrip nor shoes, and
salute no man by the way.
Into whatsoever
house ye shall enter, first say, Peace be to
this house. And if the son of peace be there,
your peace shall rest upon him: if not, it
shall return to you. And in the same house
remain, eating and drinking such things as
are with them: for the workman is worthy of
Here it appears that these things
his hire." 6
were not commanded, but permitted, that
whoso should choose to use, might use that
which was lawful unto him by the Lord's appointment; but if any should not choose to
use it, he would not do contrary to a thing
commanded, but would be yielding up his
own right, by demeaning himself more merci-

i "
3 i Cor. ix. 7-15 ; and : Cor.

Au/erebat."

- Luke x. 35.

4 Luke viii. 1-3. [See R.V.]

S Matt. x. 7-10.

6 Luke x. 1-7.

OF THE WORK OF MONKS.

fully and laboriously in the Gospel in. the
which he would not accept even the hire
which was his due.
Otherwise the Apostle
did contrary to a command of the Lord: for,
after he had shown it to be lawful unto him,
" But yet have
he hath straightway subjoined,
I not used this power."

8. But let us return to the order of our
discourse, and the whole of the passage itself
Epistle let us diligently consider.
of the
"
" Have we not," saith he,
leave ' to eat and
to drink ? have we not leave to lead about a
What leave meant he,
woman, a sister?"
but what the Lord gave unto them whom He
sent to preach the kingdom of heaven, saying,
" Those things which are (given) of them,
3 for the workman is worthy of his
eat ye;
hire;" and proposing Himself as an example
of the same power, to Whom most faithful
women did of their means minister such
necessaries ? But the Apostle Paul hath done
more, from his
fellow- Apostles alleging a
proof of this license permitted of the Lord.
For not as finding fault hath he subjoined,
"As do also
the other Apostles, and the
brethren of the Lord, and Cephas;" but that
hence he might show that this which he
would not accept was a thing which, that it
was lawful for him to accept was proved by
the wont of the rest also his fellow-soldiers.
" Or I only and Barnabas, have we not power
Lo, he hath taken
to forbear working?"
away all doubt even from the slowest hearts,
that they may understand of what working
" Or I
he speaks.
only and Barnabas, have we not power to
but for that all evangelists
forbear working ?
and ministers
power
received of the Lord, not to work with their
hands, but to live by the Gospel, working
only spiritual works in preaching of the kingdom of heaven and edifying of the peace of
the Church ?
is
of that very spiritual working that the Apostle
said, "Or I only and Barnabas, have we not
For this power
power to forbear working?"
to forbear working all those had: let him say
then, who essays
to deprave and pervert
precepts Apostolical; let him say, if he dares,
that all evangelists received of the Lord power
But if this
to forbear preaching the Gospel.
is most absurd and mad to say, why will they
not understand what is plain to all, that they
did indeed receive power not to work, but
works bodily, whereby to get a living, because
"
the workman is worthy of his hire," as the
It is not therefore that Paul
Gospel speaks.
and Barnabas only had not power to forbear

For no man can say that it

For to what end saith he,

of God's word had

"

working; but that all alike had this power, of
which these availed not themselves in "
laying
out more" upon the Church; so as in those
places where they preached the Gospel they
judged to be meet for the weak. And for this
reason, that he might not seem to have found
fault with his fellow-Apostles, he goes on to
'* Who goeth a warfare at any time at
say:
his own charges ? Who feedeth a flock, and
of the milk of the flock pirtaketh not ?
Speak
Saith not the Law
I these things as a man ?
For in the law of Moses it is
the same ?
written, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that
Doth God care for
treadeth out the corn.
oxen ? Or saitn he it for our sake altogether ?
For our sakes truly is it written, because he
that plougheth ought to plough in hope, and
he that thresheth in hope of partaking of the
fruits." 3 By these words the Apostle Paul
sufficiently indicates, that it was no usurping
unto themselves of aught beyond their due on
fellow-Apostles, that they
the part of his
wrought not bodily, whence they might have
the things which to this life are necessary,
but as the Lord ordained, should, living by
the Gospel, eat bread gratuitously given of
them unto whom they were preaching a
Their charges, namely,
gratuitous grace.
they did like soldiers receive, and of the fruit
of the vineyard by them planted, they did, as
need was, freely gather; and of the milk of
the flock which they fed, they drank; and of
the threshing-floor on which they threshed,
they took their meat.

"

spiritual

What are the

9. But he speaks more openly in the rest
which he subjoins, and altogether removes
"If we. unto you,"
all causes of doubting.
" have sown spiritual things, is it a
saith he,
great matter if we shall reap your carnal
things
things ?
which he sowed, but the word and mystery
of the sacrament of the kingdom of heaven ?
And what the carnal things which he saith he
had a right to reap, but these temporal things
which are indulged to the life and indigency
These however being due to
of the flesh ?
him he declares that he had not sought nor
accepted, lest he should cause any impediWhat work
ment to the Gospel of Christ.
remaineth for us to understand him to have
wrought, whereby he should get his living,
but bodily work, with his own bodily and
For if from spiritual work he
visible hands ?
sought food and clothing, that is, to receive
these of them whom he was edifying in the
Gospel, he could not, as he does, go on to
say, "If others be partakers of this power
over you, are not we rather ?
Nevertheless,

1 Licentiam.

- Luke x. 7.

" Ea quce ab ipsis sunt?

3 1 Cor. ix. 7-10. [See R.V.^1

5 o8

"

we have not used this power, but tolerate all
things that we may not cause any hindrance
to the Gospel of Christ." 1 What power doth
he say he had not used, but that which he
had over them, received of the Lord, the
power to reap their carnal things, in order to
the sustenance of this life which is lived in
Of which power were others also
the flesh ?
partakers, who did not at the first announce
the Gospel to them, but came thereafter to
their Church preaching the self-same. Therefore, when he had said, "If we have sown
unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter
if we shall reap your carnal things ?" he subIf others be partakers of this power
joined,
" And when he
over you, are not we rather?
had demonstrated what power they
had:
''Nevertheless we have not used," saith he,
" this power; but we put up with all things, lest
we should cause any impediment to the GosLet therefore these persons
pel of Christ."
say in what way from spiritual work the
Apostle had carnal food, when himself openly
says that he had not used this power.
But
if from spiritual work he had not carnal food,
it remains that from bodily work he had it,
Neither did we eat any
and thereof saith,
man's bread for nought; but wrought with
labor and travail night and day, that we might
not be chargeable to any of you: not because
we have not power, but to make ourselves an
example unto you to follow us. 2
All tilings,"
saith he, "we suffer, lest we cause any hindrance to the Gospel of Christ."

"

10. And he comes back again, and in all
wr
ays, over and over again, enforceth what he
" Do ye
hath the right to do, yet doeth not.
not know," saith he, "that they which work
in the temple, eat of the things which are in
the temple ? they which serve the altar, have
So hath the Lord
their share with the altar ?
ordained for them which preach the Gospel,
But I have used none
to live of the Gospel.
What more open than
of these things." 3
this ? what more clear ?
I fear lest haply,
while I discourse wishing to expound this,
that become obscure which in itself is bright
For they who understand not
and clear.
these words, or feign not to understand, do
much less understand mine, or profess to
understand: unless perchance they do therefore quickly understand ours, because it is
allowed them to deride them being understood; but concerning the Apostle's words
this same is not allowed.
For this reason,
where they cannot interpret them otherwise
according to their own sentence, be it ever so
clear and manifest, they answer that it is ob-

"

"

scure and uncertain, because wrong and perCries the man of
verse they dare not call it.
" The Lord hath ordained for them
God,
which preach the Gospel, of this Gospel to
live; but I have used none of these things;"
and flesh and blood essayeth to make crooked
what is straight; what open, to shut; what
serene, to cloud over.
It was," saith it,
"
spiritual work that he was doing, and
thereof did he live."
If it be so, of the Gos-
" The
pel did he live: why then doth he say,
Lord hath ordained for them which preach
the Gospel, of the Gospel to live; but I have
Or if this very
used none of these things ?
" to live," which is here used, they will
word,
needs also interpret in respect of spiritual life,
then had the Apostle no hope towards God,
in that he did not live by the Gospel, because
I have used none of these
he hath said,
Wherefore, that he should have
things."
certain hope of life eternal, the Apostle did
of the Gospel in any wise spiritually live.
What therefore he saith, "But I have used
none of these things," doth without doubt
make to be understood of this life which is in
the flesh, that which he hath said of the
Lord's ordaining to them which preach the
Gospel, that of the Gospel they should live;
that is, this life which hath need of food and
clothing, they by the Gospel shall sustain; as
above he said of his fellow-apostles; of whom
" The workman is
the Lord Himself saith,
worthy of his meat;" and, '''The workman
This meat, then, and
is worthy of his hire."
this hire of the sustenance of this life, due to
evangelists, this of them to whom he evangelized the Apostle accepted not, saying a
I have used none of these
true

"

"

thing,

things."

11. And he goes on, and adjoins, lest perchance any should imagine that he only therefore received not, because they had not given:
" But I have not written these things that
they may be so done unto me: good is it for
me rather to die than that any make void my
glory." 4 What glory, unless that which he
wished to have with God, while in Christ sufAs he is presently
fering with the weak ?
" For if I shall
about to say most openly;
have preached the Gospel, there is not to me
any glory: for necessity is laid upon me;" 5 that
" For woe will be to
is, of sustaining this life.
"
me," he saith,
that is, to my own will shall I forbear to preach
the Gospel, because I shall be tormented with
hunger, and shall not have whereof to live.
" For if willingly
For he goes on, and says;
I do this, I have a reward."
By his doing it

if I preach not the Gospel:

"

Cor.

a 2 Thess. iii. 8, 9.

3 1 Cor. ix. 13-15.

4 1 Cor. ix. 15.

5 1 Cor. ix. 16. [See R.V.]

OF THE WORK OF MONKS.

"

"

"

"

" What then," saith he,

willingly, he means, if he do it uncompelled
by any necessity of supporting this present
life; and for this he hath reward, to wit, with
But if unwillGod, of glory everlasting.
ing," saith he, "a dispensation is entrusted
unto me: " * that is, if being unwilling, I am
by necessity of passing through this present
a dislife, compelled to preach the Gospel,
pensation is entrusted unto me;
to wit, that
by my dispensation as a steward, because
Christ, because the truth, is that which I
preach, howsoever because of occasion, howsoever seeking mine own,
howsoever by
necessity of earthly emolument compelled so
to do, other men do profit, but I have not
that glorious and everlasting reward with
shall be my
God.
reward?" He saith it as asking a question:
therefore the pronunciation must be susWhich the
pended, until he give the answer.
more easily to understand, let, as it were, us
put the question to him, "What, then, will
be thy reward, O Apostle, when that earthly
reward due to good evangelists, not for its
sake evangelizing, but yet taking it as the
to them by the
consequence and offered
not?
Lord's
appointment,
What shall be thy reward then ?
See what
he replies: "That, preaching the Gospel, I
may make the Gospel of
Christ without
" that is, that the Gospel may not be
charge;
to believers expensive, lest they account that
for this end is the Gospel to be preached to
them, that its preachers should seem as it
were to sell it. And yet he comes back again
and again, that he may show what, by warrant
of the Lord, he hath a right unto, yet doeth
that I abuse not," saith he, "my power
not:
in the Gospel."

acceptest

thou

"

"

12. But now, that as bearing with the infirmity of men he did this, let us hear what
" For though I be free from all men,
follows:
yet have I made myself servant unto all, that
To them that are
I might gain the more.
under the law, I became as under the law, that
I might gain them that are under the law;
to them that are without law, as without
law, (being not without law to God, but under
the law to Christ,) that I might gain them
that are without law." 3 Which thing he did,
not with craftiness of simulation, but with
mercy of compassion with others; that is, not
as if to feign himself a Jew, as some have
thought, in that he observed at Jerusalem the
things prescribed by the old law. 4 For he did
this in accordance with his free and openly
declared sentence, in which he says,
Is any
called being; circumcised ? let him not become

"

"

uncircumcised." That is, let him not so live,
as though he had become uncircumcised, and
covered that which he had laid bare: as in
another place he saith,
Thy circumcision is
become uncircumcision." 5
It was in accordance then with this his sentence, in which he
saith, "Is any called being circumcised ? let
him not become uncircumcised.
Is any called
let him not be circumin uncircumcision ?
6 that he did those things, in which,
cised;''
by persons not understanding and not enough
attending, he has been accounted to have
For he was a Jew, and was called
feigned.
being circumcised; therefore he would not
become uncircumcised; that is, would not so
For
live as if he had not been circumcised.
this he now had in his power to do. And
" under'' the law, indeed, he was not as they
who servilely wrought it; but yet "in" the
law of God and of Christ.
For that law was
not one, and the law of God another, as accursed Manicheans are wont to say.
Otherwise, if when he did those things he is to be
accounted to have feigned, then he feigned
himself also a pagan, and sacrificed to idols,
because he says that he became to those withBy whom, doubtout law, as without law.
less, he would have us to understand no other
than Gentiles whom we call Pagans.
It is
one thing therefore to be under the law, another
law.
" Under the law," the carnal Jews;
in the
law," spiritual men, both Jews and Christians;
(whence the former kept that custom of their
fathers, but did not impose unwonted burdens upon the believing Gentiles; and therefore they also were circumcised;) but
without law," are the Gentiles which have not yet
believed, to whom yet the Apostle testifieth
himself to have become like, through sympathy of a merciful heart, not simulation of a
changeable exterior; that is, that he might in
that way succor carnal Jew or Pagan, in
which way himself, if he were that, would
have wished to be succored: bearing, to wit,
their infirmity, in likeness of compassion, not
deceiving in fiction of lying; as he straight-
" I became to the
way goes on, and says,
weak as weak, that I might gain the weak." 7
For it was from this point that he was speakAs
ing, in saying all those other things.
then, that he became to the weak as weak,
was no lie; so all those other things above
For what doth he mean his weakrehearsed.
ness towards the weak to have been, but that
of suffering with them, insomuch that, lest he
should appear to be a seller of the Gospel,
and by falling into an ill suspicion with ig-

without
"

another

law,

the

in

"

1 1 Cor. ix. 17.
4 S. Jerome in Ep. inter Augustinianas, 75, n. 9-11.

2 1 Cor. ix. 18.

3 1 Cor. ix. 19-21.

5 Rom. ii. 25.

Cor.

7 1 Cor. ix. 22.

5io

norant men, should hinder the course of
God's word, he would not accept what by
warrant of the Lord was his due ? Which if
he were willing to accept, he would not in any
wise lie, because it was truly due to him; and
for that he would not, he did not in any wise
For he did not say, it was not due; but
lie.
he showed it to be due, and that being due
he had not used it, and professed that he
would not at all use it, in that very thing becoming weak; namely, in that he would not
use his power; being, to wit, with so merciful affection endued, that he thought in what
way he should wish to be dealt withal, if himself also were made so weak, that possibly, if
he should see them by whom the Gospel was
preached to him, accepting their charges, he
might think it a bringing of wares to market,
and hold them in suspicion accordingly.

"

13. Of this weakness of his, he saith in
another place, "We made ourselves small
among you, even as a nurse cherisheth her
For in that passage the context
children." *
" For neither at any time,"
indicates this:
used we flattering words, as ye
saith he,
know, nor an occasion of covetousness; God
nor of men sought we glory,
is witness:
neither of you, nor yet of others when we
might have been burdensome to you as the
Apostles of Christ: but we made ourselves
small among you, even as a nurse cherisheth
her children." What therefore he saith to
the Corinthians, that he had power of his
apostleship, as also the other Apostles, which
power he testifieth that he had not used; this
also he saith in that place to the Thessalo-
" When we might have been burdennians,
some to you as Christ's Apostles:
according
to that the Lord saith, "The workman is
For that of this he
worthy of his hire."
speaks, is indicated by that which he above
set down, "Neither for occasion of coveteousness, God is
By reason,
namely, of this which by right of the Lord's
appointment was due to good evangelists,
who not for its sake do evangelize but seek
the kingdom of God, so that all these things
should be added unto them, others were taking advantage thereof, of whom he also saith,
" For they that are such serve not God, but
2 From whom the Apostle
their own belly."
wished so to cut off this occasion, that even
what was justly due to him, he would forego.
For this himself doth openly show in the
second to the Corinthians, speaking of other
For he
Churches supplying his necessities.
had come, as it appears, to so great indigence, that from distant Churches were sent

witness."

"

"

"

alted:
"

I became to the weak as weak;
"

supplies for his necessities, while yet from
them among whom he was, he accepted
nothing of that kind. "Have I committed
saith he, "in humbling myself that
a sin,
ye might be exalted, because I have preached
to you the Gospel of God freely ?
Other
Churches I despoiled, taking wages of them
to minister unto you: and when I was present
with you and wanted, to no man was I burFor that which was lacking to me
densome.
the brethren which came from Macedonia
supplied, and in all things I have kept myself
from being burdensome to you, and will keep
It is the truth of Christ in me, that
myself.
this glory shall not be infringed in me in the
Wherefore ? because I
regions of Achaia.
love you not ? God knoweth.
But what I
do, I also mean to do, that I may cut off occasion from them which seek occasion, that
wherein they glory they may be found as also
we." 3 Of this occasion, therefore, which he
here saith that he cuts off, he would have
that understood which he saith in the former
" Neither for occasion of covetousness,
place,
God is witness." And what he here saith,
"
In humbling myself that ye might be exthis in the first to the same Corinthi-
" this
ans,
I became small among
to the Thessalonians,
you, as a nurse cherisheth her children.'' 4
Now then observe what follows: "
So," saith
he, "being affectionately desirous of you,
we are minded to impart unto you not alone
the Gospel of God, but our own souls also;
because ye are become most dear to us.
For
ye remember, brethren, our labor and toil,
night and day working, that we might not
For this he said above,
burden any of you."
" When we might be burdensome to you, as
Because, then, the weak
Christ's Apostles."
were in peril, lest, agitated by false suspicions,
they should hate an, as it were, venal Gospel,
for this cause, trembling for them as with a
father's and a mother's bowels of compassion,
So too in the Acts of the
did he this thing.
Apostles he speaks the same thing, when,
sending from Miletus to Ephesus, he had
called thence the presbyters of the Church,
to whom, among much else, "Silver," saith
" and gold, or apparel of no man have I
he,
coveted; yourselves know, that to my necessities and theirs who were with me these hands
In all things have I shown
have ministered.
you that so laboring it behoveth to help the
weak, mindful also of the words of the Lord
Jesus, for that He said, More blessed is
rather to give than to receive." s

14. Here peradventure some man may

it

1 " Parvuli." 1 Thess. ii. 5-7. [See R.V.]

Rom. xvi. 16

3 2 Cor. xi. 7-12. [See R.V.]

4 1 Thess. ii. 7-9.

5 Acts xx. 33-35.

OF THE WORK OF MONKS.

say, "If it was bodily work that the Apostle
wrought, whereby to sustain this life, what
was that same work, and when did he find
time for it, both to work and to preach the
Gospel?" To whom I answer: Suppose I do
not know; nevertheless that he did bodily
work, and thereby lived in the flesh, and did
not use the power which the Lord had given
to the Apostles, that preaching the Gospel
he should live by the Gospel, those things
above-said do without all doubt bear witness.
For it
is not either in one place or briefly
said, that it should be possible for any most
astute arguer with all his tergiversation to
traduce and pervert it to another meaning.
Since then so great an authority, with so
mighty and so frequent blows mauling the
gainsayers, doth break in pieces their contrariness, why ask they of me either what sort
of work he did, or when he did it ? One thing
I know, that he neither did steal, nor was a
housebreaker or highwayman, nor chariotdriver or hunter or player, nor given to filthy
lucre: but innocently and honestly wrought
things which are fitted for the uses of men;
such as are the works of carpenters, builders,
shoemakers, peasants, and such like.
For
honesty itself reprehends not what their pride
doth reprehend, who love to be called, but
The Apostle then
love not to be, honest.
would not disdain either to take in hand any
work of peasants, or to be employed in the
" Be
labor of craftsmen.
ye without offense to Jews and to Greeks and
to the Church of God," * before what men he
could possibly stand abashed, I know not.
If they shall say, the Jews; the Patriarchs
if the Greeks, whom we call also
fed cattle:
Pagans; they have had philosophers, held in
high honor, who were shoemakers: if the
Church of God; that just man, elect to the
testimony of a conjugal and ever-during virginity, to whom was betrothed the Virgin
Mary who bore Christ, was a carpenter.
Whatever therefore of these with innocence
and without fraud men do work, is good.
For the Apostle himself takes precaution of
this, that no man through necessity of sustaining life should turn aside to evil works.
"Let him that stole," saith he, "steal no
more; but rather let him labor good with his
hands, that he may have to impart to him that
This then is enough to know,
needeth." 3
that also in the very work of the body the
Apostle did work that which is good.

For he who saith,

15. But when he might use to work, that
is, in what spaces of time, that he might not
be hindered from preaching the Gospel, who

ii Cor. x. 32.

Matt. xiii. 55

3 Eph. iv. 28.

can make out?
Though, truly, that he
wrought at hours of both day and night himYet these men
self hath not left untold. 4
truly, who as though very full of business
and occupation inquire about the time of
Have they from
working, what do they?
Jerusalem round about even to Illyricum filled the lands with the Gospel ? 3 or whatever of
barbarian nations hath remained yet to be
gone unto, and to be filled of the peace of
the Church, have they undertaken ? We know
them into a certain holy society most leisurely
gathered together. A marvellous thing did
the Apostle, that in very deed amid his so
great care of all the Churches, both planted
and to be planted, to his care and labor appertaining, he did also with his hands work:
yet on that account, when he was with the
Corinthians, and wanted, was burdensome to
no man of those among whom he was, but
altogether that which was lacking to him the
brethren which came from Macedonia supplied.

16. For he himself also, with an eye to the
like necessities of saints, who, although they
obey his precepts, "that with silence they
work and eat their own bread," may yet from
many causes stand in need of somewhat by
way of supplement to the like sustenance,
therefore, after he had thus said, teaching
and premonishing, "Now them which are
such we command and beseech in our Lord
Jesus Christ, that with silence they work and
" 7
eat their own bread;
yet, lest they which
had whereof they might supply the needs of
the servants of God, should hence take occasion to wax lazy, providing against this he
" But ye, brethren,
hath straightway added,
become not weak in showing beneficence." 8
And when he was writing to Titus, saying,
"
Zenas the lawyer and Apollos do thou diligently send forward, that nothing may be
" 9 that he might show from
wanting to them;
what quarter nothing ought to be wanting to
" But let
them, he straightway subjoined,
ours also learn to maintain s:ood works I0 for
necessary use, that they be not unfruitful."
11 whom he calls
In the case of Timothy also,
son, because he knew him
his own most true 12
weak of body, (as he shows, in advising him
not to drink water, but to use a little wine for
his stomach's sake and his often infirmities,)
lest then haply, because in bodily work he
could not labor, he being unwilling to stand
in need of daily food at their hands, unto

5 Rom. xv. 19.
4 1 Thess. ii. 9 ; 2 Thess. lii. 8.
6 2 Cor. xi. 9.
7 2 Thess. iii. 12, 13.
8 Infirmari benefacientes.
9 Tit. iii. 13, 14.
10 Bonis operibits prepesse, KaXt&v tpyiov TTpotaraaOai.

margin, "profess honest trades."

11 1 Tim. i. 2.

I2 " Germanissimu;i:." 1 Tim. v. 23.

E. V. in

5i2

and

comforts

admonishes,

whom he ministered the Gospel, should seek
some business in which the stress of his mind
would become entangled; (for it is one thing
to labor in body, with the mind free, as does
a handicraftsman, if he be not fraudulent and
avaricious and greedy of his own private gain;
but another thing, to occupy the mind itself
with cares of collecting money without the
body's labor, as do either dealers, or bailiffs,
or undertakers, for these with care of the
mind conduct their business, not with their
hands do work, and in that regard occupy
their mind itself with solicitude of getting;)
lest then Timothy should fall upon such like
ways, because from weakness of body he
could not work with his hands, he thus
him:
exhorts,
"Labor," saith he, "as a good soldier of
Jesus Christ. No man, going a warfare for
God, entangleth himself with secular business; that he may please Him to whom he
For he that striveth
hath proved himself, 1
for masteries, is not crowned except he strive
Hereupon, lest the other should
lawfully."
be put to straits, saying,
Dig I cannot, to
beg I am ashamed," 3 he adjoined, "The
husbandman that laboreth must be first paraccording to that which
taker of the fruits:
" Who goeth
he had said to the Corinthians,
a warfare any time at his own charges ? Who
planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the
fruit thereof? Who feedeth a flock, and par-
" 4 Thus
taketh not of the milk of the flock ?
did he make to be without care a chaste evangelist, not to that end working as an evangelist
that he might sell the Gospel, but yet not
having strength to supply unto himself with
his own hands the necessities of this life;
for
that he should understand whatever being
necessary for himself he was taking of them
whom as provincials he as a soldier was serving, and whom as a vineyard he was culturing,
or as a flock was feeding, to be not matter of
mendicity, but of power.

"

"

17. On account then of these either occupations of the servants of God, or bodily
infirmities, which cannot be altogether wanting, not only doth the Apostle permit the
needs of saints to be supplied by good believers, but also most wholesomely exhorteth.
For, setting apart that power, which he saith
himself had not used, which yet that the
faithful must serve unto, he enjoins, saying,
"
Let him that is catechised in the word,
communicate unto him that doth catechise
" 5 setting apart, then,
him, in all good things:
this power, which that the preachers of the
word have over them to whom they preach,
3 Luke xvi. 3. [See R.V.]
2 2 Tim. li. 3-6.
8 Gal. vi. 6.

1 Cui $e probavit,
5 1 Cor. ix. 7.

is

"

"

he often testifieth; speaking, moreover, of
the saints who had sold all that they had and
distributed the same, and were dwelling at
Jerusalem in an holy communion of life, not
saying that any thing was their own, to whom
all things were in common, and their soul
and heart one in the Lord: that these by the
Churches of the Gentiles should have what
they needed bestowed upon them, he chargeth
Thence is also that to the
and exhorteth.
Romans: " Now therefore I
will go unto
For
Jerusalem, to minister unto the saints.
it hath pleased Macedonia and Achaia to
make a certain contribution for the poor of
For it
the saints which are at Jerusalem.
hath pleased them; and their debtors they
For if in their spiritual things the Genare.
tiles have communicated, they ought also in
carnal things to minister unto them." 7
This
;s like that which he says to the Corinthians:
"
If we have sown unto you spiritual things,
it a great thing if we reap your carnal
Also to the Corinthians in the
things ?
Moreover, brethren, we do
second Epistle:
you to wit of the grace of God bestowed on
the Churches of Macedonia; how that in a
great trial of affliction the abundance of their
joy and their deep poverty abounded in the
riches of their liberality;
for to their power,
I bear record, yea, and beyond their power,
they were willing of themselves; with many
prayers beseeching of us the grace and the
fellowship of the ministering to the saints:
and not as we hoped, but first they gave their
own selves to the Lord, and unto us by the
will of God, insomuch, that we desired Titus,
that as he had begun, so he would also finish
in you the same grace also.
But as ye
abound in every thing, in faith, and utterance,
and knowledge, and in all diligence, and in
your love to us, see that ye abound in this
I speak not by commandment,
grace also.
but by occasion of the forwardness of others,
and to prove the exceeding dearness of your
For ye know the grace of our Lord
love.
Jesus Christ, that, though He was rich, yet
for your sakes He became poor, that ye
through His poverty might be made rich.
And herein I give advice: for this is expedient for you, who have begun before, not only
to do, but also to be willing a year ago; now
therefore perfect it in the doing; that as there
is a readiness to will, so of performance also
For if there be
out of that which each hath.
first a ready mind, it is acceptable according
to that a man hath, not according to that he
Not, namely, that others may have
hath not.
ease, and ye straits* but by an equality, that

6 Acts ii. 44 ; iv. 32.

Rom. xv. 25-27.

" 1 Cor. ix. 11.

OF THE WORK OF MONKS.

now at this time your abundance may be a
supply for their want, that their abundance
also may become a supply for your want: that
is written, He
there may be equality, as it
that had gathered much had nothing over;
and he that had gathered little had no lack.
But thanks be to God, which put the same
earnest care for you into the heart of Titus:
for indeed he accepted the exhortation; but
being more forward, of his own accord he
went forth unto you. And we have sent with
him the brother, whose praise is in the Gospel throughout all the Churches; and not that
only, but he was also ordained of the Churches
as a companion of our travail, with this grace
which is administered by us to the glory of
the Lord, and our ready mind: avoiding this,
that no man should blame us in this abunFor we
dance which is administered by us.
provide for honest things, not only in the
sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of
In these words appeareth how much 2
men." 1
the Apostle willed it not only to be the care
of the holy congregations 3 to minister necessaries to the holy servants of God, giving
counsel in this, because this was profitable
more to the persons themselves who did this,
than to them towards whom they did it, (for
to those another thing was profitable, that is,
that they should make of this service of their
brethren towards them an holy use, and not
with an eye to this serve God, nor take these
things but to supply necessity, not to feed
laziness:) but likewise his own care the blessed
Apostle saith to be so great in this ministration which was now in transmitting through
Titus, that a companion of his journey was on
us, ordained by the
this account, he tells
Churches, a man of God well reported of,
"whose praise,'' says he, "is in the Gospel
throughout all the Churches." And to this
end, he says, was the same ordained to be
his companion, that he might avoid men's
reprehensions, lest, without witness of saints
associated with him in this ministry, he should
be thought by weak and impious men to receive for himself and turn aside into his own
bosom, what he was receiving for supplying
the necessities of the saints, by him to be
brought and distributed to the needy.
" For as
18. And a little after he saith,

touching the ministering to the saints, it
is
superfluous for me to write to you.
For I
know the forwardness of your mind, for which
I boast of you to them of Macedonia, that
Achaia was ready a year ago; and your zeal

1 2 Cor. viii. 1-21.
"
2 Read perhaps

to be the care."
i Plebium.

quantam ;

how great the Apostle willed

Yet have we sent
hath provoked very many.
the brethren, lest our boasting of you should
be in vain in this behalf; that, as I said, ye
may be ready: lest haply if they of Macedonia
come with me, and find you unprepared, we
(that we say not, ye) should be ashamed in
Therefore I thought it necesthis substance.
sary to exhort the brethren, that they would
go before unto you, and make up beforehand
this your long promised benediction, that the
same might be ready, as benediction, and not
But this I say, He which
as covetousness.
soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly;
and he which soweth in benediction shall reap
also in benediction. Every man according as
he hath purposed in his heart, not grudgingly,
for God loveth a cheerful
or of necessity:
giver. And God is able to make all grace
abound in you; that ye, always having all
sufficiency in all things, may abound to every
is written, He hath disgood work: as it
persed abroad; he hath given to the poor: his
But He
righteousness remaineth for ever.
that ministereth seed to the sower will both
minister bread for your food, and multiply
your seed sown, and increase the growing
fruits of your righteousness; that ye may be
enriched in every thing to all bountifulness,
which causeth through us thanksgiving to
God: for the administration of this service
not only supplieth the want of the saints, but
makes them also to abound by thanksgiving
unto God of many, while by the proof of this
ministration they glorify God for the obedience
of your confession unto the Gospel of Christ,
and for your liberal distribution unto them,
and unto all men; and in the praying for you
of them which long after you for the excellent
Thanks be unto God
grace of God in you.
In what richness
for His unspeakable gift."
of holy gladness must the Apostle have been
steeped, while he speaks of the mutual supply
of the need of Christ's soldiers and His other
5 on the one part of carnal things to
subjects,
those, on the other of spiritual things to these,
to exclaim as he does, and as it were in
repletion of holy joys to burst out 6
with,
"Thanks be to God for His unspeakable
gift!"

19. As therefore the Apostle, nay rather
the Spirit of God possessing and filling and
actuating his heart, ceased not to exhort the
faithful who had such substance, that nothing
should be lacking to the necessities of the
servants of God, who wished to hold a more
lofty degree of sanctity in the Church, in cutting off all ties of secular hope, and dedicating a mind at liberty to their godly service

4 2 Cor. ix.

5 Provincialium.

6 " Eructuare.

5H

of warfare: likewise ought themselves also to
obey his precepts, in sympathizing with the
weak, and unshackled by love of private
wealth, to labor with their hands for the common good, and submit to their superiors without a murmur; that there may be made up
for them out of the oblations of good believers
that which, while they labor and do some work
whereby they may get their living, yet still
by reason of bodily infirmities of some, and
by reason of ecclesiastical occupations or
erudition of the doctrine which bringeth salvation, they shall account to be lacking.

sweetness of

20. For what these men are about, who will
not do bodily work, to what thing they give
" To
up their time, I should like to know.
prayers/' say they, "and psalms, and reading, and the word of God." A holy life, unquestionably, and in
Christ
worthy of praise; but then, if from these we
are not to be called off, neither must we eat,
nor our daily viands themselves be prepared,
that they may be put before us and taken.
Now if to find time for these things the servants of God at certain intervals of times by
very infirmity are of necessity compelled, why
do we not make account of some portions of
times to be allotted also to the observance of
For one single prayer
Apostolical precepts ?
of one who obeyeth is sooner heard than ten
As for divine songs,
thousand of a despiser.
however, they can easily, even while working
with their hands, say them, and like as rowers
1 so with godly melody cheer
with a boat-song,
Or are we ignorant how
up their very toil.
it is with all workmen, to what vanities, and
for the most part even filthinesses, of theatrical fables they give their hearts and tongues,
while their hands recede not from their work ?
What then hinders a servant of God while
working with his hands to meditate in the law
of the Lord, and sing unto the Name of the
Lord Most High? 2
provided, of course, that
to learn what he may by memory rehearse,
For to this end also
he have times set apart.
those good works of the faithful ought net to
be lacking, for resource of making up what is
necessary, that the hours which are so taken
up in storing of the mind that those bodily
works cannot be carried on, may not oppress
But they which say that they give
with want.
up their time to reading, do they not there
find that which the Apostle enjoineth ? Then
what perversity is this, to refuse to be ruled
by his reading while he wishes to give up his
time thereto; and that he may spend more
time in reading what is good, therefore to reFor who knows not
fuse to do what is read ?

that each doth the more quickly profit when
he reads good things, the quicker he is in
doing what he reads ?

21. Moreover, if discourse must be bestowed upon any, and this so take up the
speaker that he have not time to work with
his hands, are all in the monastery able to hold
discourse unto brethren which come unto
them from another kind of life, whether it be
to expound the divine lessons, or concerning
any questions which may be put, to reason in
an wholesome manner ? Then since not all
have the ability, why upon this pretext do all
want to have nothing else to do?
Although
even if all were able, they ought to do it by
turns; not only that the rest might not be
taken up from necessary works, but also because it sufneeth that to many hearers there
To come now to the Aposbe one speaker.
tle; how could he find time to work with his
hands, unless for the bestowing of the word
of God he had certain set times ? And indeed
God hath not willed this either to be hidden
For both of what craft he was a
from us.
workman, and at what times he was taken up
with dispensing the Gospel, holy Scripture
Namely, when the day
has not left untold.
of his departure caused him to be in haste,
being at Troas, even on the first day of the
week when the brethren were assembled to
break bread, such was his earnestness, and
so necessary the disputation, that his discourse was prolonged even until midnight, 3 as
though it had slipped from their minds that
on that day it was not a fast: 4 but when he
was making longer stay in any place and disputing daily, who can doubt that he had cerFor at
tain hours set apart for this office ?
Athens, because he had there found most
studious inquirers of things, it is thus written
" He disputed therefore with the
of him:
Jews in the synagogue, and with the Gentile
inhabitants 5 in the market every day to those
who were there. ' ' 6
Not, namely, in the
synagogue every day, for there it was his custom to discourse on the sabbath: but "
in the
"
market," saith he,
by reason,
doubtless, of the studiousness of the AtheCertain however
nians.
of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers conferred with him." And a little after, it says:
"Now the Athenians and strangers which
were there spent their time in nothing else

For so it follows:

every day;

"

"

See St. Chrys. on Stat. Horn. ix.

3 Acts xx. 7.
4 S. Augustin therefore assumes that the Christians of the
Apostolic age did not break their fast before receiving the Euchar2. Tr. p. 159, and note g.
ist.
5 Tots 'Iouoatots xai rots o-e(3ojiieVoi? /cat wtj dyopa Kara, iraaaf
For xai Tots a^O/uei/cus
ijixipav 7rpbs tous TrapaTvy\6.vovra';.
Aug. has et Gentilncs incolis : for which some mss. have Gentibus
in viculis.

1 Celeumate.

- Ps. i. 2 : xiii. 6

6 Acts xvii. 17, 18, 21.

OF THE WORK OF MONKS.

"

"

in the synagogue every sabbath;

but either to tell or to hear some new thing."
Let us suppose him all those days that he was
at Athens not to have worked: on this account, indeed, was his need supplied from
Macedonia, as he says in the second to the
Corinthians: 1 though in fact he could work
both at other hours and of nights, because he
was so strong in both mind and body.
But
when he had gone from Athens, let us see
what says the Scripture: "He disputed,"
" -
saith it,
In Troas, however, where
this at Corinth.
through necessity of his departure being close
at hand, his discourse was protracted until
midnight, it was the first day of the week,
which is called the Lord's Day: whence we
understand that he was not with Jews but
with Christians; when also the narrator himself saith they were gathered together to break
bread. And indeed this same is the best
management, that all things be distributed
to their times and be done in order, lest becoming ravelled in perplexing entanglements,
they throw our human mind into confusion.

22. There also is said at what work the
"After these things," it
Apostle wrought.
he departed from Athens and came
says,
to Corinth; and having found a certain Jew,
by name Aquila, of Pontus by birth, lately
come from Italy, and Priscilla his wife, because that Claudius had ordered all Jews to
depart from Rome, he came unto them, and
because he was of the same craft he abode
with them, doing work: for they were tentThis if they shall essay to intermakers." 3
pret allegorically, they show what proficients
they be in ecclesiastical learning, on which
they glory that they bestow all their time.
And, at the least, touching those sayings
above recited, "Or I only and Barnabas,
have we not power to forbear working?"
" We have not used this power;
" 4 and,
and,
" When we might be burdensome to you, as
Apostles of Christ," 3 and, "Night and day
working that we might not burden any of
and, "The Lord hath ordained for
you;" 6
them which preach the Gospel, of the Gospel
but I have used none of these
to
things:" 7 and the rest of this kind, let them
either expound otherwise, or if by most clear
shining light of truth they be put to it, let
them understand and obey; or if to obey they
be either unwilling or unable, at least let
them own them which be willing, to be better,
and them which be also able, to be happier
men than they.
For it is one thing to plead
infirmity of body, either truly alleged, or

live;

1 2 Cor. xi. 9.
4 1 Cor. ix. 6-12.
7 1 Cor. ix. 14, 15.

2 Acts xviii. 4.
5 1 Thess. ii. 6.

3 Acts xviii. 1-3.
6 2 Thess. iii. S.

falsely pretended: but another so to be deceived and so to deceive, that it shall even
be thought a proof of righteousness obtaining
more mightily in servants of God, if laziness
have gotten power to reign among a set of
He, namely, who shows a
ignorant men.
true infirmity of body, must be humanely
dealt withal; he who pretends a false one,
and cannot be convicted, must be left unto
God: yet neither of them fixeth a pernicious
rule; because a good servant of God both
serves his manifestly infirm brother;
and,
when the
other deceives,
believes
him because he does not think him a bad
man, he does not imitate him that he may be
bad; and if he believe him not; he thinks him
deceitful, and does, nevertheless, not imitate
This is true
him.
righteousness, that by doing no bodily work
we imitate the birds of the air, because he
who shall do any such work, goes against the
" whoso being infirm in mind hears
Gospel :
and believes this, that person, not for that he
so bestows all his time, but for that he so
erreth, must be mourned over.

But when a man says,

if he

"

23. Hence arises another question;

for
" What then ? did
peradventure one may say,
the other Apostles, and the brethren of the
Lord, and Cephas, sin, in that they did not
work ? Or did they occasion an hindrance to
the Gospel, because blessed Paul saith that
he had not used this power on purpose that
he might not cause any hindrance to the
For if they sinned because
Gospel of Christ ?
they wrought not, then had they not received
power not to work, but to live instead by the
But if they had received this power,
Gospel.
by ordinance of the Lord, that they which
preach the Gospel should live by the Gospel;
" The workman is worthy
and by His saying,
of his meat;" which power Paul, laying out
somewhat more,
8 would not use; then truly
they sinned not.
If they sinned not, they
caused no hindrance.
is not to be
thought no sin to hinder the Gospel. 9
If this
be so, "to us also," say they, "it is free
either to use or not to use this power."

For it

24. This question I should briefly solve, if
I should say, because I should also justly say,
that we must believe the Apostle.
For he
himself knew why in the Churches of the
Gentiles it was not meet that a venal Gospel
were carried about; not finding fault with his
fellow-apostles, but distinguishing his own
ministry; because they, without doubt by admonition of the Holy Ghost, had so distributed among them the provinces of evangelizing, that Paul and Barnabas should go

8 A melius aliquid crogans.

1 1 Cor. ix. 12

5i6

unto the Gentiles, and they unto the CircumBut that he gave this precept to
cision. 1
them who had not the like power, those many
things already said do make manifest.
But
these brethren of ours rashly arrogate unto
themselves, so far as I can judge, that they
For if they be
have this kind of power.
evangelists, I confess, they have it:
if ministers of the altar, dispensers of sacraments, of
course it is no arrogating to themselves, but
a plain vindicating of a right.

25. If at the least they once had in this
world wherewithal they might easily without
handiwork sustain this life, which property,
when they were converted unto God, they disparted to the needy, then must we both beFor
lieve their infirmity, and bear with it.
usually such persons, having been, not better
brought up, as many think, but what is the
truth, more languidly brought up, are not
Such
able to bear the labor of bodily works.
For
peradventure were many in Jerusalem.
it is also written, that they sold their houses
and lands, and laid the prices of them at the
feet, that distribution might be
Apostles'
made to every one as he had need. 2
Because
they were found, being near, and were useful
3 were
to the Gentiles, who, being afar off,
thence called from the worship of idols, as it
" Out of Zion shall go forth the law,
is said,
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem," 4
therefore hath the Apostle called the Christians of the Gentiles their debtors: "their
debtors," saith he, "they are:" and hath
" For if in their spiradded the reason why,
itual things the Gentiles have communicated,
they ought also in carnal things to minister
But now there come into this
unto them." 5
profession of the service of God, both persons
from the condition of slaves, or also freedmen, or persons on this account freed by
their masters or about to be freed, likewise
from the life of peasants, and from the exercise and plebeian labor of handicraftsmen,
persons whose bringing up doubtless has been
all the better for them, the harder it has been:
whom not to admit, is a heavy sin.
For many
of that sort have turned out truly great men
and meet to be imitated.
For on this achath God chosen the weak things
count also
of the world to confound the things which are
mighty, and the foolish things of the world
hath He chosen to confound them who are
wise; and ignoble things of the world, and
things which are not, as though they were,
that the things that are may be brought to
nought: that no flesh may glory before God. ' ' 6
This pious and holy thought, accordingly,

"

causeth that even such be admitted as bring
no proof of a change of life for the better.
For it doth not appear whether they come of
purpose for the service of God, or whether
running away empty from a poor and laborious life they want to be fed and clothed; yea,
moreover, to be honored by them of whom
they were wont to be despised and trampled
Such persons therefore because they
on.
cannot excuse themselves from working by
pleading infirmity of body, seeing they are
convicted by the custom of their past life, do
therefore shelter themselves under the screen
of an ill scholarship, that from the Gospel
badly understood they should essay to pervert
fowls of the air,"
precepts apostolical: truly
but in lifting themselves on high through
pride; and "
grass of the field," but in being
carnally minded.

"

26. That, namely, befalleth them which in
the same
younger widows,
undisciplined
Apostle saith must be avoided: " And withal
they learn to be idle; and not only idle, but
also busy bodies and full of words, speaking
what they ought not." 7 This very thing said
he concerning evil women, which we also in
evil men do mourn and bewail, who against
him, the very man in whose Epistles we read
these things, do, being idle and full of words,
speak what they ought not. And if there be
any among them who did with that purpose
come to the holy warfare,
8 that they may please
Him to whom they have proved themselves,
these, when they be so vigorous in strength
of body, and soundness of health, that they
are able not only to be taught, but also, agreeably unto the Apostle, to work, do, by receiving of these men's idle and corrupt discourses,
which they are unable, by reason of their unskilled rawness, to judge of, become changed
by pestiferous contagion into the same noisomeness: not only not imitating the obedience of saints which quietly work, and of
other monasteries 9 which in most wholesome
discipline do live after the apostolic rule; but
also insulting better men than themselves,
preaching up laziness as the keeper of the
Gospel, accusing mercy as the prevaricator
For a much more merciful work
therefrom.
is it to the souls of the weak, to consult for
the fair fame of the servants of God, than it
is to the bodies of men, to break bread to
Wherefore I would to God that
the hungry.
these, which want to let their hands lie idle,
would altogether let their tongues lie idle too.
For they would not make so many willing to
imitate them, if the examples they set were
not merely lazy ones, but mute withal.

1 Acts xiii.
4 Is. ii. 3.

Gal. 11. 9.

2 Acts ii. 45 ; iv. 34.
S Rom. xv. 27.

3 Acts ii. 39.
6 1 Cor. i. 27-29.

7 1 Tim. v. 13.
9 Cassian. de Inst. x. 22.

8 2 Tim. ii. 4. [See R.V.]

OF THE WORK OF MONKS.

5'7

"

27. As it

apothecae

Now "

is, however, they, against the
Apostle of Christ, recite a Gospel of Christ.
For so marvellous are the works of the sluggards, hindered that they want to have that
very thing by Gospel, which the Apostle enjoined and did on purpose that the Gospel
And yet, if
itself should not be hindered.
from the very words of the Gospel we should
compel them to live agreeably with their way
of understanding it, they will be the first to
endeavor to persuade us how they are not to
be understood so as they do understand them.
For certainly, they say that they therefore
ought not to work, for that the birds of the
air neither sow nor reap, of which the Lord
hath given us a similitude that we should take
Then
no thought about such necessaries.
why do they not attend to that which follows ?
they sow not,
For it is not only said, that
neither reap;" 1 but there is added, "nor
"
"
gather in apothecas.
may be called either "barns," or word for
Then why do these
word, "repositories."
persons want to have idle hands and full repositories ? Why do they lay by and keep
what they receive of the labors of others, that
thereof may be every day somewhat forthcoming ? Why, in short, do they grind and
For the birds do not this.
cook ?
Or, if
they find some whom they may persuade to
this work also, namely, to bring unto them
day by day viands ready made; at least their
water they either fetch them from springs, or
from cisterns and wells draw and set it by:
this the fowls do not.
But if so please them,
let it be the study of good believers and most
devoted subjects of the Eternal King, to
carry their service to His most valiant soldiers
even to that length, that they shall not be
forced even to fill a vessel of water for themselves, if now-a-days people have surpassed
even them which at that time were at Jerusalem, in a new grade of righteousness, stepping out beyond them. To them, namely,
by reason of famine being imminent, and
foretold by the Prophets which were at that
2 good believers sent out of Greece suptime,
plies of corn; of which I suppose they made
them bread, or at least procured to be made;
which thing the birds do not.
But if now-adays these persons, as I began to say, have
surpassed these in some grade of righteousness, and do altogether in things pertaining
to the maintenance of this life, as do the
birds; let them show us men doing such service unto birds as they wish to be done unto
them, except indeed birds caught and caged
because they are not trusted, lest if they fly

they come not back: and yet these would
rather enjoy liberty and receive from the
fields what is enough, than take their food
by men laid before them and made ready.

But plainly, on account of

28. Here then shall these persons in their
turn be in another more sublime degree of
righteousness outdone, by them who shall so
order themselves, that every day they shall
betake them into the fields as unto pasture,
and at what time they shall find it, pick up
their meal, and having allayed their hunger,
return.
the
keepers of the fields, how good were it, if the
Lord should deign to bestow wings also, that
the servants of God being found in other
men's fields should not be taken up as thieves,
As things are,
but as starlings be scared off.
however, such an one will do all he can to be
like a bird, which the fowler shall not be able
But, lo, let all men allow this to
to catch.
the servants of God, that when they will they
should go forth into their fields, and thence
depart fearless and refreshed: as it was ordered to the people Israel by the law, that
none should lay hands on a thief in his fields,
unless he wanted to carry any thing away with
him from thence; 3 for if he laid hands on
nothing but what he had eaten, they would let
Whence
him go away free and unpunished.
also when the disciples of the Lord plucked
the ears of corn, the Jews calumniated them
on the score of the sabbath 4 rather than of
But how is one to manage about those
theft.
times of year, at which food that can be taken
on the spot is not found in the fields ? Whoso
shall attempt to take home with him any thing
which by cooking he may prepare for himself,
he shall, according to these persons' understanding of it, be accosted from the Gospel
" Put it down; for this the birds do not."
with,
29. But let us grant this also, that the
whole year round there may in the fields be
found either of tree or of herbs or of any
manner of roots, that which may be taken as
food uncooked; or, at any rate, let so great
exercise of body be used, that the things
which require cooking, may be taken even
raw without hurt, and people may even in
winter weather, no matter how rough, go forth
to their fodder; and so it shall be the case
that nothing be taken away to be prepared,
nothing laid up for the morrow.
Yet will not
those men be able to keep these rules, who
for many days separating themselves from
sight of men, and allowing none access to
them, do shut themselves up, living in great
For these do use to
earnestness of prayers.
shut up with themselves store of aliments,

1 Matt. vi. 26.

: Acts xi. 28-30.

3 Deut. xxiii. 24, 25.

4 Matt. xii. 1, 2.

5i8

such indeed as are most easily and cheaply
had, yet still a store which may suffice for
those days during which they purpose that no
man shall see them; which thing the birds
do not. Now touching these men's exercising of themselves in so marvellous continency,
seeing that they have leisure for the doing of
these things, and not in proud elation but in
merciful sanctity do propose themselves for
men's imitation, I not only do not blame it,
but know not how to praise it as much as it
deserves. And yet what are we to say of
such men, according to these persons' understanding of the evangelical words ? Or haply
the holier they be, the more unlike are they
to the fowls? because unless they lay by for
themselves food for many days, to shut themselves up as they do they will not have
Howbeit, to them as well as us is
strength ?
it said, "Take therefore no thought for the
morrow." x

30. Wherefore, that I may briefly embrace
the whole matter, let these persons, who from
perverse understanding of the Gospel labor
to pervert apostolical precepts, either take no
thought for the morrow, even as the birds of
the air; or let them obey the Apostle, as dear
children: yea rather, let them do both, beFor things contrary to
cause both accord.
his Lord, Paul the servant of Jesus Christ
This then we say
would never advise. 2
openly to these persons; If the birds of the
air ye in such wise understand in the Gospel,
that ye will not by working with your hands
procure food and clothing; then neither must
ye put any thing by for the morrow, like as
the birds of the air do put nothing by.
But
if to put somewhat by for the morrow, is
possibly not against the Gospel where it
" Behold the birds of the air, for they
said,
" 3
neither sow nor reap nor gather into stores;
then is it possibly not against the Gospel nor
against similitude of the birds of the air, to
maintain this life of the flesh by labor of corporal working.

is

31. For if they be urged from the Gospel
that they should put nothing by for the morrow, they most rightly answer, "Why then
had the Lord Himself a bag in which to put
by the money which was collected? 4 Why
so long time beforehand, on occasion of impending famine, were supplies of corn sent to
the holy fathers ? s Why did Apostles in such
wise provide things necessary for the indigence of saints lest there should be lack
thereafter, that most blessed Paul should thus
" Now
write to the Corinthians in his Epistle:

32. Some man will say:

concerning the collection for the saints, as I
have given order to the Churches of Galatia,
even so do ye.
Upon the first day of the
week let every one of you lay by him in store,
as God hath prospered him, that the gatherings be not then first made when I come.
And when I come, whomsoever ye shall approve by your letters, them will I send to
bring your liberality unto Jerusalem. And
if it be meet that I go also, they shall go with
me?" 6
These and much else they most
copiously and most truly bring forward. To
whom we answer: Ye see then, albeit the
" Take no thought for the morLord said,
row," yet ye are not by these words constrained to reserve nothing for the morrow:
then why do ye say that by the same words
ye are constrained to do nothing ? Why are
the birds of the air not a pattern unto you for
reserving nothing, and ye will have them to
be a pattern for working nothing ?
" What then does
it profit a servant of God, that, having left the
former doings which he had in the world he
is converted unto the spiritual life and warfare, if it still behove him to do business as
of a common workman?"
As if truly it
words, how
could be easily unfolded
in
greatly profiteth what the Lord, in answer to
that rich man who was seeking counsel of laying hold on eternal life, told him to do if he
would fain be perfect: sell that he had, distribute all to the indigence of the poor, and
follow Him? 7 Or who with so unimpeded
course hath followed the Lord, as he who
" Not in vain have I run, nor in vain
saith,
" 8 who yet both enjoined these
labored ?
Works, and did them.
This unto us, being
by so great authority taught and informed,
ought to suffice for a pattern of relinquishing
our old resources, and of working with our
hands. But we too, aided by the Lord Himself,
are able perchance in some sort to apprehend
what it doth still profit the servants of God. to
have left their former businesses, while they
do yet thus work.
For if a person from being
rich is converted to this mode of life, and is
hindered by no infirmity of body, are we so
without taste of the savor of Christ, as not to
understand what an healing it is to the swelling of the old pride, when, having pared off
the superfluities by which erewhile the mind
was deadly inflamed, he refuses not, for the
procuring of that little which is still naturally
necessary for this present life, even a common workman's lowly toil ?
If however he
be from a poor estate converted unto this
manner of life, let him not account himself

1 Matt. vi. 34.
4 John xii. 6.

2 Rom. i. 1.
5 Acts xi. 28-30.

3 Matt. vi. 26.

6 1 Cor. xvi. 1-4.

7 Matt. xix. 21.

Phil. li. 16.

OF THE WORK OF MONKS.

to be doing- that which he was doing; aforetime, if foregoing the love of even increasing
his ever so small matter of private substance,
and now no more seeking his own but the
things which be Jesu Christ's,
' he hath transcharity of a life in
lated himself into the
common, to live in fellowship of them who
have one soul and one heart to Godward, so
that no man saith that any thing is his own,
but they have all things common. 2
For if in
this earthly commonwealth its chief men in
the old times did, as their own men of letters
are wont in their most glowing phrase to tell
of them, to that degree prefer the common !
weal of the whole people of their city and
country to their own private affairs, that one
of them, 3 for subduing of Africa honored with I
a triumph, would have had nothing to give to
his daughter on her marriage, unless by decree
of the senate she had been dowered from the
public treasury: of what mind ought he to be
towards his commonwealth, who is a citizen
of that eternal City, the heavenly Jerusalem,
but that even what with labor of his own hands
he earns, he should have in common with his
brother, and if the same lack any thing, supply it from the common store; saying with
him whose precept and example he hath followed, "As having nothing, and possessing
all things?" 4

'

33. Wherefore even they which having relinquished or distributed their former, whether
ample or in any sort opulent, means, have
chosen with pious and wholesome humility to
be numbered among the poor of Christ; if
they be so strong in body and free from ecclesiastical occupations, (albeit, bringing as
they do so great a proof of their purpose, and
conferring from their former havings, either
very much, or not a little, upon the indigence
of the same society, the common fund itself
and brotherly charity owes them in return a
sustenance of their life,) yet if they too work
with their hands, that they may take away all
excuse from lazy brethren who come from a
more humble condition in life, and therefore
one more used to toil; therein they act far
more mercifully than when they divided all
If indeed they be
their goods to the needy.
unwilling to do this, who can venture to compel them ? Yet then there ought to be found
for them works in the monastery, which if
more free from bodily exercise, require to be
looked unto with vigilant administration, that
not even they may eat their bread for nought,
because it is now become the common propNor is it to be regarded in what monerty.

asteries, or in what place, any man may have
bestowed his former having upon his indigent
For all Christians make one combrethren.
monwealth. And for that cause whoso shall
have, no matter in what place, expended upon
Christians the things they needed, in what
place soever he also receiveth what himself
hath need of, from Christ's goods 3 he doth
Because in what place soever
receive it.
himself has given to such, who but Christ reBut, as for them who before they
ceived it ?
entered this holy society got their living by
labor of the body, of which sort are the more
part of them which come into monasteries,
because of mankind also the more part are
such; if they will not work, neither let them
For not to that end are the rich, in this
eat.
Christian warfare, brought low unto piety,
that the poor may be lifted up unto pride.
As indeed it is by no means seemly that in
that mode of life where senators become men
of toil, there common workmen should become men of leisure; and whereunto there
come, relinquishing their dainties, men who
had been masters of houses and lands, there
common peasants should be dainty.
" Be not
34. But then the Lord saith,
solicitous for your life what ye shall eat, nor
for the body, what ye shall put on." Rightly:
because He had said above, "Ye cannot
serve God and mammon."
For he who
preaches the Gospel with an eye to this, that
he may have whereof he may eat and whereof
be clothed, accounts that he at the same time
both serves God, because he preaches the
Gospel; and mammon, because he preaches
with an eye to these necessaries: which thing
the Lord saith to be impossible. And hereby
he who doth for the sake of these things
preach the Gospel is convicted that he serves
not God but mammon; however God may
use him, he knows not how, to other men's
For to this sentence doth He
advancement.
subjoin, saying "Therefore I say unto you,
Be not solicitous for your life what ye shall
eat, nor for your body what ye shall put on: "
not that they should not procure these things,
as much as is enough for necessity, by what
means they honestly may; but
that they
should not look to these things, and for the
sake of these do whatever in preaching of
The inthe Gospel they are bidden to do.
tention, namely, for which a thing is done,
He calls the eye:
of which a little above He
was speaking with purpose to come down to
this, and saying, "The light of thy body is
thine eye: if thine eye be single, thy whole
body shall be full of light; but if thine eye

1 Phil. ii. 21.
ZScipio ap. V, I. iv.

2 Acts iv. 32.
4 2 Cor. vi. 10.

5 De Christ i.

"

"

be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness;" that is, such will be thy deeds as
shall be thine intention for which thou doest
For indeed that He might come to
them.
this, He had before given precept concerning
Lay not up for yourselves
alms, saying,
treasures on earth where rust and moth doth
corrupt, and where thieves break through
But lay up for yourselves treasure
and steal.
in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth
corrupt, and where thieves do not break
For where thy treasure
through nor steal.
be, there will thy heart be also. 1 "
shall
Thereupon He subjoined, "The light of thy
" that they, to wit, which
body is thine eye:
do alms, do them not with that intention that
they should either wish to please men, or
seek to have repayment on earth of the alms
Whence the Apostle, giving charge
they do.
Let
to Timothy for warning of rich men,
them," says he "readily give, communicate,
treasure up for themselves a good foundation
for the time to come, that they may lay hold
Since then the Lord hath
on the true life." 2
to the future life directed the eye of them
which do alms, and to an heavenly reward, in
order that the deeds themselves may be lull
of light when the eye shall be simple, (for of
that last retribution is meant that which He
" He that receiveth
says in another place,
you receiveth Me, and he that receiveth Me
receiveth Him that sent Me. He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet
shall receive a prophet's reward; and he that
receiveth a righteous man in the name of a
righteous man shall receive a righteous man's
reward. And whosoever shall give to drink
unto one of these little ones a cup of cold
water only in the name of a disciple, verily
I say unto you, his reward shall not be lost,"
lest haply after he had reproved the eye 4 of
them which bestow things needful upon the
indigent both prophets and just men and
disciples of the Lord, the eye of the persons
to whom these things were done should become depraved, so that for the sake of receiving these things they should wish to serve
" No man," saith He,
Christ as His soldiers:
"can serve two masters." And a little after:
"Ye cannot/' saith He, "serve God and
And straightway He hath
mammon." s
Therefore I say unto you, be not
added,
solicitous for your life what ye shall eat, nor
for the body what ye shall put on."

35. And that which follows concerning
birds of the air and lilies of the field, He
saith to this end, that no man may think that

"

)

God careth not for the needs of His servants;
when His most wise Providence reacheth
unto these in creating and governing those.
For it must not be deemed that it is not He
that feeds and clothes them also which work
But lest they turn aside
with their hands.
the Christian service of warfare unto their
purpose of getting these things, the Lord in
this premonisheth His servants that in this
ministry which is due to His Sacrament, we
should take thought, not for these, but for
His kingdom and righteousness: and all
these things shall be added unto us, whether
working by our hands, or whether by infirmity
of body hindered from working, or whether
bound by such occupation of our very warfare that we are able to do nothing else.
For
neither does it follow that because the Lord
" Call upon Me in the day of tribhath said,
ulation and I will deliver thee, and thou shalt
glorify Me," 6 therefore the Apostle ought
not to have fled, and to be let down by the
wall in a basket that he might escape the
hands of a pursuer, 7 but should rather have
waited to be taken, that, like the three children from the midst of the fires, the Lord
Or for this reason ought
might deliver him.
not the Lord either to have said this, "If
they shall persecute you in one city, flee ye
namely, because He hath said,
to another,"
"
If ye shall ask of the Father any thing in
My name, He will give it you." 9 As then
whoever to Christ's disciples when fleeing
from persecution should cast up this sort of
question, why they did not rather stand, and
by calling upon God obtain through
His
marvellous works in such wise deliverance,
as Daniel from the lions, as Peter from his
chains, they would answer that they ought
not to tempt God, but He would then and
then only do the like for them, if
it should
please Him, when they had nothing that they
could do; but when He put flight in their
power, although they were thereby delivered,
yet were they not delivered but by Him: so
likewise to servants of God having time and
strength after the example and precept of
the Apostle to get their living by their own
hands, if any from the Gospel shall raise a
question concerning the birds of the
air,
which sow not nor reap nor gather into stores,
and concerning lilies of the field that they
toilnot neither do they spin; they will easily
If we also, by reason of any either
answer,
infirmity or occupation cannot work, He will
so feed and clothe us, as He doth the birds
and the lilies, which do no work of this kind:

"

1 Matt. vi. 19-22.
4 Correpto oculo .

2 1 Tim. vi. 18, 19.
5 Matt. vi. 24, 25, 34.

3 Matt. x. 40-42.

6 Ps. 1. 15.
8 Matt. x. 23.

7 Acts ix. 25 ; 2 Cor. xi. 33.
9 John xvi. 23.

OF THE WORK OF MONKS.

And therefore

but when we are able, we ought not to tempt
our God; because this very ability of ours,
we have it by His gift, and in living by it, we
live by His bounty Who hath bounteously
bestowed upon us that we should have this
concerning these
ability.
necessary things we are not solicitous; because when we are able to do these things,
He by Whom mankind are fed and clothed
cloth feed and clothe us: but when we are
not able to do these things, He feeds and
clothes us by Whom the birds are fed and
the lilies clothed, because we are more worth
Wherefore in this our warfare,
than they.
neither for the morrow take we thought:
because not for the sake of these temporal
things, whereunto pertaineth To-morrow, but
for the sake of^those eternal things, where it
is evermore To-day, have we proved ourselves unto Him, that, entangled in no secular business, we may please Him. 1

36. Since these things are so, suffer me
awhile, holy brother, (for the Lord giveth
me through thee great boldness,) to address
these same our sons and brethren whom I
know with what love thou together with us
dost travail in birth withal, until the Apostolic
discipline be formed in them. O servants of
God, soldiers of Christ, is it thus ye dissemble the plottings of our most crafty foe, who
fearing your good fame, that so goodly odor
of Christ, lest good souls should say, "We
will run after the odor of thine ointments," 2
and so should escape his snares, and in every
his own
way desiring to obscure it with
stenches, hath dispersed on every side
so
many hypocrites under the garb of monks,
strolling about the provinces, no where sent,
no where fixed, no where standing, no where
Some hawking about limbs of marsitting.
tyrs, if indeed of martyrs; others magnifying
their fringes and phylacteries; 3 others with a
lying story, how they have heard say that
their parents or kinsmen are alive in this or
that country, and therefore be they on their
way to them: and all asking, all exacting,
either the costs of their lucrative want, or
And
the price of their pretended sanctity.
in the meanwhile wheresoever they be found
out in their evil deeds, or in whatever way
they become notorious, under the general
name of monks, your purpose is blasphemed,
a purpose so good, so holy, that in Christ's
name we desire it, as through other lands so
through all Africa, to grow and flourish.
Then are ye not inflamed with godly jealDoes not your heart wax hot within
ousy ?

you, and in your meditation a fire kindle, 4
that these men's evii works ye should pursue
with good works, that ye should cut off from
them occasion of a foul trafficking, by which
your estimation is- hurt, and a stumblingHave mercy
block put before the weak ?
then and have compassion, and show to mankind that ye are not seeking in ease a ready
subsistence, but through the strait and narrow way of this purpose, are seeking the
Ye have the same cause
kingdom of God.
which the Apostle had, to cut off occasion
from them which seek occasion, that they
who by their stinks are suffocated, by your
good odor may be refreshed.

37. We are not binding heavy burdens
and laying them upon your shoulders, while
we with a finger will not touch them.
Seek
out, and acknowledge the labor of our occupations, and in some of us the infirmities of
our bodies also, and in the Churches which
we serve, that custom now grown up, that
they do not suffer us to have time ourselves
for those works to which we exhort you. For
" Who goeth a warfare
though we might say,
any time at his own charges ? Who planteth
a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof ? Who feedeth a flock, and partaketh not
of the milk of the flock?" 5 yet I call our
Lord Jesus, in Whose name I fearlessly say
these things, for a witness upon my soul,
that so far as it concerns mine own convenience, I would much rather every day at certain hours, as much as is appointed by rule
in well-governed monasteries, do some work
with my hands, and have the remaining hours
free for reading and praying, or some work
6 than have to
pertaining to Divine Letters,
bear these most annoying perplexities
of
other men's causes about secular matters,
which we must either by adjudication bring
to an end, or by intervention cut
short.
Which troubles the same Apostle hath fastened us withal, (not by his own sentence, but
by His who spake through him,) while yet
we do not read that he had to put up with them
himself: indeed his was not the sort of work
to admit of it, while running to and fro in
If then
his Apostleship.
ye have secular law-suits, bring them before us;" or, "Appoint us to judge them;"
but, "Them which are contemptible in the
Church, these," saith he,
put ye in place.
To your abashment I say it:
is it so that
there is not among you any wise man who
can judge between his brother, but brother
goeth to law with brother, and that before

Nor hath he said,

"

"

1 2 Tim. ii. 4.
3 Reg. S. Ben. c. 1. Cass. Coll. xviii. 7.

2 Cant. i. 3, 4.

4 Ps. xxxix. 3. [See R.V.]
6 Reg. S. Ben. c. xlviii.

5 1 Cor. ix. 7.

servants

For we are

" * So then wise believers and saints,
infidels ?
having their stated abode in the different
places, not those who were running hither
and hither on the business of the Gospel,
persons whom he willed to be
were the
charged with examination of such affairs.
Whence it is no where written of him that he
on any occasion gave up his time to such
matters; from which we are not able to excuse ourselves, even though we be contemptible; because he willed even such to be put
in place, in case there were lack of wise men,
rather than have the affairs of Christians to
Which
be brought into the public courts.
labor, however, we not without consolation
of the Lord take upon us, for hope of eternal
life, that we may bring forth fruit with paunto His
tience.
Church, and most of all to the weaker members, whatsoever members we in the same
body may chance to be.
I pass by other
innumerable ecclesiastical cares, which perchance no man credits but he who hath exTherefore we do not
perienced the same.
bind heavy burdens and place them on your
shoulders, while we ourselves touch them not
so much as with a finger; since indeed if with
safety to our office we might, (He seeth it,
Who tries our hearts
!) we would rather do
these things which we exhort you to do, than
the things which we ourselves are forced to
True it is, to all both us and you, while
do.
according to our degree and office we labor,
both the way is strait in labor and toil; and
yet, while we rejoice in hope, His yoke is
easy and His burden light, Who hath called
us unto rest, Who passed forth before us
from the vale of tears, where not Himself
either was without pressure of griefs.
If ye
be our brethren, if our sons, if we be your
fellow-servants, or rather in Christ your servants, hear what we admonish, acknowledge
what we enjoin, take what we dispense.
But
if we be Pharisees, binding heavy burdens
and laying them on your shoulders;
yet do
ye the things we say, even though ye disapprove the things we do.
But to us it is a
very small thing that we be judged by you, 3
or of any human assize. 4 Of how near and
dear 5 charity is our care on your behalf,
let Him look into it Who hath given what we
may offer to be looked into by His eyes.
In
fine: think what ye will of us: Paul the
Apostle enjoins and beseeches you in the
Lord, that with silence, that is, quietly and
obediently ordered, ye do work and eat your
own bread. 6 Of him, as I suppose, ye be-

lieve no evil, and He who by him doth
speak, on Him have ye believed.

38. These things, my brother Aurelius,
most dear unto me, and in the bowels of
Christ to be venerated, so far as He hath bestowed on me the ability Who through thee
commanded me to do it, touching work of
Monks, I have not delayed to write; making
this my chief care, lest good brethren obeying apostolic precepts, should by lazy and
disobedient be called even prevaricators from
the Gospel: that they which work not, may
at the least account them which do work to
be better than themselves without doubt.
But who can bear that contumacious persons
resisting most wholesome admonitions of
the Apostle, should, not as weaker brethren
be borne withal, but even be preached up as
monasteries
holier
founded on sounder doctrine should be by
1 this double enticement corrupted, the dis-
' solute license of vacation from labor, and the
Let it be known then
false name of sanctity ?
to the rest, our brethren and sons, who are
accustomed to favor such men, and through
1 ignorance to defend this kind of presumption,
that they need themselves most chiefly to be
corrected, in order that those may be corrected, nor that they become "
weary in wellTruly, in that they do promptly
doing." 7
and with alacrity minister unto the servants
of God the things they need, not only we
blame them not, but we most cordially embrace them: only let them not with perverse
mercy more hurt these men's future life, than
to their present life they render aid.

insomuch

men;

that

j

39. For there is less sin, if people do not
praise the sinner in the desires of his soul,
and speak good of him who practiseth iniquities. 8 Now what is more an iniquity than to
wish to be obeyed by inferiors, and to refuse
The Apostle, I mean,
to obey superiors ?
not us: insomuch that they even let their hair
grow long: a matter, of which he would have
If any chooseth
no disputing at all, saying,
to be contentious, we have no such custom,
Now this I
neither the Church of God. 9
command;" 10 which gives us to understand
that it is not cleverness of reasoning that we
are to look for, but authority of one giving
command to attend unto.
For whereunto, I
pray thee, pertaineth this also, that people so
openly against the Apostle's precepts wear
Is it that there must be in such
long hair?
sort vacation, that not even the barbers are
Or, because they say that they
to work?

"

1 i Cor. vi. 4-6.
4 Ab /influx no die.

2 Matt, xxiii. 3.
S Germana.

3 1 Cor. iv. 3.
6 2 Ihess. iii. 12.

8 Ps. x. 3 |_ix. 24].
7 2 Thess. iii. 13.
10 E. V. follows text rec. toOto &i irapayy(X\u)v ovk eiraivu), but
good MSS. and Versions besides the Ital. and Vulg. have toOto Se
7rapayyeAAio ovk i-TTaiviav, hoc autem ftraecijiio lion laudans.

9 1 Cor. xi. 16, 17.

OF THE WORK OF MONKS.

imitate the Gospel birds, do they fear to be,
as it were, plucked, lest they be not able to
I shrink from saying more against this
fly ?
fault, out of respect for certain long-haired
brethren, in whom, except this, we find much,
But
and well-nigh every thing, to venerate.
the more we love them in Christ, the more
Nor are
solicitously do we admonish them.
we afraid indeed, lest their humility reject our
admonition; seeing that we also desire to be
admonished by such as they, wherever we
This then
chance to stumble or to go aside.
we admonish so holy men, not to be moved
by foolish quibblings of vain persons, and
imitate in this perversity them whom in all
For those
else they are far from resembling.
persons, hawking about a venal hypocrisy,
fear lest shorn Sanctity be held cheaper than
lone-haired : because forsooth he who sees
them shall call to mind those ancients whom
we read of, Samuel and the rest who did not
cut off their hair. 1 And they do not consider
what is the difference between that prophetic
veil, and this unveiling which is in the Gospel,
" When thou shalt
of which the Apostle saith,
go over 2 unto Christ, the veil shall be taken
That, namely, which was signified
away." 3
in the veil interposed between the face of
Moses and the beholding of the people Israel,
that same was also signified in those times by
For the same
the long hair of the Saints.
Apostle saith, that long hair is also instead of
a veil: by whose authority these men are
If a
hard pressed.
man wear long hair, it is a disgrace to him."
say they, "we take
"The very disgrace,
upon us, for desert of our sins:
holding out
a screen of simulated humility, to the end
that under cover of it they may carry on
Just as if the
their trade of self-importance. 5
Apostle were teaching pride when he says,
"
Every man praying or prophesying with
and, "A
veiled head shameth his head;" 6
man ought not to veil his head, forsomuch as
he is the image and glory of God." 7
Consequently he who says,
Ought not," knows
Hownot perchance how to teach humility !
ever, if this same disgrace in time of the
Gospel, which was a thing of a holy meaning 8
in time of Prophecy, be by these people
courted as matter of humility, then let them
be shorn, and veil their head with haircloth.
Only then there will be none of that attracting of people's eyes in which they trade, 9 because Samson was veiled not with haircloth,
but with his long hair.

Seeing he saith openly,

"

"

"

''

"

40. And then that further device of theirs,
(if words can express it), how painfully
ridiculous is it, which they have invented for
defense of their long locks ! "A man," say
they, "the Apostle hath forbidden to have
long hair: but then they who have made
themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of God
are no longer men." O dotage unparalleled !
Well may the person who says this arm himself against Holy Scripture's most manifest
proclamations, with counsel of outrageous
impiety, and persevere in a tortuous path,
and essay to bring in a pestiferous doctrine
that not "Blessed is the man who hath not.
walked in the counsel of the ungodly, and in
the way of sinners hath not stood, and in the
chair of noisome wickedness I0 hath not sat."
For if he would meditate in God's law day
and night, there he should find the Apostle
Paul himself, who assuredly professing highest chastity saith, "I would that all men were
and yet shows himself a man, not
even as I:
only in so being, but also in so speaking.
For he saith, "When I was a child, I spake
as a child, I understood as a child, I thought
as a child; when I became a man, I put away
I2 But why should I mention
childish things."
the Apostle, when concerning our Lord and
Saviour Himself they know not what they
For of Whom
think who say these things.
but Him is it said, "Until we come all to
unity of faith and to knowledge of the Son of
God, to the Perfect Man, to the measure of
the age of the fullness of Christ; that we be
no longer babes, tossed and carried about
with every wind of doctrine, in sleight of
men, in cunning craftiness for machination of
With which sleight these persons
error." 13
deceive ignorant people, with which cunning
craftiness and machinations of the enemy
both they themselves are whirled round, and
in their whirling essay to make the minds of
the weak which cohere unto them so (in a
manner) to spin round with them, that they
also may not know where they are.
For they
have heard or read that which is written,
" Whosoever of you have been baptized in
Christ, have put on Christ: where is no Jew
nor Greek; no bond nor free; no male nor
female.'' I4 And they do not understand that it
is in reference to concupiscence of carnal sex IS
that this is said, because in the inner man,
wherein we are renewed in newness of our
Then let
mind, no sex of this kind exists.
them not deny themselves to be men, just
because in respect of their masculine sex they
For wedded Christians also who
work not.

1 Numb. vi. 5
2 Cum transieris.

Gr. T)vCko. &' av

7rTTpei|/T), sc. 6 'IcrparjA

Chrys. Theod. or ris Origen.

4Exod. xxxiv. 33.
7 1 Cor. xi. 14.

Sl'enalem typlium.
8 Sacramentum.

3 2 Cor. iii. 16.
6 1 Cor. xi. 4.
9 Species ilia venalis.

' Pestilentite.
12 1 Cor. xiii. n.
[See R.V.]
u Gal. iii. 27, 28. [See R.V.]

" Ps. i. 1.
J 3 Eph. iv. 13, 14.
*5 2 Cor. iv. 16.

5^4

"

do this work, are of course not Christians on
the score of that which they have in common
with the rest who are not Christians and with
For that is one thing that is
the very cattle.
either to infirmity conceded or to mortal
propagation paid as a debt, but another that
which for the laying hold of incorrupt and
eternal life is by faithful profession signified.
That then which concerning not veiling of
the head is enjoined to men, in the body
indeed it is set forth in a figure, but that it
is enacted in the mind, wherein is the image
and glory of God, the words themselves, do
indicate: "A man indeed," it saith, "ought
not to veil his head, forsomuch as he is the
image and glory of God."
For where this
image is, he doth himself declare, where he
Lie not one to another; but stripping
saith,
off the old man with his deeds, put ye on the
new, which is renewed to the acknowledging
of God, according to the image of Him who
created him." * Who can doubt that this renewing takes place in the mind ?
But and if
any doubt, let him hear a more open senFor, giving the same admonition, he
tence.
thus saith in another place: "As is the truth
in Jesus, that ye put off concerning the
former conversation the old man, him which
is corrupt according to the lust of deception;
but be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind,
and put on the new man, him which after God
is created." 2 What then ? Have women not
this renewal of mind in which is the image of
God ? Who would say this ?
But in the sex
of their body they do not signify this; thereThe part,
fore they are bidden to be veiled.
namely, which they signify in the very fact of
their being women, is that which may be called
the concupiscential part, over which the mind 3
bears rule, itself also subjected to its God,
when life
is most rightly and orderly conin a single inducted.
What, therefore,
dividual human being is the mind and the
concupiscence, (that ruling, this ruled; that
lord, this subject,) the same in two human
beings, man and woman, is in regard of the
Of
sex of the body exhibited in a figure.
which sacred import 4 the Apostle speaks when
he says, that the man ought not to be veiled,
the women ought.
For the mind doth the
more gloriously advance to higher things, the

more diligently the concupiscence is curbed
from lower things; until the whole man together with even this now mortal and frail
body in the last resurrection be clothed with
incorruption and immortality, and death be
swallowed up in victory.

41. Wherefore, they which will not do right
things, let them give over at least to teach
Howbeit they be others whom
wrong things.
in this speech we reprove: but as for those
who by this one fault, of letting their hair
contrary to apostolic precept grow long, offend
and trouble the Church, because when some
being unwilling to think of them any thing
amiss are forced to twist the manifest words
of the Apostle into a wrong meaning, others
choose to defend the sound understanding of
the Scriptures rather than fawn upon any
men, there arise between the weaker and the
stronger brethren most bitter and perilous
contentions: which things perchance if they
knew, these would correct without hesitation
this also, in whom we admire and love all
Those then we not reprove, but ask
else.
and solemnly beseech by the Godhead and
the Manhood of Christ and by the charity of
the Holy Ghost, that they no more put this
stumbling-block before the weak for whom
Christ died, and aggravate the grief and torment of our heart when we bethink us how
much more readily evil men can imitate this
evil thing for deceiving of mankind, when
they see this in them whom on the score of
other so great good we with deserved offices
of Christian love do honor.
If however, after
this admonition, or rather this solemn entreaty of ours, they shall think fit to persevere
in the same, we shall do nothing else but only
This let them know; it
grieve and mourn.
If they be servants of God, they
is enough.
have pity.
If they have not pity, I will not
All these things, theresay any thing worse.
fore, in the which peradventure I have been
more loquacious than the occupations both of
thee and of me could wish, if thou approve
the same, make thou to be known to our
brethren and sons, on whose behalf thou hast
deigned to put this burden upon me: but if
aught seem to thee meet to be withdrawn or
amended, by reply of your Blessedness I
shall know the same.

1 Col. iii. 9, io.
3 Metis.

2 Eph. iv. 21-24. [See R.V.]
4 Sacramentiun.

5 1 Cor. xv. 54.

ST. AUGUSTIN:

ON PATIENCE

[DE PATIENTIA.]

TRANSLATED BY THE

REV. H. BROWNE, M.A.,

OF CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, LATE PRINCIPAL OF THE DIOCESAN

COLLEGE. CHICHESTER.

ON PATIENCE

[DE PATIENTIA.]

"

cautiorfuit iste in doloribus qnam Me in nemoribits .

Erasmus infers from the style and language of this piece, that it is not S. Augustin's,
putting it in the same category with the treatises On Continence, On substance of CharThe Benedictine editors acknowledge that it has pecuity, On Faith of things invisible.
liarities of style which are calculated to move suspicion; (especially the studied assonances
and rhyming endings, e. g.
. consensit
ille obleclamentis, non cessit ille iormentis," chap. 12.); yet they feel themselves bound to
retain it among the genuine works by Augustin's own testimony, who mentions both this
piece and that On Continence in his Epistle to Darius, 231. chap. 7.
That it
is not named in the Retractations is accounted for by the circumstance that it appears to
have been delivered as a sermon, see chap. 1. and 3, and Augustin did not live to fulfill his
intention of composing a further book of retractations on review of his popular discourses
In point of matter and doctrine this treatise has nothing
and letters.
contrary to or not in harmony with S. Augustin's known doctrine and sentiments.

Ep. 224. chap. 2.

[Vol. I. 584.]

.

its

1. That virtue of the mind which is called
Patience, is so great a gift of God, that even
in Him who bestoweth the same upon us,
that, whereby He waiteth for evil men that
they may amend, is set forth by the name
of Patience, [or long-suffering.]
So, although
in God there can be no suffering,
1 and
name a patiendo,
"patience" hath
from suffering, yet a patient God we not only
faithfully believe, but also wholesomely conBut the patience of God, of what kind
fess.
and how great it is, His, Whom we say to be
yet not impatient, nay even most
impassible,
patient, in words to unfold this who can be
Ineffable is therefore that patience, as
able ?
is His jealousy, as His wrath, and whatever
For if we conceive of
there is like to these.
these as they be in us, in Him are there none.
We, namely, can feel none of these without
molestation: but be it far from us to surmise
that the impassible nature of God is liable to

But like as He is jealous
any molestation.
without any darkening of spirit,
3 wroth without any perturbation, pitiful without any pain,
repenteth Him without any wrongness in Him
to be set right; so is He patient without aught
Now therefore as concerning
of passion.
human patience, which we are able to conceive and beholden to have, of what sort it is,
I will, as God granteth and the brevity of the
present discourse alloweth, essay to set forth.
2. The patience of man, which is right and
laudable and worthy of the name of virtue, is
understood to be that by which we tolerate
evil things with an even mind, that we may
not with a mind uneven desert good things,
through which we may arrive
better.
Wherefore the impatient, while they will not
suffer ills, effect not a deliverance from ills,
but
suffering
ills.
Whereas the patient who choose rather by
not committing to bear, than by not bearing

heavier

only

the

of

at

1 Pati.

2 Nihil J>atienteui.

3 Livorc.

to commit, evil, both make lighter what
through patience they suffer, and also escape
worse ills in which through impatience they
would be sunk. But those good things which
are great and eternal they lose not, while to
the evils which be temporal and brief they
yield not: because "the sufferings of this
present time are not worthy to be compared,"
as the Apostle says, "with the future glory
that shall be revealed in us." x And again he
This our temporal and light tribulasays,
tion doth in inconceivable manner work for
us an eternal weight of glory."

"

will.

3. Look we then, beloved, what hardships
in labors and sorrows men endure, for things
which they viciously love, and by how much
they think to be made by them more happy,
How
by so much more unhappily covet.
much for false riches, how much for vain
honors, how much for affections of games
and shows, is of exceeding peril and trouble
most patiently borne ! We see men hankering after money, glory, lasciviousness, how,
that they may arrive at their desires, and
having gotten not lose them, they endure sun,
rain, icy cold, waves, and most stormy tempests, the roughnesses and uncertainties of
wars, the strokes of huge blows, and dreadful
wounds, not of inevitable necessity but of
But these madnesses are
culpable
Thus avathought, in a manner, permitted.
rice, ambition, luxury, and the delights of all
sorts of games and shows, unless for them
some wicked deed be committed or outrage
which is prohibited by human laws, are accounted to pertain to innocence: nay moreover,
the man who without wrong to any shall,
whether for getting or increasing of money,
whether for obtaining or keeping of honors,
whether in contending in the match, or in
hunting, or in exhibiting with applause some
theatrical spectacle, have borne great labors
and pains, it is not enough that through popular vanity he is checked by no reproofs, but
he is moreover extolled with praises: "Bethe sinner is praised
cause," as it is written,
For the force
in the desires of his soul." 3
of desires makes endurance of labors and
pains: and no man save for that which he
enjoyeth, freely takes on him to bear that
But these lusts, as I said,
which annoyeth.
for the fulfilling of which they which are on
fire with them most patiently endure much
hardship and bitterness, are accounted to be
permitted, and allowed by laws.

"

4. Nay more; for is it not so that even for
open wickednesses, not to punish but to perpetrate them, men put up with many most

grievous troubles ? Do not authors of secular
letters tell of a certain right noble parricide
of his country, that hunger, thirst, cold, all
these he was able to endure, and his body
was patient of lack of food and warmth and
sleep to a degree surpassing belief? 5 Why
speak of highway robbers, all of whom while
they lie in wait for travellers endure whole
nights without sleep, and that they may catch,
as they pass by, men who have no thought of
harm, will, no matter how foul the weather,
plant in one spot their mind and body, which
are full of thoughts of harm? Nay it is said
that some of them are wont to torture one
another by turns, to that degree that this
practice and training against pains is not a
For, not so much perwhit short of pains.
chance are they excruciated by the Judge,
that through smart of pain the truth may be
got at, as they are by their own comrades,
that through patience of pain truth may not
be betrayed. And yet in all these the patience
is rather to be wondered at than praised: nay
neither wondered at nor praised, seeing it is
no patience; but we must wonder at the hardness, deny the patience: for there is nothing
in this rightly to be praised, nothing usefully
to be imitated; and thou wilt rightly judge
the mind to be all the more worthy of greater
punishment, the more it yields up to vices the
Patience is cominstruments of virtues.
panion of wisdom, not handmaid of concupiscence: patience is the friend of a good
conscience, not the foe of innocence.

5. When therefore thou shalt see any man
suffer aught patiently, do not straightway
praise it as patience; for this is only shown
When it is a good
by the cause of suffering.
cause, then is it true patience: when that is
not polluted by lust, then is this distinguished
But when that is placed in
from falsity.
crime, then is this much misplaced in name.
For not just as all who know are partakers of
knowledge, just so are all who suffer partakers
of patience: but they which rightly use the
suffering, these
are
praised, these with the prize of "atience are
crowned.

in verity of

patience

6. But yet, seeing that for lusts' sake, or
even wickednesses, seeing, in a word, that for
this temporal life and weal men do wonderfully bear the brunt of many horrible sufferings, they much admonish us how great things
ought to be borne for the sake of a good life,
that it may also hereafter be eternal life, and
without any bound of time, without waste or
loss of any advantage, in true felicity secure.
The Lord saith, "In your patience ye shall

1 Rom. viii. 18.

2 2 Cor. iv. 17.

3 Ps. x. 3.

4 Sal/icst Catilin. c. v.

ON PATIENCE.

5 2 9

rour

" For in hope are we saved.

possess your souls:" 1 He saith not, 3
"
your
farms, your praises, your luxuries; but,
If then the soul endures so great
souls."
sufferings that it may possess that whereby it
may be lost, how great ought it to bear that
it may not be lost ? And then, to mention a
thing not culpable, if it bear so great sufferings for saving of the flesh under the hands of
chirurgeons cutting or burning the same, how
great ought it to bear for saving of itself under
the fury of any soever enemies ?
Seeing that
leeches, that the body may not die, do by
pains consult for the body's good; but enemies
by threatening the body with pains and death,
would urge us on to the slaying of soul and
body in hell. ^
7. Though indeed the welfare even of the
body is then more providently consulted for,
if its temporal life and welfare be disregarded
for righteousness' sake, and its pain or death
most patiently for righteousness' sake endured.
Since it is of the body's redemption
which is to be in the end, that the Apostle
speaks, where he says, "Even we ourselves
groan within ourselves, waiting the adoption
' ' 2 Then
of sons, the redemption of our body.
he subjoins,
But
hope which is seen is not hope: for what a
man seeth, why doth he also hope for ?
But
if what we see not we hope for, we do by
patience wait for it." When therefore any ills
do torture us indeed, yet not extort from us
ill works, not only is the soul possessed
through patience; but even when through
patience the body itself for a time is afflicted
or lost, it is unto eternal stability and salvation resumed, and hath through grief and
death an inviolable health and happy immorWhence the Lord
tality laid up for itself.
Jesus exhorting his Martyrs to patience, hath
promised of the very body a future perfect
entireness, without loss, I say not of any limb,
but of a single hair.
"Verily I say unto
you," saith He, "a hair of your head shall
That so, because, as
not
perish." 3
the
no man ever hated his own
Apostle says,
4 a faithful man may more by patience
flesh,''
than by impatience take vigilant care for the
state of his flesh, and find amends for its
present losses, how great soever they may be,
in the inestimable gain of future incorruption.
8. But although patience be a virtue of the
mind, yet partly the mind exercises it in the
mind itself, partly in the body.
In itself it
exercises patience, when, the body remaining
unhurt and untouched, the mind is goaded
by any adversities or filthinesses of things or

"

"

words, to do or to say something that is not
expedient or not becoming, and patiently
bears all evils that it may not itself commit
any evil in work or word.
By this patience
we bear, even while we be sound in body, that
in the -midst of the offenses of this world our
blessedness is deferred: of which is said what
If what we see not
I cited a little before,
we hope for, we do by patience wait for it."
By this patience, holy David bore the revilings of a railer, 5 and, when he might easily
have avenged himself, not only did it not,
but even refrained another who was vexed
and moved for him; and more put forth his
kingly power by prohibiting than by exercisNor at that time was his
ing vengeance.
body afflicted with any disease or wound, but
there was an acknowledging of a time of
humility, and a bearing of the will of God,
for the sake of which there was a drinking of
the bitterness of contumely with most patient
This patience the Lord taught, when,
mind.
the servants being moved at the mixing in of
the tares and wishing to gather them up, He
" Leave
said that the householder answered,
both to grow until the harvest." 6
That,
namely, must be patience put up with, which
must not be in haste put away.
Of this
patience Himself afforded and showed an example, when, before the passion of His Body,
He so bore with His disciple Judas, that ere
He pointed him out as the traitor, He endured him as a thief; 7 and before experience
of bonds and cross and death, did, to those
lips so full of guile, not deny the kiss of
All these, and whatever else there
peace.
be, which it were tedious to rehearse, belong
that manner of patience, by which the
to
mind doth, not its own sins but any evils soever from without, patiently endure in itself,
while the body remains altogether unhurt.
But the other manner of patience is that by
which the same mind bears any troubles and
grievances whatsoever in the sufferings of the
body; not as do foolish or wicked men for the
sake of getting vain things or perpetrating
crimes; but as is defined by the Lord,
for
In both kinds, the
righteousness' sake." 9
For both with
holy Martyrs contended.
scornful reproofs of the ungodly were they
filled, where, the body remaining intact, the
mind hath its own (as it were) blows and
wounds, and bears these unbroken: and in
their bodies they were bound, imprisoned,
vexed with hunger and
tortured,
gashed, torn asunder, burned, butchered;
and with piety immovable submitted unto

thirst,

"

1 Luke xxi. 19.
3 Luke xxi. 18.

2 Rom. viii. 23-25.
4 Eph. v. 29.

5 2 Sam. xvi. 5-12.
8 Matt. xxvi. 49.

6 Matt. xiii. 30.
9 Matt. v. 10.

7 John xii. 6 ; xii ', 29.

God their mind, while they were suffering in
the flesh all that exquisite cruelty could devise in its mind.

all

9. It is indeed a greater fight of patience,
when it is not a visible enemy that by persecution and rage would urge us into crime,
which enemy may openly and in broad day
be by not consenting overcome; but the devil
himself, (he who doth likewise by means of
the children of infidelity, as by his vessels,
persecute the children of light) doth by himself hiddenly attack us, by his rage putting us
As
on to do or say something against God.
such had holy Job experience of him, by both
temptations vexed, but in both through steadfast strength of patience and arms of piety
For first, his body being left
unconquered.
unhurt, he lost all that he had, in order that
the mind, before excruciation of the flesh,
might through withdrawal of the things which
men are wont to prize highly, be broken, and
he might say something against God upon loss
of the things for the sake of which he was
thought to worship Him. He was smitten
also with sudden bereavement of all his sons,
so that whom he had begotten one by one he
should lose
at once, as though their
numerousness had been not for the adorning
of his felicity, but for the increasing of his
But where, having endured these
calamity.
things, he remained immovable in his. God,
he cleaved to His will, Whom it was not possible to lose but by his own will; and in place
of the things he had lost he held Him who
took them away, in Whom he should find
For He that took
what should never be lost.
them away was not that enemy who had will
of hurting, but He who had given to that
The enemy
enemy the power of hurting.
next attacked also the body, and now not
those things which were in the man from
without, but the man himself, in whatever
From the head to
part he could, he smote.
the feet were burning pains, were crawling
worms, were running sores; still in the rotting
body the mind remained entire, and horrid as
were the tortures of the consuming flesh, with
inviolate piety and uncorrupted patience it
endured them all.
There stood the wife,
and instead of giving her husband any help,
was suggesting blasphemy against God.
For
we are not to think that the devil, in leaving
her when he took away the sons, went to
work as one unskilled in mischief: rather,
how necessary she was to the tempter, he had
But now he had not
already learned in Eve.
found a second Adam whom he might take
More cautious was
by means of a woman.
Job in his hours of sadness, than Adam in
his bowers of gladness, the one was overcome

in the midst of pleasant things, the other
overcame in the midst of pains; the one consented to that which seemed delightsome, this
other quailed not in torments most affrightThere stood his friends too, not to
some.
console him in his evils, but to suspect evil in
For while he suffered so great sorrows,
him.
they believed him not innocent, nor did their
tongue forbear to say that which his conscience
had not to say; that so amid ruthless tortures
of the body, his mind also might be beaten
But he, bearing
with truthless reproaches.
in his flesh his own pains, in his heart others'
errors, reproved his wife for her folly, taught
friends wisdom, preserved patience in
his
each and all.

to

they

rather

10. To this man let them 1 look who put
themselves to death when they are sought for
to have life put upon them; and by bereaving
themselves of the present, deny and refuse
also that which is to come.
Why, if people
were driving them to deny Christ or to do any
thing contrary to righteousness, like true
bear
all
ought
Martyrs,
patiently than to dare death impatiently.
If
it could be right to do this for the sake of
running away from evils, holy Job would have
killed himself, that being in so great evils, in
his estate, in his sons, in his limbs, through
the devil's cruelty, he might escape them all.
But he did it not.
Far be it from him, a wise
man, to commit upon himself what not even
And if she
that unwise woman suggested.
had suggested it, she would with good reason
here also have had that answer which she had
when suggesting blasphemy; "Thou hast
If we
spoken as one of the foolish women.
have received good at t*he hand of the Lord,
shall we not bear evil?" 2
Seeing even he
also would have lost patience, if either by
blasphemy as she had suggested, or by killing
himself which not even she had dared to
speak of, he should die, and be among them
" Woe unto them that
of whom it is written,
'' 3 and rather increase
have lost patience !
than escape pains, if after the death of his
body he should be hurried off to punishment
either of blasphemers, or of murderers, or of
them which are worse even than parricides.
For if a parricide be on that account more
wicked than any homicide, because he kills
not merely a man but a near relative; and
among parricides too, the nearer the person
killed, the greater criminal he is judged to
be: without doubt worse still is he who kills
himself, because there is none nearer to a man
What then do these miserable
than himself.
persons mean, who, though both here they

1 Donatists.

2 Job ii. 10.

3 Ecclus. ii. 14.

ON PATIENCE.

pain upon themselves, and
have inflicted
hereafter not only for their impiety towards
God but for the very cruelty which they have
exercised upon themselves will deservedly
suffer pains of His inflicting, do yet seek
moreover the glories of Martyrs ? since, even
if for the true testimony of Christ they suffered persecution, and killed themselves, that
they might not suffer any thing from their
persecutors, it would be rightly said to them,
" Woe unto them which have lost patience !
"
For how hath patience her just reward, if
even an impatient
the
crown ? or how shall that man be judged innocent, to whom is said, "Thou shalt love
1 if he commit murthy neighbor as thyself,"
der upon himself which he is forbidden to
commit upon his neighbor?

suffering

receives

11. Let then the Saints hear from holy
" My son,
Scripture the precepts of patience:
when thou comest to the service of God,
stand thou in righteousness and fear, and
prepare thy soul for temptation: bring thine
heart low, and bear up; that in the last end
All that shall come
thy life may increase.
upon thee receive thou, and in pain bear up,
and in thy humility have patience.
For in the
fire gold and silver is proved, but acceptable
men in the furnace 2 of humiliation." 3 And
" My son, faint not
in another place we read:
thou in the discipline of the Lord, neither be
wearied when thou art chidden of Him.
For
whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and
scourgeth every son whom He receiveth." 4
son whom He reWhat is here set down,
ceiveth," the same in the above mentioned
testimony is, "acceptable men."
For this is
just, that we who from our first felicity of
Paradise for contumacious appetence of things
to enjoy were dismissed, through humble
patience of things that annoy may be received
back: driven away for doing evil, brought
back by suffering evil: there against righteousness doing ill, here for righteousness'
sake patient of ills.

"

12. But concerning true patience, worthy
of the name of this virtue, whence it is to be
had, must now be inquired.
For there are
some 5 who attribute it to the strength of the
human will, not which it hath by Divine assistance, but which it hath of free-will. Now
this error is a proud one: for it is the error
of them which abound, of whom it is said in
the Psalm, "A scornful reproof to them which
abound, and a despising to the proud." 7
It
is not therefore that "patience of the poor"
which "
For these

perisheth not forever." 8

IO

poor receive it from that Rich One, to Whom
" My God art Thou, because my
is said,
of Whom is
goods Thou needest not:" 8
"every good gift, and every perfect gift;" 9
to Whom crieth the needy and the poor, and
" My
in asking, seeking, knocking, saith,
God, deliver me from the hand of the sinner,
and from the hand of the lawless and unjust:
because Thou art my patience, O Lord, my
But these which
hope from my youth up."
abound, and disdain to be in want before
God, lest they receive of Him true patience,
they which glory in their own false patience,
seek to "confound the counsel of the poor,
" Nor do they
because the Lord is his hope."
regard, seeing they are men, and attribute so
much to their own, that is, to the human will,
that they run into that which is written,
"Cursed is every one who putteth his hope
in man." 12 Whence even if it chance them
that they do bear up under any hardships or
difficulties, either that they may not displease
men, or that they may not suffer worse, or in
self-pleasing and love of their own presumption, do with most proud will bear up under
these same, it is meet that concerning patience
this be said unto them, which concerning wis-
" This
dom the blessed Apostle James saith,
wisdom cometh not from
above, but
For why may
earthly, animal, devilish." 13
there not be a false patience of the proud, as
there is a false wisdom of the proud ?
But
from Whom cometh true wisdom, from Him
For to Him singcometh also true patience.
" Unto God is my
eth that poor in spirit,
soul subjected, because from Him is my
patience." 14
13. But they answer and speak, saying,
" If the will of man without any aid of God by
strength of free choice IS bears so many grievous and horrible distresses, whether in mind
or body, that it may enjoy the delight of this
mortal life and of sins, why may it not be that
in the same manner the self-same will of man
by the same strength of free-choice,
not
thereunto looking to be aided of God, but
unto itself by natural possibility sufficing,
doth, in all of labor or sorrow that is put
upon it, for righteousness and eternal life's
sake most patiently sustain the same ? Or is
it so, say they, that the will of the unjust is
sufficient, without aid of God, for them, yea
even to exercise themselves in undergoing
torture for iniquity, and before they be tortured by others; sufficient the will of them
which love the respiting of this life that, without aid of God, they should in the midst of

is

'* Matt. xix. 19.
4 Prov. iii. 11, 12.
7 Ps. ix. 18.

Receptibiles.

5 Pelagians.

3 Ecclus. ii. 1-5.
6 Ps. cxxiii. 4.

8 Ps. xvi. 2.
" Ps. xiv. 6.
U Ps. lxii. 5.

9 James i. 17.
Jer. xvii. 5.
JS Liber i arbitrii.

JO Ps. lxxi. 4, 5.
'3 James iii. 15.

"

beareth all things."

most atrocious and protracted torments persevere in a lie, lest confessing their misdeeds
they be ordered to be put to death; and not
sufficient the will of the just, unless strength
be put into them from above, that whatever
be their pains, they should, either for beauty's
sake of very righteousness or for love of eternal life, bear the same ?

"
14. They which say these things, do not
understand that as well each one of the wicked
is in that measure for endurance of any ills
more hard, in what measure the lust of the
world is mightier in him; as also that each
one of the just is in that measure for endurance of any ills more brave, in what measure
in him the love of God is mightier.
But lust
of the world hath its beginning from choice
of the will, its progress from enjoyableness of
pleasure, its confirmation from the chain of
custom, whereas " the love of God is shed
* not verily from ourabroad in our hearts,"
selves, but "
by the Holy Spirit which is given
unto us." And therefore from Him cometh
the patience of the just, by Whom is shed
Which love (of
abroad their love (of Him).
charity) the Apostle praising and setting off,
among its other good qualities, saith, that it
"
Charity," saith he,
"is magnanimous." 3 And a little after he
The greater
saith,
then is in saints the charity (or love) of God,
the more do they endure all things for Him
whom they love, and the greater in sinners
the lust of the world, the more do they endure all things for that which they lust after.
And consequently from that same source
cometh true patience of the righteous, from
which there is in them the love of God; and
from that same source the false patience of
the unrighteous, from which is in them the
With regard to which the
lust of the world.
Apostle John saith; "Love not the world,
neither the things that be in the world.
If
any man love the world, the love of the
Father is not in him: because all that is in
the world, is lust of the flesh, and lust of the
eyes, and pride of life;
4 which is not of the
This concupiFather, but is of the world.
scence, then, which is not of the Father, but
is of the world, in what measure it shall in
any man be more vehement and ardent, in
that measure becometh each more patient of
all troubles and sorrows for that which he
Therefore, as we said above,
lusteth after.
is not the patience which descendeth
this
from above, but the patience of the godly is
from above, coming down from the Father of
lights. And so that is earthly, this heavenly;

endureth all things."

" s

"

that animal, this spiritual; that devilish, this
Godlike. 6 Because concupiscence, whereof it
cometh that persons sinning suffer all things
but charity,
stubbornly, is of the world;
whereof cometh that persons living aright
suffer all things bravely, is of God. And
therefore to that false patience it is possible
that, without aid of God, the human will may
suffice; harder, in proportion as it is more
eager of lust, and bearing ills with the more
endurance the worse itself becometh: while to
this, which is true patience, the human will,
unless aided and inflamed from above, doth
not suffice, for the very reason that the Holy
Spirit is the fire thereof; by Whom unless it
be kindled to love that impassible Good, it is
not able to bear the ill which it suffereth.

15. For, as the Divine utterances testify,
"God is love, and he that dwelleth in love
dwelleth in God, and God dwelleth in him." 7
Whoso therefore contends that love of God
may be had without aid of God, what else
does he contend, but that God may be had
without God ? Now what Christian would say
this, which no madman would venture to say ?
Therefore in the Apostle, true, pious, faithful
patience, saith exultingly, and by the mouth
of the Saints; "Who shall separate us from
the love of Christ ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword ? As it
is written,
For Thy sake we are killed all the day long;
we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.
Nay, in all these things we are more than
conquerors through Him that loved us:" not
through Him that
through ourselves, but,
loved us." 8 And then he goes on and adds;
"For I am persuaded, that neither death,
nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Tesus our
This is that "love of God" which
Lord."
"is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy
But the conSpirit which is given unto us."
cupiscence of the bad, by reason of which
there is in them a false patience, "is not of
the Father," 9 as saith the Apostle John, but
is of the world.

"

16. Here some man shall say; "If the
concupiscence of the bad, whereby it comes
that they bear all evils for that which they
lust after, be of the world, how is it said to be
As if, truly, they were not
of their will?"
themselves also of the world, when they love
the world, forsaking Him by Whom the world
was made.
they serve the creature

For "

1 Rom. v. 5.
4 Ambitio saculi.

2 1 Cor. xiii. 4, 7.
5 i John ii. 15, 16.

3 Magnanima.

6 Deifica.
8 Rom. viii. 35-39.

ohn iv. 16.
ohn ii. 16.

Ii.

ON PATIENCE.

N

"

"

more than the Creator, Who is blessed for
ever." ' Whether then by the word
world,"
the Apostle John signifies lovers of the world,
the will, as it is of themselves, is therefore of
the world: or whether under the name of the
world he comprises heaven and earth, and all
that is therein, that is the creature universally, it is plain that the will of the creature,
not being that of the Creator, is of the world.
" Ye
For which cause to such the Lord saith,
are from beneath, I am from above: ye are
of this world, I am not of this world." 2 And
to the Apostle He saith,
If ye were of the
But
world, the world would love his own."
lest they should arrogate more unto themselves than their measure craved, and when
He said that
they were not of the world,
should imagine this to be of nature, not of
" But because ye
grace, therefore He saith,
are not of the world, but I have chosen you
out of the world, therefore the world hateth
It follows, that they once were of the
you."
world: for, that they might not be of the
world, they were chosen out of the world.

17. Now this election the Apostle demonstrating to be, not of merits going before in
good works, but election of grace, saith thus:
"And in this time a remnant by election of
But if by grace, then is it
grace is saved.
no more of works, otherwise grace is no more
This is election of grace; that is,
grace." 3
election in which through the grace of God
men are elected: this, I say, is election of
grace which goes before all good merits of
For if it be to any good merits that it
men.
is given, then is it no more gratuitously given,
but is paid as a debt, and consequently is not
truly called grace; where "reward/' as the
same Apostle saith,
is not imputed as grace,
" 4 Whereas if, that it may be true
but as debt.
grace, that is, gratuitous, it find nothing in
man to which it is due of merit, (which thing
" Thou wilt
is well understood in that saying,
save them for nothing,'' 5
then assuredly
itself gives the merits, not to merits is given.
Consequently it goes before even faith, from
" For
which it is that all good works begin.
" shall live by faith." 6
the just,'' as is written,
But, moreover, grace not only assists the just,
but also justifies the ungodly. And therefore
even when it does aid the just and seems to
be rendered to his merits, not even then does
it cease to be grace, because that which it aids
With a view therefore
it did itself bestow.
to this grace, which precedes all good merits
of man, not only was Christ put to death by

"

)

1 Rom. i. 25.
3 Rom. xi. 5, 6.
5 Psalm Ivi. 7, Lat. and LXX. vnep toG /u.rjflei'b; cruxreis avroiis.
But Heb. and E. V. "
6 Habak. ii. 4.

shall they escape by iniquity ?"

2 John viii. 23.
4 Rom. iv. 4.

"

"

Wherefore, if

the ungodly, but " died for the ungodly." 7
And ere that He died, He elected the Apostles, not of course then just, but to be justified: to whom He saith,
I have chosen you
For to whom He said,
out of the world."
"Ye are not of the world," and then, lest
they should account themselves never to have
" But I
been of the world, presently added,
have chosen you out of the world;
assuredly
that they should not be of the world was by
His own election of them conferred upon
it had been through
them.
their own righteousness, not through His
grace, that they were elected, they would not
have been chosen out of the world, because
they would already not be of the world if already they were just. And again, if the reason why they were elected was, that they were
already just, they had already first chosen
For who can be righteous but by
the Lord.
choosing righteousness? "But the end of
the law is Christ, for righteousness is to every
one that believeth. 8 WT
ho is made unto us
wisdom of God, and righteousness, and sanetification, and redemption:
written, He that glorieth, let him glory in the
Lord." 9 He then is Himself our righteousness.

that,

as

is

it

"

18. Whence also the just of old, before the
Incarnation of the Word, in this faith of
Christ, and in this true righteousness, (which
thing Christ is unto us,) were justified; believing this to come which we believe come:
and they themselves by grace were saved
through faith, not of themselves, but by the
gift of God, not of works, lest haply they
For their good works
should be lifted up.
did not come before God's mercy, but folFor to them was it said, and by
lowed it.
them written, long ere Christ was come in
I will have mercy on whom I will
the flesh,
have mercy, and I will show compassion on
whom I
will have compassion." 11 From
which words of God the Apostle Paul, should
so long after say; "It is not therefore of him
that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of
God that showeth mercy."
It is also their
own voice, long ere Christ was come in the
" My God, His mercy shall prevent
flesh,
me )' 12 How indeed could they be aliens
from the faith of Christ, by whose charity
even Christ was fore-announced unto us;
without the faith of Whom, not any of mortals either hath been, or is, or ever shall be
able to be, righteous ?
If then, being already
just, the Apostles were elected by Christ, they
would have first chosen Him, that just men
might be chosen, because without Him they

7 Rom. v. 6.
11 Ex. xxxiii. 19 ; Rom. ix. 15, 16.

8 Rom. x. 4.

9 1 Cor. i. 30, 31.

10 Eph. ii. 8, 9.
I2 Ps. lix. 10.

could not be just.
Himself saith to them,
Me, but I have chosen you."
Apostle John speaks,
God, but that He loved us." 1

But it was not so:

as

" Not ye have chosen
Of which the
" Not that we loved

it

"

"

What," I say,

19. Since the case is so, what is man, while
in this life he uses his own proper will, ere
he choose and love God, but unrighteous and
is man," a creaungodly ?
ture going astray from the Creator, unless his
Creator "be mindful of him," 2 and choose 3
him freely, and love 4 him freely ?
Because
he is himself not able to choose or love, unless being first chosen and loved he be healed,
because by choosing blindness he perceiveth
not, and by loving laziness is soon wearied.
But perchance some man may say: In what
manner is it that God first chooses and loves
unjust men, that He may justify them, when
" Thou hatest, Lord, all that
is written,
work iniquity ?" 5
In what way, think we, but
in a wonderful and ineffable manner? And
yet even we are able to conceive, that the
good Physician both hates and loves the sick
man: hates him, because he is sick; loves
him, that he may drive away his sickness.

20. Let thus much have been said with regard to charity, without which in us there
cannot be true patience, because in good men
it is the love of God which endureth all things,
as in bad men the lust of the world.
But
this love is in us by the Holy Spirit which was
Whence, of Whom cometh in us
given us.
love, of Him cometh patience.
But the lust
of the world, when it patiently bears the burdens of any manner of calamity, boasts of the
strength of its own will, like as of the stupor
This
of disease, not robustness of health.
is not the language of
boasting is insane: it
patience, but of dotage. A will like this in
that degree seems more patient of bitter ills,
in which it is more greedy of temporal good
things, because more empty of eternal.

21. But if

it be goaded on and inflamed
with deceitful visions and unclean incentives
by the devilish spirit, associated and conspiring therewith in malignant agreement, this
spirit makes the will of the man either frantic
with error, or burning with appetite of some
worldly delight; and hence, it seems to show
a marvellous endurance of intolerable evils:
but yet it does not follow from this that an
evil will without instigation of another and
unclean spirit, like as a good will without aid
For that
of the Holy Spirit, cannot exist.
there may be an evil will even without any
spirit either seducing or inciting, is sufficiently
clear in the instance of the devil himself, who

1 1 John iv. 10.
4 Diligere.

2 Ps. viii. 4.
5 Ps. v. 5.

ligere.

is found to have become a devil, not through
some other devil, but of his own proper will.
An evil will therefore, whether it be hurried
on by lust, whether called back by fear,
whether expanded by gladness, whether contracted by sadness, and in all these perturbations of mind enduring and making light of
whatever are to others, or at another time,
more grievous, this evil will may, without another spirit to goad it on, seduce itself, and
in lapsing by defection from the higher to the
lower, the more pleasant it shall account that
thing to be which it seeks to get or fears to
lose, or rejoices to have gotten, or grieves to
have lost, the more tolerably for its sake bear
what is less for it to suffer than that is to be
For whatever that thing be, it is of
enjoyed.
the creature, of which one knows the pleasure.
Because in some sort, the creature loved approaches itself to the creature loving in fond
contact and connection, to the giving experience of its sweetness.

"

22. But the pleasure of the Creator, of
which is written, "And from the river of Thy
pleasure wilt Thou give them to drink,"
is of
far other kind, for it
is not, like us, a creaUnless then its love be given to us
ture.
from thence, there is no source whence it
And consequently, a good
may be in us.
will, by which we love God, cannot be in
man, save in whom God also worketh to will.
This good will therefore, that is, a will faithfully subjected to God, 7 a will set on fire by
sanctity of that ardor which is above, a will
which loves God and his neighbor for God's
sake; whether through love, of which the
Lord, Thou
Apostle Peter makes answer,
" 8 whether through
knowest that I love Thee;
fear, of which says the Apostle Paul,
In
fear and trembling work out your own salvation;" 9 whether through joy, of which he
tribulation
says,
whether through sorrow, with
patient;"
which he says he had great grief for his
brethren;" in whatever way it endure what
bitterness and hardships soever, it is the love
of God which
I2 and
which is not shed abroad in our hearts but by
the Holy Spirit given unto us. 13 Whereof
piety makes no manner of doubt, but, as the
charity of them which holily love, so the
patience of them which piously endure, is the
For it cannot be that the divine
gift of God.
Scripture deceiveth or is deceived, which not
only in the Old Books hath testimonies of
" My
this thing, when it
" From Him is my
Patience art Thou," and,

" endureth all things,"

In hope rejoicing,

is said unto God,

in

"

"

6 Ps. xxxvi. 9.
9 Phil. ii. 12.
12 1 Cor. xiii. 7.

7 Phil. ii. 13.
10 Rom. xii. 12.
'3 Rom. v. 5.

8 John xxi. 15,
11 Rom. ix. 2.

ON PATIENCE.

" x and where another prophet saith,
patience;
that we receive the spirit of fortitude;
2 but
"
also in the Apostolic writings we read,
Because unto you is- given on behalf of Christ,
not only to believe on Him, but to suffer for
Therefore let not that make the
Him." 3
mind to be as of its own merit uplifted,
wherewith he is told that he is of Another's
mercy gifted.

23. But if moreover any not having charity,
which pertaineth to the unity of spirit and the
bond of peace whereby the Catholic Church
is gathered and knit together, being involved
in any schism, doth, that he may not deny
Christ, suffer tribulations, straits, hunger, nakedness, persecution, perils, prisons, bonds,
torments, swords, or flames, or wild beasts,
or the very cross, through fear of hell and
in nowise is all this to be
everlasting fire;
blamed, nay rather this also is a patience
For we cannot say that
meet to be praised.
it would have been better for him that by
denying Christ he should suffer none of these
things, which he did suffer by confessing
Him: but we must account that it will perhaps be more tolerable for him in the judgment, than if by denying Christ he should
so that what the
avoid all those things:
If I shall give my body to be
Apostle saith,
burned, but have not charity, it profiteth me
nothing/' 4 should be understood to profit
nothing for obtaining the kingdom of heaven,
but not for having more tolerable punishment
to undergo in the last judgment.

"

24. 5 But it may well be asked, whether this
patience likewise be the gift of God, or to be
attributed to strength of the human will, by
which patience, one who is separated from the
Church doth, not for the error which separated
him but for the truth of the Sacrament or
Word which hath remained with him, for fear
For
of pains eternal suffer pains temporal.
we must take heed lest haply, if we affirm
that patience to be the gift of God, they in
whom it is should be thought to belong also
to the kingdom of God; but if we deny it to
be the gift of God, we should be compelled
to allow that without aid and gift of God there
can be in the will of man somewhat of good.
Because it is not to be denied that it is a good
thing that a man believe he shall undergo pain
of eternal punishment if he shall deny Christ,
and for that faith endure and make light of
any manner of punishment of man's inflicting.
25. So then, as we are not to deny that this
is the gift of God, we are thus to understand
that there be some gifts of God possessed by

1 Ps. lxxi. 5 ; and lxii. 5.
3 Phil. i. 29.
S See on Profit 0/ Believing, c. 1, p. 347.

2 Is. xi. 2.
4 1 Cor. xiii. 3.

J

"

shall

the sons of that Jerusalem which is above,
and free, and mother of us all, (for these are
in some sort the hereditary possessions in
heirs of God and joint-heirs
which we are
with Christ: ") but some other which may be
received even by the sons of concubines to
whom carnal Jews and schismatics or heretics
For though it be written,
are compared.
"
Cast out the bondmaid and her son, for the
son of the bondmaid shall not be heir with
! my son Isaac:" 7 and though God said to
I Abraham, "In Isaac
thy seed be
called:" which the Apostle hath so inter-
" That is, not they which be
preted as to say,
sons of the flesh, these be the sons of God;
but the sons of the promise are counted for
" 8 that we might understand the seed
the seed;
of Abraham in regard of Christ to pertain by
reason of Christ to the sons of God, who are
Christ's body and members, that is to say,
the Church of God, one, true, very-begotten,
catholic, holding the godly faith; not the
faith which works through elation or fear, but
"which worketh by love;" 9
nevertheless,
even the sons of the concubines, when Abraham sent them away from his son Isaac, he
did not omit to bestow upon them some gifts,
that they might not be left in every way
empty, but not that they should be held as
For so we read: "And Abraham gave
heirs.
all his estate unto Isaac; and to the sons of
his concubines gave Abraham gifts, and sent
If then we
them away from his son Isaac." 10
be sons of Jerusalem the free, let us understand that other be the gifts of them which
are put out of the inheritance, other the. gifts
of them which be heirs.
For these be the
" Ye have not received
heirs, to whom is said,
the spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye
have received the spirit of adoption of sons,
whereby we cry, Abba, Father." 11

26. Cry we therefore with the spirit of
charity, and until we come to the inheritance
in which we are alway to remain, let us be,
through love which becometh the free-born,
not through fear which becometh bondmen,
Cry we, so long as we
patient of suffering.
are poor, until we be with that inheritance
made rich.
Seeing how great earnest thereof
we have received, in that Christ to make us
rich made Himself poor; Who being exalted
unto the riches which are above, there was
sent One Who should breathe into our hearts
holy longings, the Holy Spirit. Of these poor,
as yet believing, not yet beholding; as yet hoping, not yet enjoying; as yet sighing in desire,
not yet reigning in felicity; as yet hungering

6 Gal. iv. 26.
8 Gen. xxi 12; and Rom. ix. 7, 8.
9 Gal. v. 6

10 Gen. xxv. 5, 6.

7 Gal. iv. 30; and Gen. xxi. 10.

" Rom. viii. 15.

the patience shall not

and thirsting, not yet satisfied: of these poor,
"
perish for
then,
" z not that there will be patience there
ever:
also, where aught to endure shall not be; but
"will not perish," meaning that it will not be
But its fruit it will have for ever,
unfruitful.
"
shall not perish for ever." For
therefore it
he who labors in vain, when his hope fails for
which he labored, says with good cause, "I
have lost so much labor:
but he who comes
to the promise of his labor says, congratulating himself, I have not lost my labor.

"

* Ps. ix. 18.

Labor then is said not to perish (or be lost),
not because it lasts perpetually, but because
So also the patience
it is not spent in vain.
of the poor of Christ (who yet are to be made
rich as heirs of Christ) shall not perish for
ever: not because there also we shall be commanded patiently to bear, but because for that
which we have here patiently borne, we shall
enjoy eternal bliss. He will put no end to
felicity, Who giveth temporal
everlasting
patience unto the will: because both the one
and the other is of Him bestowed as a gift
upon charity, Whose gift that charity is also.

ST. AUGUSTIN:

ON CARE

TO BE HAD FOR THE DEAD.

[DE CURA PRO MORTUIS.]

TRANSLATED BY

REV. H. BROWNE. M.A.,

OF CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, LATE PRINCIPAL OF THE DIOCESAN
COLLEGE, CHICHESTER.

ON CARE TO BE HAD FOR THE DEAD-
[DE CURA PRO MORTUIS.]

From the Retractations, Book ii. Chap. 64.

The book, On care to be had for the dead, I wrote, having been asked by letter whether
it profits any person after death that his body shall be buried at the memorial of any Saint. 1
The book begins thus : Long time unto your Holiness, my venerable fellow-bishop Paulinus.

1. Lonxj time, my venerable fellow-bishop
Paulinus, have I been thy Holiness's debtor
for an answer; even since thou wrotest to me
by them of the household ~ of our most religious daughter Flora, asking of me whether
it profit any man after death that his body is
buried at the memorial of some Saint.
This,
namely, had the said widow begged of thee
for her son deceased in those parts, and thou
hadst written her an answer, consoling her,
and announcing to her concerning the body
of the faithful young man Cynegius, that the
thing which she with motherly and pious affection desired was done, to wit, by placing it in
the basilica of most blessed Felix the Confessor. Upon which occasion it came to pass, that
by the same bearers of thy letter thou didst
write also to me, raising the like question, and
craving that I would answer what I thought
of this matter, at the same time not forbearing to say what are thine own sentiments.
For thou sayest that to thy thinking these be
no empty motions of religious and faithful
minds, which take this care for their deceased
Thou addest, moreover, that it canfriends.

1 The date may be conjectured from the order of the Retractations, where this book is mentioned next after the Enchiridion aa
Laurentium, which was not finished earlier than A. 1). 421. The
first two paragraphs of this treatise will be found quoted by Augustin in his Book On Eight Questions 0/ Duicitius. yuaest. ii. 2, 3.
Ben. ed. Paulinus, to whom it was addressed, was Bishop of Nola;,
and took great pains to honor the memory of St. Felix, who is
Several poems of his on the submentioned in the beginning of it.
ject are extant.
2 Homilies.

not be void of effect 3 that the whole Church is
wont to supplicate for the departed: so that
hence it may be further conjectured that it
doth profit a person after death, if by the
faith of his friends for the interment of his
body such a spot be provided wherein may be
apparent the aid, likewise in this way sought,
of the Saints.

2. But this being the case, how to this
opinion that should not be contrary which the
" For we shall all stand before
Apostle says,
the judgment-seat of Christ, that each may
receive according to the things he hath done
by the body, 4 whether good or bad;" 5
this,
For
thou signifiest, thou dost not well see.
this apostolic sentence doth before death admonish to be done, that which may profit
after death; not then, first, when there is to
be now a receiving of that which a person
shall have done before death.
True, but this
question is thus solved, namely, that there is
a certain kind of life by which is acquired,
while one lives in this body, that it should be
possible for these things to be of some help
to the departed;
"

and, consequently, it

according to the things done by the body,"
that they are aided by the things which shall,
after they have left the body, be religiously
For there are whom
done on their behalf.
these things aid nothing at all, namely, when

is

3 Vacare.

4 Per corpus.

5 2 Cor. v. 10.

54Q

they are done either for persons whose merits
are so evil, that neither by such things are
they worthy to be aided; or for persons whose
merits are so good, that of such things they
Of the kind of life,
have no need as aids.
therefore, which each hath led by the body,
doth it come, that these things profit or profit
not, whatever are piously done on his behalf
when he has left the body.
For touching
merit whereby these things profit, if none
have been gotten in this life, it
is in vain
So it comes to pass as
sought after this life.
well that not unmeaningly 1 doth the Church,
or care of friends, bestow upon the departed
whatever of religion it shall be able; as also
that, nevertheless, each receiveth "according
to the things which he hath done by the body,
whether it be good or bad," the Lord rendering unto each according to his works.
For,
that this which is bestowed should be capable
of profiting him after the body, this was acquired in that life which he hath led in the
body.

3. Possibly thy inquiry is satisfied by this
But what other consideramy brief reply.
tions move me, to which I think meet to answer, do thou for a short space attend.
In
the books of the Maccabees we read of sacriHowbeit, even if
fice offered for the dead. 2
it were no where at all read in the Old Scriptures, not small is the authority, which in this
usage is clear, of the whole Church, namely,
that in the prayers of the priest which are
offered to the Lord God at His altar, the
commendation of the dead hath also its place.
But then, whether there be some profit accruing unto the soul of the dead from the place
of its body, requires a more careful inquiry.
And first, whether it make any difference in
causing or increasing of misery after this life
to the spirits of men if their bodies be not
buried, this must be looked into, not in the
light of opinion however commonly received,
but rather of the holy writ of our religion.
For we are not to credit that, as is read in
Maro, the unburied are prohibited from navigating and crossing the infernal stream: because forsooth

" To none is giv'n to pass the hideous banks
And waters hoarse, ere in their meet abode
The bones have sunk to rest." 3

Who can incline a Christian heart to these
poetical and fabulous figments, when the
Lord Jesus, to the intent that under the hands
of their enemies, who should have their bodies
in their power, Christians might lie down
without a fear, asserts that not a hair of their

head shall perish, exhorting that they should
not fear them which when they have killed
the body have nothing more that they can
do? 4 Of which in the first book "On the
City of God," I have methinks enough spoken,
to break the teeth in their mouths who, in
imputing to Christian times the barbarous
devastation, especially that which Rome has
lately suffered, do cast up to us this also, that
Christ did not there come to the succor of
To whom when it
His own.
is answered
that the souls of the faithful were, according
to the merits of their faith, by Him taken into
protection, they insult over us with talking o*f
their corpses left unburied.
All this matter,
then, concerning burial I have in such words
as these expounded.

"

4. "But" (say I) "in such a slaughterheap of dead bodies, could they not even be
buried ? not this, either, doth pious faith too
greatly dread, holding that which is foretold
that not even consuming beasts will be an
hindrance to the rising again of bodies of
which not a hair of the head shall perish. 5
Nor in any wise would Truth say,
Fear not
them which kill the body, but cannot kill the
it could at all hinder the life to
soul;" if
come whatever enemies might choose to do
Unless haply
with the bodies of the slain.
any is so absurd as to contend that they ought
not to be feared before death, lest they kill
the body, but ought to be feared after death,
lest, having killed the body, they suffer it not
Is that then false which Christ
to be buried.
says, "Who kill the body, and afterwards
have no more that they can do," if they have
so great things that they can do on dead
Far be the thought, that that should
bodies ?
be false which Truth hath said.
For the
thing said is, that they do somewhat when
they kill, because in the body there is feeling
while it is in killing, but afterward they have
nothing more that they can do because there
is no feeling in the body when killed.
Many
bodies, then, of Christians the earth hath not
covered: but none of them hath any separated
from heaven and earth, the whole of which
He filleth with presence of Himself, Who
knoweth whence to resuscitate that which He
" The
created.
dead bodies of thy servants have they given for
meat unto the fowls of the heaven, the flesh
of thy saints unto the beasts of the earth:
they have shed their blood like water round
about Jerusalem, and there was no man to
bury them:" 6 but more to heighten the
cruelty of them who did these things, not to the

It is said indeed in the Psalm,

1 Inaniter.

2 2 Mac. xii. 43.

3 sEneid vi. 327, 328.

< Matt. x. 28.
5 Luke xxi. 18 ;
6 Ps. lxxix. 2, 3.

xii. 4-7; Matt. x. 28-30.

ON CARE TO BE HAD FOR THE DEAD.

"

infelicity of them who suffered them.
For, |
however, in sight of men these things may
seem hard and dire, yet
precious in the
sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.'' *
So, then, all these things, care of funeral, '
bestowal in sepulture, pomp of obsequies, are
more for comfort of the living, than for help
If it at all profit the ungodly
to the dead.
to have costly sepulture, it shall harm the
godly to have vile sepulture or none.
Right
handsome obsequies in sight of men did that
rich man who was clad in purple receive of
the crowd of his housefolk; but far more
handsome did that poor man who was full of
sores obtain oi the ministry of Angels; who
bore him not out into a marble tomb, but into
Abraham's bosom bore him on high.
All
this they laugh at, against whom we have
undertaken to defend the City of God: but
for all that their own philosophers, even, held
care of sepulture in contempt; and often
whole armies, while dying for their earthly
country, cared not where they should after
lie, or to what beasts they should become
meat; and the poets had leave to say of this
matter with applause

"

His* cov'ring is the overarching sky.

though all unurn'd he He,
,? 3

How much less ought they to make a vaunting about unburied bodies of Christians, to
whom the flesh itself with all its members,
re-fashioned, not only from the earth, but even
from the other elements, yea, from their most
secret windings, whereinto these evanished
corpses have retired, is assured to be in an
instant of time rendered back and made entire
as at the first, according to His promise?

5. Yet it follows not that the bodies of the
departed are to be despised and flung aside,
and above all of just and faithful men, which
bodies as organs and vessels to all good works
For if a father's
their spirit hath holily used.
garment and ring, and whatever such like, is
the more dear to those whom they leave behind, the greater their affection is towards
their parents, in no wise are the bodies themselves to be spurned, which truly we wear in
more familiar and close conjunction than any
For these pertain not to
of our putting on.
ornament or aid which is applied from withWhence
out, but to the very nature of man.
also the funerals of the just men of old were
with dutiful piety cared for, and their obsequies celebrated, and sepulture provided: 4
and themselves while living did touching

1 Ps. cxvi. 15.
3 Lucan vii. 8iq, speaking of the slain in the battle of Pharsalia,

2 Luke xvi. 19-22.

whose bodies Caesar forbad to burn or inter.

4 Gen. xxiii.; xxv. 9, 10

;

xlvii. 30.

burial or even translation of their bodies give
Tobias also, to have by
charge to their sons.
burying of the dead obtained favor with God,
is by witness of an Angel commended. 5 The
Lord Himself also, about to rise on the third
day, both preaches, and commends to be
preached, the good work of a religious woman,
that she poured out a precious ointment over
His limbs, and did it for His burial: 6 and
they are with praise commemorated in the
Gospel, who having received His Body from
the cross did carefully and with reverend
honor see it wound and laid in the sepulchre. 7
These authorities however do not put us upon
thinking that there is in dead bodies any feeling; but rather, that the Providence of God
(Who is moreover pleased with such offices of
piety) doth charge itself with the bodies also
of the dead, this they betoken, to the intent
our faith of resurrection might be stayed up
thereby. Where also is wholesomely learned,
how great may be the reward for alms which
we do unto the living and feeling, if not even
that be lost before God, whatever of duty
and of diligence is paid to the lifeless memThere are indeed also other
bers of men.
things, which in speaking of the bestowal or
removal of their bodies the holy Patriarchs
willed to be understood as spoken by the
prophetic Spirit: but this is not the place to
treat thoroughly of these things, seeing that
sufficeth which we have said.
But if the lack
of those things which are necessary for sustentation of the living, as food and clothing,
however heavy affliction attend the lacking,
do not break in good men the manly courage
of bearing and enduring, nor eradicate piety
from the mind, but by exercising make it
more fruitful; how much more doth lack of
those things which are wont to be applied for
care of funerals and bestowal of bodies of
the departed, not make them wretched, now
that in the hidden abodes of the pious they
And therefore, when these
are at
things have to dead bodies of Christians in
that devastation of the great City or of other
towns also been lacking, there
neither
fault of the living, who could not afford these
things, nor pain of the dead who could not
feel the same. 8
conj cerning the ground and reason of sepulture.
Which I have therefore from another book
of mine transferred to this, because it was
easier to rehearse this, than to express the
same matter in another way.

This is my opinion

rest !

is

j

6. If this be true, doubtless rlso the providing for the interment of bodies a place at

5 Tobit ii. 7; xii. 12.
8 On the City of God, book i. chap. xii. 13. Vol. ii. p. 10.

6 Matt. xxvi. 7-13.

7 John xix. 38, 39.

the Memorials of Saints, is a mark of a good
human affection towards the remains of one's
friends: since if there be religion in the burying, there cannot but be religion in taking
But
thought where the burying shall be.
while it is desirable there should be such like
solaces of survivors, for the showing forth of
their pious mind towards their beloved, I do
riot see what helps they be to the dead save
that upon recollection of the
in this way:
place in which are deposited the bodies of
those whom they love, they should by prayer
commend them to those same Saints, who
have as patrons taken them into their charge
Which indeed
to aid them before the Lord.
they would be still able to do, even though
they were not able to inter them in such
But then the only reason why the
places.
name Memorials or Monuments is given to
those sepulchres of the dead which become
specially distinguished, is that they recall to
memory, and by putting in mind cause us to
think of, them who by death are withdrawn
from the eyes of the living, that they may
not by forgetfulness be also withdrawn from
For both the term Memorial 1
men's hearts.
most plainly shews this, and Monument is so
named from monishing, that is, putting in
For which reason the Greeks also
mind.
call that (ivrj/xsiov which we call a Memorial
or Monument: because in their tongue the
memory itself, by which we remember, is
called fivTJfnj. When therefore the mind recollects where the body of a very dear friend
lies buried, and thereupon there occurs to
the thoughts a place rendered venerable by
the name of a Martyr, to that same Martyr
doth it commend the soul in affection of
heartfelt recollection 2 and prayer. And when
this affection is exhibited to the departed by
faithful men who were most dear to them,
profits them who
there is no doubt that it
while living in the body merited that such
things should profit them after this life.
But
even if some necessity should through absence of all facility not allow bodies to be
interred, or in
interred, yet
should there be no pretermitting of supplications for the spirits of the dead: which supplications, that they should be made for all
in Christian and catholic fellowship departed,
even without mentioning of
their names,
under a general commemoration, the Church
hath charged herself withal; to the intent
that they which lack, for these offices, parents
or sons or whatever kindred or friends, may
have the same afforded unto them by the one
pious mother which is common to all.
But

such places

if there were lack of these
supplications,
which are made with right faith and piety for
the dead, I account that it should not a whit
profit their spirits, howsoever in holy places
the lifeless bodies should be deposited.

profited,

7. When therefore the faithful mother of
a faithful son departed desired to have his
body deposited in the basilica of a Martyr,
forasmuch as she believed that his soul would
be aided by the merits of the Martyr, the
very believing of this was a sort of supplication, and this
if aught profited.
And in that she recurs in her thoughts to
this same sepulchre, and in her prayers more
and more commends her son, the spirit of
the departed is aided, not by the place of its
dead body, but by that which springs from
memory of the place, the "living affection of
For at once the thought, who is
the mother.
commended and to whom, doth touch, and
that with no unprofitable emotion, the religious mind of her who prays.
For also in
prayer to God, 3 men do with the members of
their bodies that which becometh suppliants,
knees, when they
when they bend their
stretch forth their hands, or even prostrate
themselves on the ground, and whatever else
they visibly do, albeit their invisible will and
heart's intention be known unto God, and He
needs not these tokens that any man's mind
should be opened unto Him: only hereby
one more excites himself to pray and groan
And I
more humbly and more fervently.
know not how it is, that, while these motions
of the body cannot be made but by a motion
of the mind preceding, yet by the same being
outwardly in visible sort made, that inward
invisible one which made them is increased:
and thereby the heart's affection which preceded that they might be made, groweth beif any be in
cause they are made.
that way held, or even bound, that he is not
able to do these things with his limbs, it does
not follow that the inner man does not pray,
and before the eyes of God in its most secret
chamber, where it hath compunction, cast
So likewise, while it
itself on the ground.
makes very much difference, where a person
deposits the body of his dead, while .he supplicates for his spirit unto God, because both
the affection preceding chose a spot which
was holy, and after the body is there deposited the recalling to mind of that holy spot
renews and increases the affection which had
preceded; yet, though he may not be able
in that place which his religious mind did
choose to lay in the ground him whom he
loves, in no wise ought he to cease from

But still

1 Memoria.

- Kecordationis.

3 Orantes.

ON CARE TO BE HAD FOR THE DEAD.

for the spirit in

necessary supplications in commending of
For wheresoever the flesh of the
the same.
departed may lie or not lie, the spirit requires
rest and must get it:
its
departing from thence took with it the consciousness without which it could make no
odds how one exists, whether in a good estate
or a bad: and it does not look for aiding of
its life from that flesh to which it did itself
afford the life which it withdrew in its departing, and is to render back in its returning;
since not flesh to spirit, but spirit Unto flesh
procureth merit even of very resurrection,
whether it be unto punishment or unto glory
that it is to ceae to life again.

8. We read in the Ecclesiastical History
which Eusebius wrote in Greek, and Ruffinus
turned into the Latin tongue, of Martyr's
bodies in Gaul exposed to dogs, and how the
leavings of those dogs and bones of the dead
were, even to uttermost consumption, by fire
burned up; and the ashes of the same scattered on the river Rhone, lest any thing
should be left for any sort whatever of memorial. 1 Which thing must be believed to
have been to no other end divinely permitted,
but that Christians should learn in confessing
life, much
Christ, while they despise this
more to despise sepulture.
For this thing,
which with savage rage was done to the bodies
of Martyrs, if it could any whit hurt them,
to impair the blessed resting of their most
victorious spirits, would assuredly not have
In very deed
been suffered to be done.
therefore it was declared, that the Lord in
Fear not them which kill the body,
saying,
and afterward have no more that they can
do," 2 did not mean that He would not permit them to do any thing to the bodies of
His followers when dead; but that whatever they might be permitted to do, nothing
should be done that could lessen the Christian felicity of the departed, nothing thereof
reach to their consciousness while yet living
after death; nothing avail to the detriment,
no, not even of the bodies themselves, to
diminish aught of their integrity when they
should rise again.

9. And yet, by reason of that affection of
the human heart, whereby "no man ever
hateth his own flesh," 3 if men have reason to
know that after their death their bodies will
lack any thing which in each man's nation or
country the wonted order of sepulture demandeth, it makes them sorrowful as men; and that
which after death reacheth not unto them,

"

1 Eusebius, H. E. book v. chap. i. relates, that the bodies of
these martyrs of Lyons lay exposed in the open air for six days
inese martyrs ot i^yons lay expose<
xessively, and were then burned and cast into the Rhone.
successively, and were then burne
Ben. ed.
2 Matt. x. 28 ; Luke xii. 4

d and cast

! Eph. v. 29.

fathers.

they do before death fear for their bodies: so
that we find in the Books of Kings, God by
one prophet threatening another prophet who
had transgressed His word, that his carcase
should not be brought into the sepulchre of
Which the Scripture hath on
his
this wise: "Thus saith the Lord, Because
thou hast been disobedient to the mouth of
the Lord, and hast not kept the charge which
the Lord thy God commanded thee, and hast
returned and eaten bread and drunk water in
the place in which He commanded thee not
to eat bread, nor drink water, thy carcase
shall not be brought into the sepulchre of thy
fathers." 4 Now if in considering what account is to be made of this punishment, we go
by the Gospel, where we have learned that
after the slaying of the body there is no
cause to fear lest the lifeless members should
suffer any thing, it is not even to be called
But if we consider a man's
a punishment.
human affection towards his own flesh, it was
possible for him to be frightened or saddened,
while living, by that of which he would have
no sense when dead: and this was a punishment, because the mind was pained by that
thing about to happen to its body, howsoever
when it did happen it would feel no pain.
To this intent, namely, it pleased the Lord to
punish His servant, who not of
his own
contumacy had spurned to fulfill His command, but by deceit of another's falsehood
to be obeying when he
thought himself
For it is not to be thought that
obeyed not.
he was killed by the teeth of the beast as one
whose soul should be thence snatched away
to the torments of hell: seeing that over his
very body the same lion which had killed it
did keep watch, while moreover the beast on
which he rode was left unhurt, and along with
that fierce beast did with intrepid presence
stand there beside his master's corpse.
By
which marvellous sign it appeareth, that the
man of God was, say rather, checked temporally even unto death, than punished after
Of which matter, the Apostle when
death.
on account of certain offenses he had mentioned the sicknesses and deaths of many, says,
"
For if we would judge ourselves, we should
But, when we
not be judged of the Lord.
are judged we are chastened of the Lord,
that we may not be condemned with the
That Prophet, truly, the very man
world.'' s
who had beguiled him, did with much respect
bury in his own tomb, and took order for his
own burying beside his bones: in hope that
thereby his own bones might be
spared,
when, according to the prophecy of that man

4 1 Kings xiii. 21, 22.

5 1 Cor. xi. 31, 32.

[See R. V.]

of God, Josiah king of Judah did in that land
disinter the bones of many dead, and with
the same bones defile the sacrilegious altars
which had been set up for the graven images.
For he spared that tomb in which lay the
prophet who more than three hundred years
before predicted those things, and for his
sake neither was the sepulture of him who
had seduced him violated.
By that affection,
namely, which causes that no man ever hateth
his own flesh, this man had taken forethought
for his carcase, who had slain with a lie his
own soul. By reason then of this, the natural
love which every man hath for his own flesh,
it was both to the one a punishment to learn
that he should not be in the sepulchre of his
fathers, and to the other a care to take order
his own bones should be
beforehand that
spared, if he should lie beside him whose
sepulchre no man should violate.

10. This affection the Martyrs of Christ
contending for the truth did overcome: and
it is no marvel that they despised that whereof they should, when death was overpast,
have no feeling, when they could not by those
tortures, which while alive they did feel, be
God was able, no doubt, (even
overcome.
as He permitted not the lion when it had
slain the Prophet, to touch his body further,
and of a slayer made it to be a keeper): He
was able, I say, to have kept the slain bodies
of His own from the dogs to which they had
been flung; He was able in innumerable
ways to have deterred the rage of the men
themselves, that to burn the carcases, to
scatter the ashes, they should not dare: but
it was fit that this experience also should not
be lacking to manifold variety of temptations,
lest the fortitude of confession which would
not for the saving of the life of the body give
way to the savageness of persecution, should
be tremblingly anxious for the honor of a
sepulchre: in a word, lest faith of resurrection should dread the consuming of the body.
It was fit then, that even these things should
be permitted, in order that, even after these
examples of so great horror, the Martyrs, fervent in confession of Christ, should become
witnesses of this truth also, in which they
had learned that they by whom their bodies
should be slain had after that no more that
they could do. 1
Because, whatever they
should do to dead bodies, they would after
all do nothing, seeing that in flesh devoid of
life, neither was it possible for him to
feel aught who had thence departed, nor for
Him to lose aught thereof, Who created the
But while these things were doing to
same.

all

the bodies of the slain, albeit the Martyrs,
not frightened by them, did with great fortitude suffer, yet among the brethren was there
exceeding sorrow, because there was given
them no means of paying the last honors to
the remains of the Saints, neither secretly to
withdraw any part thereof, (as the same history testifies,) did the watchings of cruel senSo, while those which had
tinels permit.
been slain, in the tearing asunder of their
limbs, in the burning up of their bones, in
the dispersion of their ashes, could feel no
misery; yet these who had nothing of them
that they could bury, did suffer torture of
in pitying them; because
exceeding grief
what those did in no sort feel, these in some
sort did feel for them, and where was henceforth for those no more suffering, yet these
did in woful compassion suffer for them.

11. In regard to that woful compassion
which I have mentioned, are those praised,
and by king David blessed, who to the dry
bones of Saul and Jonathan afforded mercy
But yet what mercy is that,
of sepulture.
which is afforded to them that have feeling of
nothing? Or haply is this to be challenged
back to that conceit of an infernal
river
which men unburied were not able to pass
Far be this from the faith of Chrisover ?
tians: else hath it gone most ill with so great
a multitude of Martyrs, for whom there could
be no burying of their bodies, and Truth did
cheat them when It said, "Fear not them
which kill the body, and after that have no
more that they can do," 3 if these have been
able to do to them so great evils, by which
they were hindered to pass over to the places
which they longed for.
But, because this
without all doubt is most false, and it neither
any whit hurts the faithful to have their
bodies denied sepulture, nor any whit the
giving of sepulture unto infidels advantageth
them; why then are those who buried Saul
and his son said to have done mercy, and for
this are blessed by that godly king, but beis a good affection with which the
cause it
hearts of the pitiful are touched, when they
grieve for that in the dead bodies of other
men, which, by that affection through which
no man ever hateth his own flesh, they would
not have done after their own death to their
own bodies; and what they would have done
by them when they shall have no more feeling, that they take care to do by others now
having no feeling while themselves have yet
feeling?

12. Stories are told of certain appearances
or visions, 4 which may seem to bring into

* Matt. x. 28.

- 2 Sam. ii. 5.

3 Luke xii. 4.

4 V

ON CARE TO BE HAD FOR THE DEAD.

But it

this discussion a question which should not
It is said, namely, that dead
be slighted.
men have at times either in dreams or in
some other way appeared to the living who
knew not where their bodies lay unburied,
and have pointed out to them the place, and
admonished that the
sepulture which was
These
lacking should be afforded them.
things if we shall answer to be false, we shall
be thought impudently to contradict the writings of certain faithful men, and the senses
of them who assure us that such things have
is to be
happened to themselves.
answered, that-it does not follow that we are
to account the dead to have sense of these
things, because they appear in dreams to say
For living men do
or indicate or ask this.
also appear ofttimes to the living as they
sleep, while they themselves know not that
they do appear; and they are told by them,
what they dreamed, namely, that in their
dream the speakers saw them doing or sayThen if
it may be that a
ing something.
person in a dream should see me indicating
to him something that has happened or even
foretelling something about to happen, while
I am perfectly unwitting of the thing and altogether regardless not only what he dreams,
but whether he is awake while I am asleep,
or he asleep while I am awake, or whether
at one and the same time we are both awake
or asleep, at what time he has the dream in
which he sees me: what marvel if the dead
be unconscious and insensible of these things,
and, for all that, are seen by the living in
their dreams, and say something which those
on awaking find to be true ?
By angelical
operations, then, I should think it is effected,
whether permitted from above, or commanded, that they seem in dreams to say
something about burying of their bodies,
when they whose the bodies are are utterly
Now this is sometimes
unconscious of it.
serviceably done; whether for some sort of
solace to the survivors, to whom pertain
those dead whose likenesses ' appear to them
as they dream; or whether that by these admonitions the human race may be made to
have regard to humanity of sepulture, which,
allow that it be no help to the departed, yet is
there culpable irreligiousness in slighting of
it. Sometimes however, by fallacious visions,
men are cast into great errors, who deserve
As, if one should see in a
to suffer this.
dream, what ^Eneas by poetic falsity is told
to have seen in the world beneath: and there
should appear to him the likeness of some
unburied man, which
such

should speak

words as Palinurus is said to have spoken to
him; and when he awakes, he should find the
body in that place where he heard say while
dreaming, that it lay unburied, and was admonished and asked to bury it when found;
and because he finds this to be true, should
believe that the dead are buried on purpose
that their souls may pass to places from
of men
which he dreamed that the souls
unburied are by an infernal law prohibited:
does he not, in believing all this, exceedingly
swerve from the path of truth ?

debt, with production of

13. Such, however, is human infirmity,
that when in a dream a person shall see a
dead man, he thinks it
is the soul that he
sees: but when he shall in like manner dream
of a living man, he has no doubt that it
is
not a soul nor a body, but the likeness of a
man that has appeared to him: just as if it
were not possible in regard of dead men, in the
same sort unconscious of it, that it should
not be their souls, but their likenesses that apOf a surety, when we
pear to the sleepers.
were at Milan, we heard tell of a certain person of whom was demanded payment of
his deceased
a
father's acknowledgment, 3 which debt unknown to the son the father had paid, whereupon the man began to be very sorrowful,
and to marvel that his father while dying did
not tell him what he owed when he also made
Then in this exceeding anxiousness
his will.
of his, his said father appeared to him in a
dream, and made known to him where was
the counter 4 acknowledgment by which that
Which
acknowledgment
when the young man had found and showed,
he not only rebutted the wrongful claim of a
false debt, but also got back his
father's
note 5 of hand which the father had not got
back when the money was paid.
Here then
the soul of a man is supposed to have had
care for his son, and to have come to him in
his sleep, that, teaching him what he did not
know, he might relieve him of a great trouble.
But about the very same time as we heard
this, it chanced at Carthage that the rhetorician Eulogius, who had been my disciple in
that art, being (as he himself, after our return to Africa, told us the story) in course of
lecturing to his disciples on Cicero's rhetorical books, as he looked over the portion of
reading which he was to deliver on the following day, fell upon a certain passage, and
not being able to understand it, was scarce
able to sleep for the trouble of his mind: in
which night, as he dreamed, I expounded to
him that which he did not understand; nay,

cancelled.

was

1 Imagines.

2 Viszs.

3 Cautio.

4 Recaittum.

5 Chirographam.

not I, but my likeness, while I was unconscious of the thing, and far away beyond the
sea, it might be, doing, or it might be dreaming, some other thing, and not in the least
In what way these
caring for his cares.
things come about, I know not: but in what
way soever they come, why do we not believe
it comes in the same way for a person in a
dream to see a dead man, as it comes that
he sees a living man ? both, no doubt, neither
knowing nor caring who, or where, or when,
dreams of their images.

or

present,

14. Like dreams, moreover, are also some
visions of persons awake, who have had their
senses troubled, such as phrenetic persons,
or those who are mad in any way: for they
too talk to themselves just as though they
were speaking to people verily present, and
as well with absent as with present, whose
images they perceive, whether persons living
But just as they which live, are
or dead.
unconscious that they are seen of them and
talk with them; for indeed they are not really
themselves make
themselves
speeches, but through troubled senses, these
persons are wrought upon by such-like imaginary visions; just so they also who have departed this life, to persons thus affected appear as present, while they be absent, and
whether any man sees them in regard of their
image,

1 are themselves utterly unconscious.
15. Similar to this is also that condition
when persons, with their senses more profoundedly in abeyance than is the case in
sleep, are occupied with the like visions.
For to them also appear images of quick and
dead; but then, when they return to their
senses, whatever dead they say they have
seen are thought to have been verily with
them: and they who hear these things pay no
heed to the circumstance that there were
seen in like manner the images of certain
living persons, absent and unconscious. A
certain man by name Curma, of the municipal town of Tullium, which is hard by Hippo,
a poor member of the Curia,
scarcely competent to serve the office of a duumvir 3 of
that place, and a mere rustic, being ill, and
all his senses entranced, lay all but dead for
several days: a very slight breathing in his
nostrils, which on applying the hand was just
felt, and barely betokened that he lived, was
all that kept him from being buried for dead.
Not a limb did he stir, nothing did he take
in the way of sustenance, neither in the eyes
nor in any other bodily sense was he sensible
of any annoyance that impinged upon them.
Yet he was seeing many things like as in

Imaginaliter.

2 Curtails,

3 Duumviralitins.

a dream, which, when at last after a great
many days he woke up, he told that he had
And first, presently after he opened
seen.
his eyes, Let some one go, said he, to the
house of Curma the smith, and see what is
doing there. And when some one had gone
thither, the smith was found to have died in
that moment that the other had come back
to his senses, and, it might almost be said,
Then, as those who
revived from death.
stood by eagerly listened, he told them how
the other had been ordered to be had up,
when he himself was dismissed; and that he
had heard it said in that place from which he
had returned, that it was not Curma of the
Curia, but Curma the smith who had been
ordered to be fetched to that place of the
dead.
Well, in these dream-like visions of
his, among those deceased persons whom he
saw handled according to the diversity of
their merits, he recognized also some whom
he had known when alive.
That they were
the very persons themselves I might perchance have believed, had he not in the
course of this seeming dream of his seen also
some who are alive even to this present time,
namely, some clerks of his district, by whose
presbyter there he was told to be baptized at
Hippo by me, which thing he said had also
So then he had seen a presbytaken place.
ter, clerks, myself, persons, to wit, not yet
dead, in this vision in which he afterwards
also saw dead persons. Why may he not be
thought to have seen these last in the same
way as he saw us ? that is, both the one sort,
and the other, absent and unconscious, and
consequently not the persons themselves, but
similitudes of them just as of the places?
He saw, namely, both a plot of ground where
was that presbyter with the clerks, and Hippo
where he was by me seemingly baptized: in
which spots assuredly he was not, when he
seemed to himself to be there.
For what
was at that time going on there, he knew
not: which, without doubt, he would have
The
known if he had verily been there.
sights beheld, therefore, were those which
are not presented in the things themselves as
they are, but shadowed forth in a sort of
In fine, after much
images of the things.
that he saw, he narrated how he had, moreover, been led into Paradise, and how it was
there said to him, when he was thence dismissed to return to his own family, "Go, be
baptized, if thou wilt be in this place of the
Thereupon, being admonished to
blessed."
be baptized by me, he said it was done aly
ready. He who was talking with him replied,
"Go, be truly baptized; for that thou didst
After this he rebut see in the vision.''

ON CARE TO BE HAD FOR THE DEAD.

Easter was
covered, went his way to Hippo.
now approaching, he gave his name among
the other Competents, alike with very many
unknown to us; nor did he care to make
known the vision to me or to any of our people. He was baptized, at the close of the
holy days he returned to his own place.
After the space of two years or more, I learned
the whole matter; first, through a certain
friend of mine and his at my own table, while
we were talking about some such matters:
then I took it up, and made the man in his
own person tell me the story, in the presence
6f some honest_townsmen of his attesting the
same, both concerning his marvellous illness,
how he lay all but dead for many days, and
about that other Curma the smith, what I
have mentioned above, and about all these
matters; which, while he was telling me, they
recalled to mind, and assured me, that they
had also at that time heard them from his
Wherefore, just as he saw his own
lips.
baptism, and myself, and Hippo, and the
basilica, and the baptistery, not in the very
realities, but in a sort of similitudes of the
things; and so likewise certain other living
persons, without consciousness on the part of
the same living persons: then why not just
so those dead persons also, without consciousness on the part of the same dead persons ?

16. Why should we not believe these to be
angelic operations through dispensation of
the providence of God, Who maketh good
use of both good things and evil, according
to the unsearchable depth of His judgments?
whether thereby the minds of mortals be instructed, or whether deceived; whether consoled, or whether terrified: according as unto
each one there is to be either a showing of
mercy, or a taking of vengeance, by Him to
Whom, not without a meaning, the Church
doth sing "of mercy and of judgment." 1
Let each, as it shall please him, take what I
If the souls of the dead took part in the
say.
affairs of the living, and if it were their very
selves that, when we see them, speak to us
in sleep; to say nothing of others, there is my
own self, whom my pious mother would no
night fail to visit, that mother who by land
and sea followed me that she might live with
me.
Far be the thought that she should, by
a life more happy, have been made cruel, to
that degree that when any thing vexes my
heart she should not even console in his sadness the son whom she loved with an only love,
whom she never wished to see mournful.
But
assuredly that which the sacred Psalm sings
Because my father and
in our ears, is true;

"

that

my mother have forsaken me, but the Lord
hath taken me up."
2 Then if our parents
have forsaken us, how take they part in our
cares and affairs ? But if parents do not, who
else are there of the dead who should know
what we are doing, or what we suffer ?
Isaiah
"
For Thou art our Father:
the Prophet says,
because Abraham hath not known us, and
Israel is not cognizant of us." 3
If so great
Patriarchs were ignorant what was
doing
towards the People of them begotten, they to
whom, believing God, the People itself to
spring from their stock was promised; how
are the dead mixed up with affairs and doings
of the living, either for cognizance or help ?
How say we that those were favored who deceased ere the evils came which followed hard
upon the decease, if also after death they feel
whatever things befall in the calamitousness
of human life ? Or haply do we err in saying
this, and in accounting them to be quietly at
rest whom the unquiet life of the living makes
solicitous ? What then is that which to the
most godly king Josias God promised as a
great benefit, that he should first die, that he
might not see the evils which He threatened
should come to
place and People?
" Thus saith
Which words of god are these:
the Lord God of Israel: concerning My words
which thou hast heard, and didst fear before
My face when thou didst hear what I have
spoken concerning this place and them which
dwell therein, that it should be forsaken and
under a curse; and hast rent thy garments,
and wept before Me, and I have heard thee,
saith the Lord of Sabaoth: not so; behold, I
will add thee unto thy fathers, and thou shalt
be added unto them in peace; and thine eyes
shall not see all the evils which I am bringing
upon this place and upon them that dwell
He, frightened by God's comtherein/' 4
minations, had wept, and rent his garments,
and is made, by hastening on of his death, to
be without care of all future evils, because he
should so rest in peace, that all those things
There then are the spirits
he should not see.
of the departed, where they see not whatever
things are doing, or events happening, in this
Then how do they see their own
life to men.
graves, or their own bodies, whether they lie
cast away, or buried ? How do they take part
in the misery of the living, when they are
either suffering their own evils, if they have
contracted such merits; or do rest in peace,
as was promised to this Josiah, where they
undergo no evils, either by suffering themselves, or by compassionate suffering with
others, freed from all evils which by suffer-

1 Ps. ci. i.

2 Ps. xxvn. 10.

3 Is. lxiii. 16.

4 2 Kings xxii. 18-20.

"

" z

ing themselves or with others while they lived
here they did undergo ?

17. Some man may say:

If there be not
in the dead any care for the living, how is it
that the rich man, who was tormented in hell,
asked father Abraham to send Lazarus to his
five brothers not as yet dead, and to take
course with them, that they should not come
themselves also into the same place of torBut does it follow, that because
ments ?
the rich man said this, he knew what his I
brethren were doing, or what they were suffer- ,
Just in that same way had
ing at that time ?
he care for the living, albeit what they were
doing he wist not at all, as we have care for
the dead, albeit what they do we confessedly
For if we cared not for the dead,
wot not.
we should not, as we do, supplicate God on
In fine, Abraham did not send
their behalf.
Lazarus, and also answered, that they have
here Moses and the Prophets, whom they
ought to hear that they might not come to
Where again it occurs to
those torments.
ask, how it was that what was doing here,
father Abraham himself wist not, while he
knew that Moses and the Prophets are here,
that is, their books, by obeying which men
should escape the torments of hell: and knew,
in short, that rich man to have lived in delights, but the poor man Lazarus to have lived
in labors and sorrows ?
For this also he says
to him; "Son, remember that thou in thy
lifetime hast received good things, but Lazarus evil things." He knew then these things
which had taken place of course among the
True, but it may
living, not among the dead.
be that, not while the things were doing in
their lifetime, but after their death, he learned
these things, by information of Lazarus: that
it be not false which the Prophet saith,
"Abraham hath not known us." 2

18. So then we must confess that the dead
indeed do not know what is doing here, but
while it is in doing here: afterwards, however,
they hear it from those who from hence go to
them at their death; not indeed every thing,
but what things those are allowed to make
known who are suffered also to remember
these things; and which it is meet for those
to hear, whom they inform of the same.
It
may be also, that from the Angels, who are
present in the things which are doing here,
the dead do hear somewhat, which for each
one of them to hear He judgeth right
to Whom all things are subject.
For were
not Angels, who could be present
there
quick and dead, the
in
Lord Jesus had not said, "It came to pass

places both of

angels

Paradise,

also that the poor man died, and was carried
into Abraham's bosom." 3
by the
Therefore, now here, now there, were they
able to be, who from hence bore thither whom
God willed.
It may be also, that the spirits
of the dead do learn some things which are
doing here, what things it
is necessary that
they should know, and what persons it
is
necessary should know the same, not only
things past or present, but even future, by the
Spirit of God revealing them: like as not all
men, but the Prophets while they lived here
did know, nor even they all things, but only
what things to be revealed to them the providence of God judged meet.
Moreover, that
some from the dead are sent to the living, as,
on the other hand, Paul from the living was
divine Scripture doth
rapt into
For Samuel the Prophet, appearing
testify.
to Saul when living, predicted even what
should befall the king: 5 although some think
it was not Samuel himself, that could have
been by magical arts evoked, but that some
spirit, meet for so evil works, did figure his
semblance: 6 though the book Ecclesiasticus,
which Jesus, son of Sirach, is reputed to have
written, and which on account of some resemblance of style is pronounced to be Solomon's, 7
contains in the praise of the Fathers, that
But
Samuel even when dead did prophesy.
if this book be spoken against from the canon
(because it is not contained
of the Hebrews, 8
therein,) what shall we say of Moses, whom
certainly we read both in Deuteronomy to
have died, 9 and in the Gospel to have, together
with Elias who died not, appeared unto the
living?

is

19. Hence too is solved that question, how
it that the Martyrs, by the very benefits
which are given to them that pray, indicate
that they take an interest in the affairs of
men, if the dead know not what the quick are
For not only by effects of benefits,
doing.
but in the very beholding of men, it is certain,"
that the Confessor Felix (whose denizenship
among you thou piously lovest) appeared
when the barbarians were attacking Nola, as
we have heard not by uncertain rumors, but
But such things are of
by sure witnesses.
God exhibited, far otherwise than as the usual
order hath itself, unto each kind of creatures
For it does not follow because
apportioned.
water was, when it pleased the Lord, in a
moment changed into wine, that we are not
to regard the worth and efficacy of water in

5 1 Sam. xxviii. 11-19.
3 Luke xvi. 22.
7 Retract, ii. 4, and " On Christian Doctrine" book ii. chap,

Qucest. ad Sitnplicianum, lib. ii. qu. 4.

* 2 Cor. xii. 4.

1 Luke xvi. 24-29.

2 Is. lxiii. 16.

viii., vol. ii. p. 539.

Ecclus. xlvi. 20.

10 Matt. xvii. 3.

Ben. ed.

Deut. xxxiv. 5.
" Inguilinatum.

ON CARE TO BE HAD FOR THE DEAD.

the proper order of the elements, as distinct
from the rarity, or rather singularity, of that
divine work: nor because Lazarus rose again,
therefore that every dead man rises when he
will; or that a lifeless man is raised up by a
living, in the same way as a sleeping man by
one who is awake.
Other be the limits of
human things, other the signs of divine virtues: other they be that are naturally, other
that be miraculously done: albeit both unto
nature God is present that it may be, and
unto miracles nature is not lacking. We are
not to think then, that to be interested in the
affairs of the living is in the power of any departed who pTHase, only because to some
men's healing or help the Martyrs be present:
but rather we are to understand that it must
needs be by a Divine power that the Martyrs
are interested in affairs of the living, from the
very fact that for the departed to be by their
proper nature interested in affairs of the living
is impossible.

20. Howbeit it

is a question which surpasses the strength of my understanding,
after what manner the Martyrs aid them who
is certain, are helped; whether
by them, it
themselves by themselves be present at the
-same time in so different places, and by so
great distance lying apart one from another,
either where their Memorials are, or beside
their Memorials, wheresoever they are felt to
or whether, while they thembe present:
selves, in a place congruous with their merits,
are removed from all converse with mortals,
and yet do in a general sort pray for the
needs of their suppliants, (like as we pray for
the dead, to whom however we are not present,
nor know where they be or what they be
doing,) God Almighty, Who is every where
present, neither bounded in ' with us nor remote from us, hearing and granting the Marministries
tyrs'
to men those
every where diffused afford
solaces, to whom in the misery of this life
He seeth meet to afford the same, and, touching His Martyrs, doth where He will, when
He will, how He will, and chiefest through
their Memorials, because this He knoweth to
be expedient for us unto edifying of the faith
of Christ for Whose confession they suffered,
by marvellous and ineffable power and goodness cause their merits to be had in honor.
A matter is this, too high that I should have
power to attain unto it, too abstruse that I
should be able to search it out; and therefore
which of these two be the case, or whether
perchance both one and the other be the case,
that sometimes these things be done by very

by angelic

prayers,

doth

presence of the Martyrs, sometimes by Angels
taking upon them the person of the Martyrs,
I dare not define; rather would I seek this at
them who know it.
For it is not to be thought
that no man knows these things: (not indeed
he who thinks he knows, and knows not,) for
there be gifts of God, Who bestows on these
some one, on those some other, according to
the Apostle who says, that "to each one is
given the manifestation of the Spirit to profit
indeed," saith he, "is given
withal; to one 2
by the Spirit discourse of wisdom; to another2
discourse of science according to the same
Spirit; while to another 3 faith in the same
Spirit; to another 3 the gift of healings in one
Spirit; to one- workings of miracles; to one 2
discerning of spirits; to one 2
prophecy; to one 2
kinds of tongues; to one 2
interpretation of
But all these worketh one and
discourses.
the same spirit, dividing to every man severally as He will." 4 Of all these spiritual
gifts, which the Apostle hath rehearsed, to
whomsoever is given discerning of spirits, the
same knoweth these things as they -are meet
to be known.

"

"

Go," said he,

21. Such, we may believe, was that John
the Monk, whom the elder Theodosius, the
Emperor, consulted concerning the issue of
the civil war: seeing he had also the gift of
For that not each several person
prophecy.
has a several one of those gifts, but that one
man may have more gifts than one, I make
This John, then, when once a
no question.
certain most religious woman desired to see
him, and to obtain this did through her husband make vehement entreaty, refused indeed
this request because he had never allowed
this to women, but
tell thy
wife, she shall see me this night, but in her
And so it came to pass: and he
sleep.-"
gave her advice, whatever was meet to be
given to a wedded believing woman. And
she, on her awaking, made known to her husband that she had seen a man of God, such
as he knew him to be, and what she had been
The person who learned this
told by him.
from them, reported it to me, a grave man
and a noble, and most worthy to be believed.
But if I myself had seen that holy monk, because (it is said) he was most patient in hearing questions and most wise in answering, I
would have sought of him, as touching our
question, whether he himself came to that
woman in sleep, that is to say, his spirit in
the form of his body, just as we dream that
we see ourselves in the form of our own body;
or whether, while he himself was doing someif asleep, was dreaming of
thing else,

or,

1 Concretus

= A lil, aAAoi.

3 A Iter i, irepu>.

4 1 Cor. xii. 7-10.

55o

something else, it was either by an Angel or
in some other way that such vision took place
in the woman's dream; and that it would so
be, as he promised, he himself foreknew by
the Spirit of prophecy revealing the same.
For if he was himself present to her in her
dream, of course it was by miraculous grace
that he was enabled so to do, not by nature;
and by God's gift, not by faculty of his own.
But if, while he was doing some other thing
or sleeping and occupied with other sights,
the woman saw him in her sleep, then doubtless some such thing took place, as that is
which we read in the Acts of the Apostles,
where the Lord Jesus speaks to Ananias concerning Saul, 1 and informs him that Saul has
seen Ananias coming unto him, while Ananias
The man of God
himself wist not of it.
would make answer to me of these things as
the case might be, and then about the Martyrs I should go on to ask of him, whether
they be themselves present in dreams, or in
whatever other way to those who see them,
in what shape they will; and above all when the
demons in men confess themselves tormented
by the Martyrs, and ask them to spare them; or
whether these things be wrought through angelic powers, to the honor and commendation
of the Saints for men's profit, while those are
in supreme rest, and wholly free for other far
better sights, apart from us, and praying for
For it chanced at Milan at (the tomb of)
us.
the holy Martyrs Protasius and Gervasius,
that Ambrose the bishop, at that time living,
like manner as
being expressly named, in
were the dead whose names they were rehearsing, the demons confessed him and besought him to spare them, he being the while
otherwise engaged, and when this was taking
place, altogether unwitting of it. Or whether
indeed these things are wrought, somewhiles
by very presence of the Martyrs, otherwhiles
by that of Angels; and whether it be possible,
or by what tokens possible, for us to discriminate these two cases; or whether to perceive and to judge of these things none be
able, but he which hath that gift through
God's Spirit, "dividing unto every man severally as He will:" 2 the same John, methinks, would discourse to me of all these
matters, as I should wish; that either by his
teaching I might learn, and what I should be
told should know to be true and certain; or I
should believe what I knew not, upon his telling
me what things he knew.
But if peradventure
he should make answer out of holy Scripture,
and say, "Things higher than thou, seek
thou not; and things stronger than thou,

search thou not; but what the Lord hath
commanded thee,
of those things bethink
this also I should thankfully
theeahvay:" 3
For it is no small gain if, when any
accept.
things are obscure and uncertain to us, and
we not able to comprehend them, it be at any
rate clear and certain that we are not to seek
them; and what thing each one wishes to
learn, accounting it to be profitable that he
should know it, he should learn that it is no
harm that he know it not.

22. Which things being so, let us not think
that to the dead for whom we have a care, any
thing reaches save what by sacrifices either
of the altar, or of prayers, or of alms, we
solemnly supplicate: although not to all for
whom they are done be they profitable, but
to them only by whom while they live it is
But
obtained that they should be profitable.
forasmuch as we discern not who these be, it
is meet to do them for all regenerate persons,
that none of them may be passed by to whom
these benefits may and ought to reach.
For
better it is that these things shall be superfluously done to them whom they neither
hinder nor help, than lacking to them whom
More diligently however doth
they help.
each man these things for his own near anddear friends, in order that they may be likewise done unto him by his.
But as for the
burying of the body, whatever is bestowed on
that, is no aid of salvation, but an office of
humanity, according to
affection by
no man ever hateth his own flesh." 4
which
Whence it is fitting that he take 5 what care he
is able for the flesh of his neighbor, when he
And if they do these
is gone that bare 6
things who believe not the resurrection of the
flesh, how much more are they beholden to
do the same who do believe; that so, an office
of this kind bestowed upon a body, dead but
yet to rise again and to remain to eternity,
may also be in some sort a testimony of the
same faith ?
But, that a person is buried at
the memorials of the Martyrs, this, I think,
so far profits the departed, that while commending him also to the Martyrs' patronage,
the affection of supplication on his behalf is
increased.

that

"

it.

23. Here, to the things thou hast thought
meet to inquire of me, thou hast such reply
as I have been able to render: which if it be
more than enough prolix, thou must excuse
this, for it was done through love of holding
For this book, then,
longer talk with thee.
how thy charity shall receive it, let me, I pray
thee, know by a second letter: though doubt-

1 Acts ix. 12.

2 i Cor. xii. ii.

3 Ecclus. iii. 22.
5 Gerat.

4 Eph. v. 2g.
6 Gercbat.

ON CARE TO BE HAD FOR THE DEAD.

less it will be more welcome for its bearer's
sake, to wit our brother and fellow-presbyter
Candidianus, whom, having been by thy letter
made acquainted with him, I have welcomed
with all my heart, and am loath to let him
For greatly in the charity of Christ
depart.
hath he by his presence consoled us, and, to

say truth, it was at his instance that I have
For with so great busidone thy bidding.
nesses is my heart distraught, that had not
he by ever and anon putting me in mind not
suffered me to forget it, assuredly to thy
questioning reply of mind had not been forthcoming.

INDEXES.

ON THE TRINITY.

Abraham, appearance of God to,

46, sq, 66 sq.

Academic philosophy, the, criticised,

210, sq.

Adam, the appearing of God to, and
how he spoke to, 45, sq ; on account of his sin we are delivered
into the power of the devil, 175.
Angels, how they work miracles, 60 ;
have their power from God only,
63; appearing of, 64-66; how
the law was given by, 67.

Anthropomorphism, 18.
Arians, the arguments of, derived
from the words "begotten"
and "
unbegotten," refuted, 8S
sq.

Back parts, the, of God, 50-52.
"

Beginning," the word, spoken relatively in regard to the Trinity,
85, 94. 95-

Begotten

unbegotten," the
words; 91, 225; reply to cavils
of heretics respecting, S9.

" and "

"

Blessedness,

desired by all, 170;
perfect only in the life to come,
171; cannot exist without immortality, 172.

Christ, the mediation and intercession of, shall cease, 26-28; the
sending of, at His incarnation,
40 ; the death and resurrection
of, and their bearing on us, 71,
sq; the Mediator gathers the
many into one, 75, sq; the ignorance of, 30; the death of, voluntary. 77, sq; the most perfect
victim for cleansing guilt, 79,
80.

Cicero says all men will be blessed,
170; commends contemplative
wisdom, 197.

Creation, all, a manifestation of God,

58.

Daniel, the appearance of God to,

INDEX OF SUBIECTS.

Death, the, of soul and body, and
the bearing of Christ's one death
on, 71-73.

Degradation, the lowest, reached by

degrees, 160.

Demons, miracles wrought by, to be

spurned, 76.

Devil, the, the mediator of death,
76; how he leads his own to despise the death of Christ, 79;
overcome not by might but by
righteousness, 176-178.

Dove, the, Holy Spirit manifested by

a, 42, 224.

Essence, and substance, 21 (note),

92, 109-114, 139 (notfi).

Eunomius, his error in saying that
the Son of God is the son not of
His nature but of His will, 220.

Faith, a thing of the heart, 168;

necessary to blessedness, 171.

Father, the, not alone immortal, 44,
etc. ; what is said of, and the
Son together; and what not, 98,
etc.; is Himself power and wisetc.; and the Son,
dom, 104,
together one wisdom as one essence, 107, etc.

of

91;

itself,

poreal changes, 57; uses all His
cieatures as He will for His
glory, 58; the essence of, never
appeared, 65; the appearances
of, wrought by angels, 66; the
knowledge of, to be sought from
Himself, 69, etc.; not corporeal
nor changeable, 87;
the only
unchangeable essence, 88; what
is spoken of according to essence, is spoken of each person
severally, and together of the
those
Trinity
things which belong absolutely
to His essence, 92; what is said
of, in respect to time, said relatively, 95; how a
substance,
simple and manifold, 100; is a
101;
Trinity,
whether one person, or the three
together, called the one God,
102; substance is spoken of improperly, essence properly, in;
nothing greater in, than one
person, 116; corporeal conceptions of, to be rejected, 116; to
be known by faith, that He may
be loved, 118, etc.; worship of ,
is the love of Him, 163; what
His wrath is, 179.

but not triple,

Generation,

eternal,

225,

Head, mystical meaning of covering

(notes).

the, 159.

Glass, seeing through darkly, ex-

Hilary quoted respecting the persons

plained, 206, etc.

God, how the Scriptures speak of,
iS; why immortality ascribed
exclusively to, 18; the substance
of, how to know, 18; uses of
the term, 22 (note); whether
God the Trinity, or one person
of the Trinity, appeared to the
fathers, 45; how He spake to
Adam, 45; His appearance to
Abraham, 46, etc., 66, etc.; to
Lot, 47; to Moses, 48; in the
pillar ot cloud and fire, 49; at
Sinai, 50; to Daniel, 53; the will
of, the higher cause of all cor-

of the Trinity, 102, 201.

Holy Spirit, the, is very God, 23;
why so called, 93; relation to
the Son, 26; relation to the Son
and the Father, 39; the sending
of, 40, 85; not incarnate in the
dove. 42; the sensible showing
of, 85; the Father and the Son
the
94;
whether He was a gift before as
well as after He was given, 95;
equal to the Father and the Son
in all things, 100, etc. ; is together with the Father and the
Holy Spirit one wisdom, 107;

only beginning

of,

ON THE TRINITY: INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

is properly called in Scripture
by the name of love, 215, etc.;
is God, and also the gift of God,
217; of the procession of the,
224, etc.

Hypostasis and person, how these
words came into use in reference
to the Trinity, the former among
the Greeks, the latter among
the Latins, 23 (note), 92, 109,
etc.

Image of God, how man is the,
113; turning aside from,
160;
to be found in the rational soul,
185; how formed anew in man,
195.

Image of the beast in man, 161.
Imagination, the power of, 153.
Incarnation of the Word, benefits of,

174, 179.

Infants, minds of, 186.
Infinite, the, not the All, 101 (note).

Kingdom, the, delivered by Christ
to the Father. 26, etc., 28.
Knowledge of God, the, to be sought

from God, 69, etc.

Law, the, given by angels, 67.
Love, the true, by which we arrive
at a knowledge of the Trinity,
122.

Magic, great miracles wrought by,
60; how far it extends, 61.
Man. is both after the image of God
and is the image of God, 113;
rescued not by might but by
righteousness, 176.

Mediatorship of Christ, the cessation

of, 28 (note), 29.

Merits, our, are the gifts of God,

174.

Mind, the Trinity in,

125; knows
itself not in part but in whole,
137; its opinion of itself deceitful, 138; what it knows of itself, 140, etc.; an image of the
Trinity, 143; in what part of,
alone, is the Trinity the image
of God, 156; how it thinks of
itself, 187 ; loves God in rightly
192, etc.; infirmloving itself,
ity of the human, 223.

Miracles, why not usual works, 59;
diversity lone makes, 60; great,
wrought by magicians, 60; how
angels work,
63;
be
wrought
spurned, 76.

signs,
by demons, to

Moses, in what manner he saw God,
50; his rod changed into a serpent, its sign, 64.

61;

Nature, what it teaches us regard-

ing God, 202.

Numbers, the senary and ternary, 73,

etc., 74. etc.

Perfection, how God brings us to,

70.

Persons, the three, in the Godhead,
23 (note), 92; and Hypostases,

how the word came into use,
etc., 109-111;
Scriptures
never formally speak of three,
in one God, no.

the

Pharaoh, the miracles wrought by

the wise men of, 59.

Philosophers, not to be consulted respecting the resurrection,
80;
their blessedness ridiculous, 171;
origin of the name, 183.

Plato's doctrine of reminiscences,

164.

Procession, 225, 226 (notes).
Pythagoras, story regarding, 164.

Resurrection of Christ, the, the

faith of, saves, 51.

Righteous man, how the man not
yet righteous can know the, 120.

Sabellianism, 7, 92.
Scripture, Holy, the adaptation of,
even to the simplest, 18; has
more meanings than one, 36 ; a
double rule for understanding
the various modes of speech
used in, respecting the Son, 37.

33,

30,

lays

Sheol, 192.
Son of man, the, 33 (note).
Son of God, the, is very God, 21 ;
in what respects less than the
Father, 24, etc.; the subjection
of, to the Father, and delivers
up the kingdom to the lather,
24-2S ; relation of, to the Holy
Spirit, 26 ; how equal to, and
how less than the Father, 29 ;
how said not to know the day
etc. ; how
nor the hour,
to sit on His right hand and
His left, not His to give. 31 ;
the \\vo natures of,
a
foundation for opposite things
being said of, 33,
etc. ; judgment committed to,
etc.;
double rule for understanding
the phraseology of
Scripture
respecting, 37, etc. ; glorification
of, by the Father, 39 ; the sending of, 40 ; object of the incarnation of, 81 ; how sent and
proclaimed beforehand, 82 ; how
in His incarnation He was made
less without detriment to His
equality with the Father, 83 ;
what the sending of, meins, 84;
the wisdom and power of the
Father, 97 ; what is said of the
Father and, together, and what
not, 98 ; and the Father, how
one, 99 ; and the Father, one
wisdom as one essence,
107,
etc.; why He is chiefly intimated
by the word wisdom, when both
the Father and the Holy Spirit
are wisdom, 107 ; the love by
which we arrive at a knowledge
of, 122 ; how we are justified
by His blood, 175; why He took
upon Himself man from the race
of Adam and from a virgin, 180;
we are to be like Him, 196.
Soul, opinions of philosophers re-

its

substance,

garding
139 ;
whence comes its error concerning itself, 140 ; its power over
the body, 148.

Species, mental, produced by species

in succession, 153.

Spirit, the Holy, why so called, 93

(note).

Spirit, a word of many meanings,

Spiration, 93, 225, 226 (notes).
Subordination, 4, 38-40.

Ternary number, the, in Christ's

resurrection, 118, 119.
Theophanies, the, 43-54, 65-6S.
Trinity, for what purpose the dissertation on, was written, 17 ; the
Catholic faith respecting, 20 ;
the difficulties concerning, 21,
etc. ; all three sometimes underin one person, 27, 28
stood
(note); the entire invisible, 43 ;
whether the, spoke at Sinai, or
some one person specially, 49,
53 ; the co-eternity of, S5, 86 ;
the three persons of, and one
essence, 92, 93 ; the word "be-
" how spoken relatively
ginning
in regard to the Trinity, 94 ;
God is a, but not triple, 101 ;
whether one, or the three persons togethtr, is called the one
God, 102 ; Hilary quoted respecting the persons of the, 102;
whether each person of, is of itself wisdom, 104, etc. ; the use
of the words hypostasis and
)-erson, in relation to, 109-114 ;
why we do not speak of one
person and three essences in,
in; how the, may be loved
though unknown, 119; difficult
to be demonstrated by natural
reason, 202, etc. ; disparity between the trinity which is in
man and that which is in God,
in, 129, 133, 143 (notes), 222.
Trinity in man, three things in love,
as it were a trace of, 124 ; a
kind of, exists in mind, knowledge, and love, 125 ; another,
in memory, understanding, and
will, 134-143 ; a trace of, in the
outer man, 144, etc.; man made
after the image of the, 5, 157,
etc., 190.

Unity of the Father and the Son,
99 ; numerical not specific, 20
(note).

Vision, how produced, 145.

Word, the Incarnate, dispels our
darkness, 70 ; man apt for the
perception of truth through, 71;
incarnation
for
of,
freeing man from mortality, 174;
knowledge and wisdom of 180,
etc.; of God, and word of man,
209; of God, equal to the Father,
213.

suitable

ON THE TRINITY

/

INDEX OF TEXTS.

ON THE TRINITY: INDEX OF TEXTS.

PAGE

ON THE TRINITY: INDEX OF TEXTS.

PAGE

FIFTEEN

DOCTRINAL AND MORAL TREATISES.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

All things gathered together in one in

Christ, expounded, 257.
Allegory, explanation by, 349;

in-

350, 351;

stances of,
in real
events, 460, 470, 492; no lie if
the thing figured is true, 460 ;
Jacob's deceit was, 491; use of,
492.

Almighty, what He Who is, cannot

do, 569.

Alms, means of, not to be gotten by
sin, 488; a means of pardon,
496; given to Christ, 519; to be
done for a heavenly reward,
520.

Almsgiving, will not, without change
of life, atone for sin, 260; the
greatest, is forgiveness of debtors and love of enemies, 261;
the first, is to pity our own souls,
262; advanced by Christianity,

Altar, prayers at the, 434; ministers
of, Christian Priests, 515; prayers offered at the, 540.
Alternatives, 464, 466, 468, 469.
Ambrose, St., Bp. of Milan, heard by

St. Augustin, 356.
Analogy, explanation by, 349.
Ananias, appearance to St. Paul, 550.
Angel, Temple may not be built to

an, 374.

Angels, the fallen, God's judgment
on, 246; who fell not, 246; nothing certainly known of their sobodies
cial organization, 256;
assumed by, 256; what Christ
did for man was in a sense done
for them, 257; may communicate the events of time to the
dead, 359; cannot sin, 385; entertained by Lot, 463; ministry of, to Lazarus, 541 ; free of
both worlds, 548.

Anger, darkens the mind's eye, 490.
Angry, in what sense God is said to

be, 248, 527.

Anima, animus, mens, 475.

Anna, and Susanna, 403, 413; more
blessed than Ruth, 443; unless
Ruth knew what was to follow:
probably knew Christ should be
born of a Virgin, 444; her long
and early widowhood, 447; her
recognized Christ
piety, 448;
with His Virgin Mother, 444,
448.

Antiphrasis, is no lie, 491; instances

of, 492.

Antiquity, testimony of, to Religion,

Apocrypha, books of, 548; quoted,

540.

the

350;

Apostle, God spoke in him, 521.
Apostles, common men chosen to
show Christ's power, 342; prophesied of, 343; use the fourfold exposition, 349, 350; Acts
of, rejected by Manichees, inteaching
consistently,
handed down from,
ef356;
fect of their labors on nations,
364; whether bound to
live
of
522;
Gospel,
Acts of the, a place to find examples, 476, 493; example of,
no obligation not to labor, 505
50S; maintained by holy women
and those among whom they
preached, 506-508; words not to
be derided, 50S; divided their
provinces, 516; had power not
to work: to speak with authority, 522; once of the world, 532;
chosen not just but justified:
else had first chosen Christ, 533.
Apostolic chair, succession from, and

471,

note, 365.

Apparitions,

in dreams,
544-550;
of the dead without their consciousness, 545 sq. ; as of the
living, unconscious, 545,
546,
549; images only, not of souls
themselves, 545; produced by
the ministry of Angels, 545, 547,
549; asking for burial, 545; use

Abortive conceptions, question

regarding resurrection of, 265.

Abraham, Christ the promised Seed
OI > 339i 34: His example cited,
408, 409, 412; actions of, figurative, 470; told no lie, 491;
knew the state of
the world
from Lazarus, 548.

Abstinence, practice of, a benefit due
to authority, 364; easier than
moderation, 405, 410; from food,
etc. for ill ends, 528.

Academics, St. Augustin once in-

clined to, 356.

Action, unless rightly done, sin, 360;
whether implied in permission,
464, 475; always conceived in
the heart, 487; indifferent, takes
its character from motive, 488;
some unconsciously prophetic,
495 ; character determined by
the intention, 519.

Adam, sin of, the results to his posterity, 246, 254; involved many
kinds of sin, 252; Job, how unlike, 530.

Address, different methods of,

to
different classes of hearers, catechumens, 298, sq.

Admonition, desired by St. Augus-

tin, 522.

Adultery, what ? 400, 402; compared
with fornication, 403;
evil,
while even second marriage is
good, 443; might be justified on
same grounds as lying, 487, 488;
some guilty of, fear perjury, 500;
penance done for, 575.

is

^Esop, Fables of, 494.
^Etiology, explanation by, 349.
Age, qualifies to give counsel, 451;

flower of, brief, 452.

Aged, marriage, 400.
Ages, seven; the last to be an age of

rest, 301.

Ages of the world, the six, 307.
Alexis, of Plato and Virgil thought

allegorical, 355.

of: pointing- out places of burial,
545; foretelling things future,
545; not to be denied, 545; instances of, in sleep, 545; pointing- out where things should be
found, 545; seen when awake,
546; in trances, 546; doctrines
taught by: of Samuel to Saul,
548; of St. Felix, 548; of saints
whether themselves or angelic
appearances, doubtful, 549, 550;
of John the Monk, 549; of Ananias to St. Paul: John would
have solved St. Augustin's difficulties, 550.

Aptus, 464.
Archimedes, not to be explained by

Epicurus, 353.

Arena, matches of the, 372.
Aristotle, not to be explained by an

enemy, 353.

Army, of the virtues and vices, 382.
Artisans, singing at work, 514.
Ascension of Christ foretold, 341;
witnessed by Apostles, 342; of
our Lord, 373, 374, 375; how
our Lord prefigured, 494.
Ashes, of martyrs, thrown into the
Rhone, 543; not scattered, 544.

"

353;

34S;

Testament,

Asper, a grammarian, 355.
Atoms, soul not formed of, 352.
Augustin, St., when ordained Priest
or Presbyter, 347; his early love
of truth, 347, 349; his prayer
for Honoratus, 348; how led into Manicheism (nine years in it),
tempted by discussions,
348;
Hearer:" a worldling:
only a
contrast
his eyes
later,
weak from past delusions, 349;
his book ">e Spiritu et Literal
note, 351; his belief about the
Old
young
when led into error, 353; his
way of search for true religion,
35. 357! disappointed in Faustus, 356; tended at times toward Academics: his prayers for
help: becomes Catechumen, 356;
his purpose of writing further to
Honoratus, 365; expresses doubt
on a point connected with marriage, 407; not at variance with
Council of Carthage, 441; his
many engagements, 441;
his
books on marriage and virginwrote against
ity, 448,
works of,
on
Faustus,
Divine grace, 450; his works on
Lying of different dates, 457;
uses a homely style in practical
his avocations,
matters,
481; life laborious, (bodily infirmity), 521, 522; did what he exhorted others to do, 522; found
a Bishop's life more laborious
than a Monk's, 521; not submitting to man's judgment, 522;
desired to be admonished, 523;
never completed his Retractations, 527; visited nightly by his
mother while she lived, 547; not
after her death, 547.

454;
448;

458;

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

Aurelius, Bp. of Carthage, desired
St. Augustin to write on the
work of Monks, 503, 522.
Authority, necessity of in religion, 356,
357; source of what we believe,
359; lovers of truth believe, 360;
for doctrine same as for belief in
Christ, 362; some probable a
priori, 363; shown by miracles
on multitudes, 364; brought to
bear on life through numbers,
364; seat of, in Catholic Church,
365; of doctrine to be strictly
guarded, 466, 4S3, 4S4.

Babylon,

represents

the

world,

496.

to life,

Ball, pleasure of playing with, 453.
Baptism, indicates our death to sin
and resurrection
252,
254; open to all, both infants
and adults, 252; "Come, ye
blessed of My Father, receive
the kingdom," 374; makes men
temples of the Holy Spirit, 374;
remission of all things in, 374;
received, to be guarded by good
life: washes once for all: why
not repeated, 375; of heretics,
"a form of Godliness:" is of
the Church only: remits original sin, 386; puts away all sin,
remits
of children, 419;
408;
from all sin, 435; supposed case
of lying in order to give, 499;
necessary for admission to Paradise, 546.

Baptized persons pray, 435.
Barnabas, simulation of corrected,

46i, 493-

Barrenness, does not make divorce

lawful, 402, 406, 412.

Beauty, inward is what Christ loves,
451; false, lawful to none, 451;
of
spiritual, decays not, 451;
truth, 498.

Bees, have progeny without inter-

course, 399.
Begging Monks, 515.
Beginners, lying,, well meant, excused in, 460, 473, 495, 497.
Beginning, The Father is, of Christ:
The Son also the, 328; Godhead
has none, 372.

_

Belief, See Faith; implies objects
unseen, 337, 338; of historical
facts, 359; different from opinion, 458; needed before understanding, 463; of a lie, not always hurtful, 466, 483; of false
doctrine, a real misery, 483; in
the heart, not enough without
confession, 486.

Bene-dictio, better than bona dictio,

292.

Betrayal, sin cf, 467, 468, 496; by

silence, 468, 469.
Bill of divorcement, 402.
Birds, their habits alluded to, 409;
who? 436; image of the proud,
516; not to be imitated in all
points, 517,518 sq.; in cages,5i7;
not imitated in picking food or

flies, 518; caught by want of
water, 348.

Bishop, empowered to relax certain
adexcommunications,
dresses another Bishop's flock
by permission, 521, 524.

441;

Bishops, Catholic, overthrew Priscillianism, 485; called to act in
secular affairs, 517; by Apostolic
injunction, to be obeyed, 522;
succession of from Aposties, 565.
laborious, 521, 522;
recent increase of occupation,
521.

Bishop's life,

Blasphemy, worst in one who knows
it such, 444, 495, 499; none can
be allowable, 499; suggested by
Job's wife, 500.

Blessedness, called Right Hand of

God, 373.

Blessing, put for cursing, 49T.
Blood, of Christ, given the pardoned

to drink, 374.

Bodies of the married are holy, 405.
Body, the death of, man's peculiar
246; resurrection
punishment,
of, 264, 332, 375, 540, 541; in
the resurrection, spiritual, 266;
material of, never perishes, 265,
529; a creature of God, 374; Temple of the Holy Spirit, 374, 444,
474, not our object in religion,
354; its peaceful members made
the soul's pattern, 389; may be
holy in marriage, 443, 444;
of
" members of
all the Faithful is
Christ," 444; soul to be preferred
to, 463, purity of, depends on
Priscillianists
soul,
erred concerning, 484; real good
of, in the life to come, 528, 529; to
be restored entire, 529; patience
of Martyrs concerning their, 530;
motions of, affect the mind, 542;
an interest felt in, by us while
living, 543, 544; overcome by
the Martyrs, 544; hurt only by
the pain of dying, 543, 544;
faith in resurrection of, confirmed by care for the dead, 541,
550; obtained by the spirit, 543;
not affected by the treatment of
the corpse, 540, 541, 543, 544.

499;

463,

Boyhood, good and bad reasons for
preferring, 352; rashness incident to, 353.

Bread, daily breaking of, at Troas,

the Eucharist, 514.
Bridegroom, Christ the, 343.
Burial, in the memorials of Martyrs,
539. 542, 549- 55o; place provided for, 539; want of, does
not affect the dead, 540, 541,
543. 544. 545; a grief to the
external rites of,
living,
for the comfort of the living,
540, 544, 550; no benefit to the
care for, a
wicked, 540,
544;
duty, 541; why? 544; by the
Patriarchs and their
children,
significative, 541 ; com541 ;
mended in Scripture, 541; rewarded, 541 ; want of, and place

544;

M> '

INDEX oi 1

' SUBJECTS.

of, floes not hinder the res
(ion, 540, 541; orrest, 541, 543,
545; place of, a benefit only as
543,
occasioning prayer,
to slight, 11 religious, 545;
550;
plai e of, naturally, a subj eel of
Interest, 543, 544; loss of, how
a punishment ; how a kindness,
Mb

542,

Business distrai 1 ing the mind unsuit-

able i" preachers, .(05.

Butler, Analogy,

i

< Iallino, each to remain in, 509,
( Jandidianus, b< ar< 1

St.

oi

t iii's book on "Care lor
Dead," ssi.

Augusthe

( 'anii. Ii is, prophi 1 v "I ( 'lirisl and the

< Ihurch, 3 1 3,

< Jare for the I lead, book on, ( ict ision

oi writing, 539, 551.

1 '.11 in" i< .1 temporal things fori ridden,

'"'

Caring not, I >y some limited to spir-

ilnal wants, 503

<

.11 nally minded like grass, 516,

< larthage,

foui 1 h

441;
introdut 1 ion ol monastei i< s into,

of,

< louncil

.1 isn >doi ii'., Iiis book, /)< Jusl. /'/.'.

Lit., 347.

;

2i 1

< '.it 1

Catechetical

282 sq. ;
instruction,
way to comment e it,
188 sq, ; oi
the edut ated,2gosq. ; ol gramma1 ians and pi
< ifessional speakers,
1 emedies 1 >i

1 auses and
1. diousness in, 292 sq.
1 humen, examination of, as to
his views, 288; specimen ol ad
dress to (1) one 01 worthy views,
(2) one o|
.11111 .. 299; fl 'I
111.1I admission of, 3] 2; St, An
mi is one, 356; leai ni id
gustin 1
and 1 epeated the I
still tinder sins, 375; having a
second wife, CESC of, 408.
< 'atholie, title of, whose by consent ,

'i eed,

fa] i(

< 'ataline, his powers oi endurance,

528.

< lato, cited, 408,
( '.ni

nl 1

il to man's happiness
to know the, ol good and evil,
242; tlie secondary, oi
evil, at e
ance and lust, 2 p,, 26 1; of

ig

( Ynllll ion,

common things obscui 1
1 e.idy
I. iilli of,
Id 3; ease ol the, 42K.

pi.ii ied,

( 'haleedon, < 'onneil ol , eXCl minninicates (Church) widows who marry, 441

a point ol char

1 'harat lei ,

1 .11 e Of,

il v. 453-

Characterem, (of Baptism), 37?.

harily, the ( 'lunch abides in, 374;
>; shown
oi the married state, \<
in communicating any good to
in keeping good
others, 441;
repute, 453; unity <>i the < )hur< h
belongs to, S35 ;
free born,
h ise, simile oi ,

;i mark ol

157.

1 hi

Chastity, advanced by Christianity,

|

/,

1 inence, better 1 han
364 ; oi
man I. d 1 h.r.l II \ ,
; weildrd,
is a good, 443, 445; wedded, is
< lod's
gift, 450; complete (in1 Ua o, ol vii ginfl and widows,
450; spiritual delights in, 452;
io he in , iken to save a
not
liie,
463; or a soul, 499; not lost by
of mind
463, 47s;
violence,
what, 47s, 499; ol mind t<> be
preset ved for detect ing heres) ,
oi the truth, 498, 499;
4S7; is
1 .innoi teach adultei y, 199,
Children, probably involved in the
guilt, not only of onr first pa1 inn own imrents, Imt also oi
know
mediate
their parents I 'v faith, 338, |6i <;
exorcised, 369 ;
530; why baptized, 419;
I ho i'
Mi- .

the
I toly, Sonj; of, 43S; hay-
,1 reason foi not mai rying
145; spiritual, may set ve
instead
natural, 445, 450;
vii ginit v i if, a compensa tion t'>
"l,
parents,
1 w 01 I hy,
lawful,
a
hi inging up
| r 8; spir-

445; having,
merit,
447,
well, is ol good will,
itual fruits in place of, 451, i
begetl ing,
lawfully

blessing, not

parents,

desire

448;

252;

445,

4 t,H;

loss

pi ii

hut

mm,

not

(1 f,

ol

t;

>

i

foi God a
a

p. IWW ol

il ..I W01 I..

!

;

pan .ii over,

(.90,

t Ihildhood, why a grown man m iy

prefer,

In i' i,

186;

ihi iwt

325;

l .oil's

r;i ; being the
bit ih oi . 2 pi,
at the same
only Son ol God, 1
ice of God ill
time man,
; made
I lis birth,
in
for us, 25] ; not regenerated in
fohn, 25 ); took
ihe baptism ol
Mil and all oilier
away 01 igin.ll
sins, 253; His life typical ol the
com
( 'In i-.i i.iii life, 254; 1
ing of, 255; advent ol, why I. >re
l..\ e io
told,
us, 2S7; genet at ion of, as Son
< rod and the Word, 322 stp ;
ol
neithet made by nor less than
r, 32 t; born I in ough
the I'aih.
( rh0St of the \ il (fin
the I loly
as God, has
no
Mary, 32s;
Burial
mother,
Passion,
\s
and Resurrection of, 326;
}26; Session at the
Cension Of,
Father's Right I land .md ( !om
ing to Judgment, 326, 3 2 7! '
latlOn ol , as Sou to the I'.il In a ,
32S s.p ; the Seed of Abraham,
339;
so honoi i-.i though .1 milled, a
to by
miracle, 340;
Jewish pi . iphecy, 342; suffet ingi
ol, contrasted wit h His Victory,
1 !_; name of, honored even DJ
the Bridegro >m,
here) ics,
>,; used the lour ways of exI .aw

nations blessed

position, 349, 350; \ eil
done away by,
teaching
handed down from, 356; even
her. I icS bid us belieye in,
on whose test inn my we do SO,

witm ss< d

351;

in,

;d I

ol

..

;

|

'

,

1 i'

in

sin,

( .od,

from

1 In- fullness ol

I le teaches oi

to martyrs;

1 eligion by t he
362; planted 1
faith, 363; Death and
way oi
Resurrection of, shut out bar,
3(13; various miracles of,
their
use, 364; effects of I lis [near
nation and Teaching, 305; ( rod
in true Man, 3(14; withoul
lesions
3di), 370;
w hat
11 imi elf,
371; His lowly Birth,
Passion
and I )ealh : born perfect as Son
171, 372; born oi the
oi
Vm "in in
1 ime:
God Mid Man: death of. a patResurrection
tern
"1 . 372, 375; sets a prize as in
the arena, 372; .arose to die no
mi n e,
172; example of, exct eds
I is Suffi 1 ingS and
Job's, 373;
shall come to
Ascension, 373;
judge tin- quick and Ihe dead:
I he ( Inn ,li abides in, as branch
es in a Vine, 374; the Knot: sin of
I. illing, m >t unpardonable: mem
hers ol, shall follow Him, 37s;
to
..in
the

pattern:
anil
slowness, 38OJ
Church, their union, 388;
hernotion concerning, 389;
etical
came in
llesh, 3S1); took a
human body and < human soul,
1 tally hungered and
(91 .,
thil sled : saw lit not Io absla in
like the I'.apt isl , .|lo; the object
ol love, 4 (7, 452; taught humil -
ity when near 1
1 is Passion, 429;
Himseli the model for virgins,
429, 431 ; the object
of virgin
love, 437; crucified, to b( gazed
mi with the inward eyes, 437!
may not be loved a lil 1

condescends

real

j6 1;

1.

|

,

,

\

|

.

;

Ii ives .1

lip 11
can ni.il..

. Ognized by Anna as .1 child,
. on. . ived in chastil y,
init y Iruil lid, ,| .((>;
\ u
ward I .cam y, 4 |i>; a
I usband, in the Spirit, to the
mai ried as to the < lunch, 446;
how n to be the wot 1 hiest obji ct
ol li .\ e, 452; tlitl and command
.d all foi our salvation, 462; no
lie io be told about, 466; patience
yet did not lit
if, p.a feet,
. rail) mi n the oi her 1 heek, 470;
of, tli.it seem false, are
. in -.
mi .it i\ e, 476, 494; denied be

r; 1

1;

.

Rock,"

back
"

show of

Himself a

fore men in pretending hei 1
485; few d< ny sim erely,
486;
some truth,
491;
kept
"
called a
Lion," 49] ;
under ..in sins figured by Jacob,
Prophet, 194;
492;
assumed
ignorance,
1 is feigning, 49 [', exhorts
patience, 521);

494; 1
Martyrs to
be. nance
chose and justified
lies, 533;
old Saint'., 533; made pooi foi
our sakes,
to
535;
be made rich, 531).

529;
the Apos
tin-

of, saved

Judas,

poor

faith

of,

of,

foi

tO

Christianity, derided as credulous,
is not without evidence,
337;
339; testimony of mankind to,

355; profession of, its effect on
the masses, 364, 365.

Christians, nominal, described, 311;
more numerous than Jews and
Pagans united [in the Roman
empire,] 356; they are not, who
forbid faith before reason, 362,
363; misrepresented, 365; work
in one
and prize of, 372;
commonwealth, 519; state of, as
longing for inheritance, 535-

all

of

by

342;

in
to a Vine, 309;

Christian life, four stages of, 275.
Church, is the Temple of God, 255;
condition of,
in
heaven, 256;
redeemed by blood, 257; history
of, in four stag/fs, 275;
its
the
likeness
Catholic, 331; quotes herself as
fulfillment
prophecy, 339,
341; called the "Queen," 339;
visible as such, 340; is herself
an evidence,
witness of
341;
past and future,
spread
abroad by suffering, 342; Pride
of Christ, 343; milk from the
teats of, 348; with what error
Manichees, 353,
charged
Catholic, prima facie
357 ;
her
claims of, 355;
teaching
from Christ and the Apostles,
356; witnessed toby people and
nations, 362; testimony of mankind leads us to, 364; doctrines
of, concerning Cod, 365; mother of God's children, 361); named
in the Creed after
the Holy
Trinity: victorious over heresies, abides in charity, 374; Body
of Christ: lie the Head, 375;
an heretical notion concerning,
389; Christ and the, 388, 389;
not yet perfect, 390; made subject to Christ, 390; her daily
cry, 391; the, a Mother and a
Virgin, 417, 418; a holy Virgin,
420; sometimes called the kingdom of heaven, 425; the, a virgin and spouse of Christ, 446,
451,452; includes the departed,
454; in a household, 454; authority of its practices though
not in Scripture, 541; disunion
with, breaks charity, 535.

Churches, seats

in (apparently an
exception), 296; of withdrawing
from, during service; by whom
filled on
Festival
days, 311;

building of, 488.

is

not

a seal:

Circumcision,

Cicero, his rule for argument, 348;
studied because acknowledged
by all, 354; conspirators put to
death by, 359; lectured on, 545.
for
Chiistians, 351; made uncircumcision by leaving the law, 461,
462; for whom lawful, 461.
City of God, St. Augustin on, 317.
Clean, who are, in God's sight, 465.
Clergy, not bound to labor, 506-508;
may claim maintenance from
their people, 506, 507; all, as
well as Apostles, 508, 510; employments fitted for, 51 1; receive

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

support, not as mendicants, that
they may escape distracting occupations, 512; injunctions to
support, 511, 513; for the good
of the people, 513; have same
to maintenance as
the
right
Apostles, 515, 516: ministers of
His Sacrament unto righteousness, 519, 520; not to be careful, 521.

Coccilius,

not

studied

instead

of

Cicero, 354.

Coeval, image of the Coeternal, 371.
Colors, divers, signify what, 339.
Command, of the

Lord, why St.

Paul had none, 421.

Commands, clear, to be obeyed at
explained

46c), 470;

risks,

all

by examples, 470, 471.

Community of goods at Jerusalem,
512; of goods, benefit of, 520;
all Chrisl urns one, 519.

Compacts, sexual, how far sinful,

400, 401.

Competentes, a step beyond other

Catechumens, 547.

Concealment, of many things law-

ful, 352; not itself lying, 491.

Conceptaculum, 471.
Concubinage, for

offspring's sake
unlawful, 406; was lawful among
the ancient fathers, 406; lawfulness of a certain kind of, doubtful, 407.

Concupiscence, gradually weakened,
524; patience not to minister to,
528.

Confession, of sins, 436; medicine
of, 473; remedy for lies, 500.

'

Confinis, 351.
Conflict, of virtues and vices in the
soul, 381; of the Christian, 382,
387.

Conscience, moves all good minds to
seek God, 363; good, excuses
not carelessness of repute, 453;
solace of, in evil
report, 453;
sinning against, 484.

Consent, in thought constitutes sin,
380, 381; yielded and withheld,
387, 388; withheld is mortification of the members, 392; what
constitutes, 464, 465; when it
justifies doing a man wrong,
466; chastity not lost without,
Consentius,

aboul
Priscillianists, 457, 482; praise
of, 481; advised to write against
Priscillianism, 486, 492.

inquiries

his

:

Constancy, in the faith of the Resur-

rection, 310 sq.

Continence, praised by Epicurus,
352; door of,
380, 381; why
mentioned last by St. Paul, 383;
God's gift, 379, 391; the gift of
God's Spirit, 384;
difficult to
treat of, 379; marriage, glorious,
not to be attained in our own
strength, 383; forbears excuses,
384; sought of God by David,
384;
required against all
sin,
385; peace the prize of, 386; a

392;

the consent of
must watch

healthful chastisement of our
nature, 390; falsely claimed, considered, 39r; its office, 391; is
the
refusing
the
mind,
thoughts, 393; glory of perseverance in, due to the Lord, 393;
the greater of two goods, 402,
411, 423; and marriage,
two
goods, 403; compared to fasting,
I05; how, is not on n level with
the marriage of the old Lathers,
408, 409; a virtue of the soul,
409; in habit and act, 410; praise
of the slate of, 411; the root-virtue, 412; profitable for the life i,,
come, 420, 421, 422, 424; when
unwillingly professed, 429; of
widows: its rank, 434; widowed,
better
chastity,
443; best for those who "
receive
445;
strength
of,
measures merit of widowhood,
447; of heretics not to persuade
is God's gift, 449;
us, 448; all
though willing, 450; term properly used of virgins and widows,
450; universal, supposed danger
of, 460.

nuptial

than

it,

"

Contraries, instances of, 483.
Conversion, not to be brought about

by lying, 47<\ 484.
Cornutus, a grammarian, 355.
Corruption, all things not perfectly

good are liable to, 240.

Councils, weight of, against heretics,

Creation, of man, what is to be believed concerning the, 302; all
good, the whole better than ea< h
part, 444.

Creature, visible and invisible, 369;
gives pleasure by approach to
that which it loves, 534.

Credulousness,
faith, 357.

distinguished

from

Creed, the Apostles', 23S; current in
4th century, 318; expounded, 321
sq.; the rule of faith or symbol,
369 sq.; not written, repeated by
I atechumens: scattered through
the
Scripture,
Son Almighty, yet implies this
37"-

calls not

369;

Crimes, penance for, 575.
Crispina, mentioned, 434.
Critics, destructive, 448.
( ross, why Christ chose, 372.
Crown, for those who strive, 372; is
not for the impatient, 531.

Curia, of Tullium, 546.
Curiosity, what it means, 356, 357;
idle, danger of, in reading, "
forbidden, 573.
Curma, vision of, 546.
Custom, binding power of, 263 sq.
Cynegius, buried in the Basilica of

St. Felix, 539.

Cyprian, St., on the unity of the

( hurch, note, 365.

DANGER, seeking, tempting God,

520.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

Daniel and St. Paul, 423.
Darius Comes, Ep. to, 337;

St.

Augustin's letter to, 527.
David, a great saint, 384; spake
rashly, 393; rash oath of, no
example, 490; his feigned madpatient forbearance
ness, 491;
of, 529.

Day, the first and the Lord's, 515.
Dead, souls of the, benefitted by
the sacraments and alms of living friends, 272, 550; care for,
539-551; pagan opinions
of,
539-544, 545: at rest, 541, 543,
544, 545; sacrifice for, in Maccabees, 540; not affected by the
condition of the body, 540 sq. ;
unconscious when seen in visions, 545 sq.; do not know what
happens in this world, 547-549;
or their happiness would be afexcept in special
fected, 547;
cases, 548; perhaps by information from other spirits, 548;
from Angels, 548; by dispensation of the Holy Spirit: interpose not ordinarily, 547 sq. ,
not as they please, 549;
549;
sometimes, 548, 549; a blessing
thereby, 547; by extraordinary
Divine permission, 549; we care
and pray for, without knowing
their state, 548, 549.

Death, of the body is man's peculiar
punishment, 246; the first and
the second, consequences of,
267; eternal, 273; cannot injure
the regenerate, 275; question of
lying to prevent, 497, 498; sin
worse
wrongly
thought of as worst evil, 474;
for mercy and truth, a gain, 497;
sin the sting of, 500.

than,

462;

Deceit, purpose of, implied in lying,
458; may be by means of truth,
458; safest to avoid, entirely;
459; turns on itself, 495.
Defamation, question of, to prevent
con-

especially

crime,
466;
demned, 472.

Degrees of glory in Heaven, 426,

.435Deifiea, 532.
Demetrias, consecrated a Nun, 441;
her choice of virginity praised,
and note, 443, 448; became like
Virgin Mary was, 449; before
her mother in the kingdom, 451;
care
grandmother
of,
needed for, being young, and a
book recommended, 454.

451 ;

Demons, served, 391; confess themselves tormented by Martyrs,
550; by living Saints, 550.
Deogratias, the book on Catechising
the Uninstructed, written for,
282.

Deserter, mark of , not changed, 375.
Desires, earthly, lead to endurance,

528.

Devil, the, how he tempts, 314; the,

called a lion, 491.

Dictinius, reformed from his error,

483 ;
"

his

book

called

the

Pound," 484, 497, 500.
Diet, what St. Augustin used, 348.
Difficulties, to be borne with, 550.
Discourse, a, often pleasant to the
hearer and distasteful
to the
speaker, and probable explanation of the fact, 282 sq.

Disease, of nature, what, 386.
Dives, care for his brethren did not
imply that he knew of their
state, 548.

Divorce, why permitted the Jews,
349; rebuked by Christ, 402;
may not take place for barrenness, 402, 406, 412; does not
dissolve marriage, 402, 406, 412;
dissolves marriage in the world's
opinion, 402.

Doctrine, sound, a protection to good
purpose, 467; error of, in some
good men, 468;
authority of,
done away by lying, 464, 484;
some to be believed before unabout,
derstood,
worse than suffering anything,
466, 475; may be withheld, not
falsified, 466; teaching to sin to
be shunned, 496.

lying

463;

Donatists, suicides of, 530; not mar-

tyrdoms, 531.

Donatus, the grammarian, 355.
Dreams, See Apparitions, 545 sq.
Drunkenness, a fault in act or habit,

Duty, of marriage among the early
people of God, 403, 406, 408,
higher, supersede lower,
419;
474; cannot require a sin, 489.

Duumvir, 546.
Dwelling called "sitting," 373

Earth, creation of the, 369.
Ecclesiasticus, said to be written by
Solomon, not canonical, 548.
Economy, some, used toward aliens
without lying, 487; practiced by
our Lord, 491.

Educated, the, how to catechise,

290 sq.

Egypt, represents the world, 496.
Election, God's sovereign grace in,
268; Divine, is grace, 532, 533;
precedes faith, 533; examples of,
Eligere, 534.
Eloquence, few attain, yet masters

of, known, 354.

Emperor, heathen, grants pardon to
the courage of Eirmus, 468.
End of the Lord, our example, 373.
Endurance, not patience, 426;
of
sufferings for worldly objects,
of men for temporal ob527;
jects praised, 528; practised for
wicked ends, 528, 529; not patience, but an example, 528; in
surgical cases, worldly, 532, 534;
this is animal and devilish, 532;
like stupor of disease, 534; frantic, of misguided lust, 534.

Enemies, love of, 261.
Epicurus, sometimes praises conti-

about
his
nence, 352;
pleasure, 352; not fit to explain
Archimedes, 353.

error

Epistles, of St. Paul, said by Manichees to be interpolated, 350;
written for men's salvation, 470,.
477; truth clearly put forth in,
" De

Erasmus, his opinion of the

Patientia" 527.

Error, the nature of, 242; always an
evil, 243, 245; not always a sin,
244; easy to talk against, 348;
three kinds of, in reading, 351;
hurts not unless believed: charitable, no evil, 352; truth frees
from, falsehood involves in, 457,
458: of fact does little harm,
4S3-

Erucius, Orations of, 354.
Esau, birthright of, what it signified,

492.

Eternal life, the penny in the parable,

426.

Eternity, no space of, between the

Father and the Son, 371.

Eucharist, Blood of Christ given to

drink in, 374.

Eulogius, sees
dream, 545.

St. Augustin in a

Eunuchs, for the kingdom of Heaven, 424, monks preferred to be
as, 523.

Eusebius, Eccl. Hist, translated by

Ruffinus, 543.

Evanescere, 486.
Eve, Adam tempted by, 372; a help

to the tempter, 530.
Every, used for "any," 472.
Evidence, of prophecy, 339, 340 sq. ;

of the Jews, 342.

267,

Evil, in the universe is but the absence of good, 240; there can
be no evil where there is no
good, 241; good and evil are
exceptions to the rule that contrary attributes cannot be predicated of the same subject, 241;
permission of,
269, 385;
turned into good by God, 269,
385, 495; man created able to
choose good or evil,
choice of
evil impossible in the future life,
271; co-existence of, with good,
in the Church, and their final
separation, 303 sq. ; God not the
author of, 365; not self-existent,
38 5 ; M anichsean errors concerning, 385. 386, 388; uses of, 385,
386; lusts, what, 387; perfected*
hereafter, not a substance, 387,
38S; its nature explained, 464;
question of doing less, to avoid
wrongly
greater,
measured through earthly affections, 474; comparison of evils,
476; not to be done that good
may come, 488.

467;

465,

Evil fruit, good tree cannot "bring

forth, expounded, 241.

Examples (see Saints), how to be

judged of, 495.

Excommunication, needed for crimes,

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

373 ; may be incurred by a valid marriage, 441.

Excuses,

shunned by continence,

384 ; useless before God, 384.
Exhortation, needful to spur us to
action, 442, 449 ; use of, implies acting on others' will, 450.
Exorcism of children shows original

Famine, provided against, 471.
continuous
Fasting,

for

several
days, 364; compared to continence, 403; adds to the merit of
widowhood, 448 ; time of, how
to be used, 452; before receiving the Eucharist, 514.

Fatalism, its excuses blasphemous,

sin, 369.

leaves

friendship

Experience,

of
room for faith', 338.
Exsufflation of Children, 369.
Eye, inward and outward, 337.
Eyes, weak from darkness cannot
bear light, 361; fools use more
readily than tfyt mind,
363 ;
their honorable
place in the
body, 444; want of, supplied
by hearing, etc., 452.

Fables, are no lies, 494.
Fairness of Christ, the love of vir-

gins, 436, 437.

357,

360;

from

dead, 259 ;

a ground

Faith, is the gift of God, 247 ; without works, is
of
things unseen derided, 337; defended by analogy, 338 ; even
after trial, 338; if due to human
things, more so to divine, 339 ;
of
prophesied of,
faith, 343; on authority, blamed
by the Manichees, 348, 356 ;
distinguished
credulity,
still a fault,
357 ; question if
357, 358; necessary, for friend338; teacher
358,
ship,
uses, towards learner, 357 ; no
harm in, though reason might
be used, 358; distinguished from
knowledge and opinion,
359;
faulty only when rash or wrong,
facts, need359; of historical
parents known by,
ful,
359. 360; most needful of all in
religion, and why, 360, 361; before reason, no rashness, 362;
Christians who
they are not
Christ before
forbid faith
in
miracles lead to,
reason, 362;
363; prepares way to wisdom,
365; before understanding, 370;
is in order to eternal life, 374;
and works, 392 ; without putting down lust,
is dead, 393;
in wedlock, 401; conjugal, less
worthy than virginity, 442; of
445 ;
profession
whence named, 476; of Christ,
none justified
533;
Faith, Hope and Love, God to be
worshipped through, 238; their
mutual dependence,
239; distinction between faith and hope,
of
239 ; love
the three, 274.

to be kept,

the greatest

without,

is

Fall of man, through pride, 371.
Falling, danger of. 432.
Falsehood, not all,

is a lie, 458;

leads to error, 459.

Faltonia, Proba, mother of Juliana,

44S.

Fame, endurance from desire

of,

52S.

of

those who

Fate, inconsistency
speak of it, 334.

Father, The, how greater than the
Himself
God, 327;
son, 249;
the Beginning of The Son, 328;
hath not His Being from The
Son, 329 ; nor from any other,
329; The
Son anointed by,
339 ; One God with The Son,
370; coeternal with Son imaged
doth what he
by coeval, 371;
will, never without The Son,

Father, human, supposed death of,
inciting to lying, 464; power of,
over children, 490 ; why greater
than sons, 370.

Faustus,

Fathers, Catholic, remarks on their
the Old, how
writings, 29T ;
they married, 403, 406,
407,
466 ; typical in their marriage
of many wives, 408.
the Manichee,

attacked
Patriarchs' marriages: his pretensions and failure, 44S.
Fear, to displease God entertained
by love, 431 ; spoken of by St.
likely to mislead,
Paul, 432 ;
489; of God, His gift, 534;
patience founded on, 535.
Feast, conversation at a, 357.
Feigning, in our Lord no falsehood,

Felix, St., burial in his Basilica, 539;

appeared at Nola, 54S.

Fellowship, attainable without mar-

riage, 403.

Female, contrasted with male, 408.
Fides, from fieri, 476.
Figure, of

speech, 392, 393 ;

in

speech, no lie, 491, 494.

Filth of soul, love of any thing but

God and the soul, 364.

Final goods, 403.
"

Finger of God," means the Holy

Spirit, 305.

saved by,

Fire,

expounded, 259;

coeval father of light, 37 r.
Firmus, Bishop, courage of, 468,

469.

Flames of the world, 438.
Fleeing iniquity, the greatest of all

alms, 262.

Flesh and blood, shall not inherit
the kingdom of God, expounded,
317 ; living after what? 383;
meaning of, in Scripture, 383,
384; how saved, 387;
Manichcean error
concerning, 388,
389 ; as created, spoken well of
by St. Paul, 388; Christ's was
true, 389 ; not evil: likened to
the Church, 389, 390; its works,
may be sins of the soul, 391.

Flood, the, a sacramental sign, 303.
Flora, a pious widow, 539.
Food, strong, not for the diseased,
357, 361 ; preserves man, 407 ;
uncooked, needs exercise to digest, 518 ; stores of, necessary,
518.

Fools, all who are not wise, and
note, 360 ; do best to follow the
knowwise, 361, 363 ;
wisdom surely,
361; incapable
of reason concerning God, 363 ;
easiest led by means of sense,
363, 364-

cannot

Foreknowledge, of God, 271, 302.
Forgery of wills, 4SS.
Forgiveness,

261; of
sins, realized in baptism, 374
sq. ; asked by all, shows all sinful, 443.

debtors,

of

Fortitude, spirit of, 535.
Fowlers, why the, cover up waters,

348.

Foxes, who? 436.
Free, why man is left, 385.
Free-born, love is of, 535.
Free-will, lost by sin, 247.
Freedom of the will, See Will, is the
gift of God, 248 ; man created
with, 271.

friendship, founded on faith, 337 ;
exists before fully proved, 33S ;
none without faith, 358; attainable without marriage, 403.

Fronto, informant of

Consentius,

483.

Fruitfulness. not to be compared to

virginity, 419.

Fruits,

thirty, sixty, and hundred

fold, 434.

Future life, continence

profitable

for, 420, 421, 423, 424.

Games, illustrate the Christian conflict, 372 ; what men will suffer
for 528.

Gaul, martyrs of, 542.
Generation, preserves mankind, as
food man, 407; of mortal creatures is by corruption, 370.
Generation, of The Son from eter-

nity, 371.

Genius, finds not truth without God's

help, 358.

Gentiles, not to use Jewish customs, 461, 462, 493; typified by
the woman with issue of blood,
494 ; idolatrous, called Pagans,
509, 511; debtors to Jews, 516.

Gift, The Holy Ghost called, 339.
Gifts, are all from God, 432; prayed
for, are not of ourselves, 433 ;
of different kinds, 434; spiritual,
one person may have many, 549.

Girding the loins, what ? 386.
Glory, different degrees of, 426, 435.
be worshipped through
God, to
faith, hope and love, 238; in
what sense said to be angry, 248;
Grace of, displayed in Christ,
249: in election, 268, 533; Peace
of, 257; pardons sin, but on condition of penitence, 258; alone

5 66

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

in

341;

signifies

Christ, 363;

decides what sins are trivial and
what not, 262; does well even in
the permission of evil, 267; Will
of, never defeated, though much
is done contrary to His will,
269: always good, but sometimes
fulfilled through the evil will of
man, 269; Grace necessary to
salvation before the fall, 271;
foreknew the sin of the
first
man, and ordered His own purpose accordingly, 271; is Love,
275 sq. ; severity of, 287; finger
the Holy Spirit,
of,
and
exclusive
305;
eternity
blessed
omnipotence of,
322;
Abraham, 339; most fitly born
of a Virgin, 339; is not in any
the True,
special place,
now invoked by all, 342; if Almighty created matter, 322; just
in binding men by law, 351;
frees from the Law, but condemns it not, 351; dwells in pure
souls, 353, reasons concerning,
understood by few, 358; helps
humbly and
those
knowledge
search

who go
358;

true wisdom, 360;
true

charitably,
of,
for
religion presupposes
faith in, 361; cannot
be displeased with our believing, 361;
demands faith, 362;
the wise
most near to, 363; mercy of,
now
shown
known by nations not to be of
earth or fire, 364; Old Testament charged with false doctrine
about, 365; providence of, points
out the Church, 364; no substance but is of Him, 365; Father of those to whom the Church
is Mother, 369; The Almighty
Father, cannot lie or will wrong,
369; Author of Incorruptibility:
One Will of Father and Son,
370, not lost by misfortunes,
37 2 , 373; a Temple is for Him:
He creates, Who clothes, 374;
permits evil, why? 385; brings
good out of evil, 385; Manichpean heresy concerning, 385,
386; His nature, 386; a Physinot wanting under
cian, 386;
the law, 449; destroys not free
favor of, gives
will, 449, 450;
gifts of, no
continence, 449;
blessings unless owned, 449;
all good comes from, 452; labors
to win, pleasant, 453; "hates"
sinners, "destroys" liars, 462,
481; who unclean in sight of,
465; hears our inward speech,
471; wronged, though not hurt,
by sins of luxury, 474; to be
honored outwardly as well as
Priscillianists
inwardly,
erred
sin
against, worse than against man,
485; sometimes heals secretly,
486; we must depend on, after
will provide
all means, 497;
where we cannot rightly, 500;

482;
concerning,

484;

527,

suffering,

His "

impassible : passions attributed
to: patience His Gift, 527, 536;
Himself long-suffering, though
528; His
not
wrath, jealousy:
repentance" implies no error,
527;
cares for our body, 529; not lost
by will, 530; riches of, 531, 536;
patience likens to, 532; assists
the just, and justifies the ungodly' 533! lree mercy of, to old
Saints, 533; how first loves sinners, works in us good will, 534,
536; never lies, 565.

"God will have all men to be saved,"

expounded, 267, 270.

Gold, may be known and not had, 361.
Goliath and Zaccheus compared, 411.
Good, all things made, 240; but not
perfectly good, hence liable to
corruption, 240; there can be no
evil where there is no good, 241 ;
highest, not attained without lovm g it) 3 D 3 '. brought out of evil,
385; all nature is, 386; in what
degree attainable, 3S7; man so
created, 388; the substance of the
flesh is, 390; superior, makes
not lesser good an evil: some, imbetter;" 443, 446; more
plied in
honored by having a good below
it than an evil, 444, 446; fall
from a higher, is an evil, 445,
446; all, comes from God, 452;
sin aims at some, in this life,
474; temporal, may be given up
without sin,
three
474,
things to be kept, for sanctity's
sake, 475; luminous, of truth,
498; impassible, 532.

475;

"

Goods, final and instrumental, 403;
when abused, become sin, 403;
of marriage are offspring, faith,
sacrament, 412.

Good works, men not saved by, 247;
follow faith, 247; rewarded by
eternal life, the gift of God, 272.

Gospel, not to seem sold, 508-510.
Gospels, said by Manichees to be in-

terpolated, 350.

Government, of mankind, 385.
Grammarians, expected to find good
several

Virgil, 353;

sense in
named, 355.

Gratitude, due from virgins to God,

Greek, words borrowed from, 349.
Greeks,

philosophers,

shoemakers,

5".

Guests, duty of protecting, 489, 490.
Guilt, transmitted from progenitors,

252, 253.

Habits, hard to change, 364.
Hair, bosses of, 429; worn long by
some monks: iong, thought a sign
of sanctity, 522; St. Paul's rule
against long, 523; every, in God's
keeping, 529.

Happiness, knowledge of the causes
of good and evil necessary to
man's, 242; of perfect knowledge
not yet ours, 359.

Head dress of women, 429.
Health and immortality, two goods,

403.

Hearers, order of, among the Manichees, 348 ; what said of, when
they left them, 348.
Hearing, studiousness of, 357.
Heart, its mouth, 379-381 ; continence must be seated there, 379;
3S1; its lanits
guage. 379 J picture of purity,
392.

consent, 380,

Heaven, the Church in,

256, 257 ;

degrees of glory in 426, 435.
Heresies, fight in vain against the

Church, 374.

Heresy, pretence of, may cause real,
483, 484 how to be exposed:
sometimes healed secretly, 486.
Heretic, not every one a, who believes heretics, 347 ; what makes
a, 348 ; silence to be kept to a :
each claims name of Catholic,
355, 356; spoils that claim by
pretending to reason, 357, 363;
cannot claim authority, or do
without it, 362 ; that on which
we believe
against
them, 363.

Christ is

Heretics, or schismatics compared
to twigs lopped off the
vine,
310 sq.; all, would have us believe in Christ, 362; many ways
condemned, 365 ; yet
in their
sins, 375 ; continence of, should
not persuade us, 448; widows and
inferior to Catholic
virgins of,
wives, 448 ; not to be tracked
out by lying, 482 ; sin less in
speaking heresy than Catholics
would, 483, 485; little harm in
believing, when they
pretend
483 ;
Catholicism,
converted,
may take comfort in their former
ignorance, 485; converted, will
correct others, 486.
Hidden life with Christ, 392.
History, explanation by, 340; of the
Exodus allegorical, though true,
350.

Holy Spirit, the birth of Christ is of
The, 250 ; is not the Father of
Christ, 250; Holy Spirit and the
Church, 255 ; is not a creature,
256; sin against The, 264 ; signified by the expression, finger
mission of, on
of God, 305;
Pentecost, 308; The third Person of the Trinity, '327 ; His
individuality and offices, 329;
body of any Christian, a temple
of, 444; speaking in
St. Paul,

Homicide,

lying to

screen

from

468 ;

justifiable,

punishment,
469.
Honoratus,

several of

the name,
347; one a companion of St.
Augustin, a lover of truth, 347;
prayed for, 348, 349; how led
astray, 348; not then a Chrisfriendship with
tian, 348; his
St. Augustin, 351; will wonder

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

Testament being
at the Old
353; called on to
called pure,
take more pains, 355; a sincere
and earnest inquirer, 365.

Honorius, laws of,

against idols,

marriage state, 263; when right,
when wrong, 487.

Interpolations

supposed

in Holy

Scripture, 350.
Involuntary continence

estimated,

Lord's

braced in the

Hope, everything pertaining to, emPrayer,
273; worldly, its objects, 348;
of discovery implied in search,
361 ; of Christians in the Judgment, 374.

Horace, fable quoted, 494.
House, temporal and eternal, 496.
Humility, most needful for virgins,
437 ; who would follow
428,
Christ, 436; ifs praise, 428; instances of, 428, 429; commended
by our Lord, 428, 430.
Humility, taught by Christ,
Passion,

near
of
his
Christ, 430; unfeigned, needed,
of
fully by St.
434;
Augustin, 436 ; of Saints, 438;
and holiness: need of in pious
widows, 448.

treated

learnt

429;

Hundredfold

fruits

of

virginity,

Hunting, pleasure of, 452.
Husband, and wife, their union, 388;
relative duties, 389, 391; might
once have many wives, 406, 407 ;
must have but one, 408.

I AM," meaning of the Name, 324.
Idleness leads to vain talking, 516.
Idolaters, a minority, 355.
Idolatry conforming to, to avoid violence, 464; might be done to
save life, if lying lawful, 482;
conformity to, nowhere allowed,

Idols, laws of Honorius against, 337;
some still believe in, 341; rejection of, prophesied, 342.

Ignorance, sometimes better than
knowledge, 242; result of evil,
245, 264; to be borne patiently,
550.

Image, of God, in the mind, 524.
Images, of persons and things seen

in visions, 545 sq.

Imitation of Christ, 427.
Immanuel, 340.
Immortality, the penny in the par-

able, 426.

Impatience, evil of, 527.
Impurity, legal, not always sin, 409.
Incest, compared with adultery and

fornication, 402.

Incorruptible,
370.

begets Incorruptible,

Incorruption, future gain of, 529.
Infirmity, a reason for not working,
515; pleaded as an excuse, 516.
Injury, not to be done to one man to

save another, 466, 467.

Instrumental, goods, 403.
Integritas,

of

said
widows, 450.

virgins

and

Intention, determines the character

of an action, 520.

Intercourse of the sexes venial

in

429.

Isaac, son of Abraham : told no lie,
otherwise than

491; inherited
his brothers, 535.

Israel, prefigured the future Church,
304; history of, and its significance 304 sq. ; compared with
Sodom, 461; history of, figurative, 470.

Israelites, whole people as it were a

prophet, 444.

Israelitess, without guile, Rahab be-

came, 497.

as

typical

of
Jacob, his
birth
286; an
Christ's
Incarnation,
ancestor of Christ, 339; his exfor lying, 460;
ample quoted
his deceit was a mystery, 491;
acted in the figure of Christ,
492.

Jealousy, attributed to God, 527.
Jehu, falsehood of, no safe example,

482.

Jericho, represents the world, 496.
Jerome, St. opinion of, about St.
simulation, and note,

Peter's

461.

Jerusalem,

and

heavenly

contrasted,

earthly
Christian's
in common at, 512; the
living
heavenly, what gifts her sons
have, 535.

496;

Jesus, supported by pious women,

506.

Jewish Christians, kept the Law,

509.

Jews, named from Judah, 339; our
witnesses to prophecy, 342; permitted to ill-treat our Lord, 373;
many of, murderers of Christ,
and heathens,
forgiven,
out numbered
Christians
by
355; their notions of defilements,
469; priesthood of , become vile,
470; heart of,
called "stony,"
"sacracalled
rites of,
491;
menta," 493.

374;

Job, his example cited, 409; patience
of, in various temptations, 530;
was thought to worship God,
for temporal things : compared
with Adam, 530; trials of, extreme, 372; tempted by his wife:
stood fast in God, 373; restored
to prosperity for our example,
ii j-

John, St. beautifully alluded to, 390;
his example cited, 410; alluded
to 426.

John, the Monk, 539; he had the
gift of prophecy: consulted by
Theodosius: appeared to one in
sleep, 550.

Joke, a, not a lie, 458.
Joseph, St. chosen to evidence the
perpetual virginity of St. Mary,
511.

Joseph, temptation of, 487; his con-

cealment no lie, 491.

Josiah, sparing the Prophet's bones,
544; spared the knowledge of
the afflictions which followed
after his death, 547.
Jotham, parable of, 494.
Joy, different degrees of, in Heaven,
426; godly, given to us, 534.

Judah, Jews named from, 339.
Judah, fornication of, no example,

Judaism, how far St. Paul allowed,

460, 461, 493.

Judas, prophesied of, 341; an examour
ple of evil tolerated, 506;
Lord's patience with, 529.
Judge, seems required for "false
inforwitness," 467, 46S, 473;
mation to, no betrayal, 468; tortures inflicted by, 528.
reason

for

believing,
341; will separate good and evil,
343; of the just and the unjust,

Judgment,

Judgments of God, on fallen men
and
angels, 246; will be explained at the Resurrection, 267;
are just, 26S sq.

Juliana, thanks St. Augustin for a
warning: asked him to write,
441; not to take all as written
for herself, 441, 448: had children when left a widow, 445,448;
highest achievements open to,
448: is to communicate the book
to others, 450; household of, a
Church, 454.

Rids, skins of, meant sins, 492.
Rindred, spiritual, preferable to hu-

man, 418.

Ringdoms, two distinct, after the resurrection; Christ's and the Devil's, 273.

357;

Riss, not refused to Judas, 529.
Rnowledge, different ways of desirdistinguished from
ing'
opinion and belief, 359; of evil,
no misery, 359; matter of belief
may be called, 360; and charity,
two goods, 403; all who know,
difficult
528;
partake of,
questions, a divine gift, 549.

of

Labor, pleasure in, 453; those able
a duty of
515:
to,
happier,
practised in good
monks, 514;
monasteries, 516; humbling effects of, on the wealthy, 51S; for
the common store, 519; in the
rich more charitable than alms-

giving, 535.

Lamb, The, followed by virgins, and
married persons, 426. 432.

Lamps, burning, what, 386.
Laurentius,

Enchiridion

the

ad-

dressed to, 237.

Law, counsel given beyond, 461,
462; of God unmoved by circumstances, 4S9; of nature, 407;
under, in, without, distinguished, 509 ; Jewish, permitted eat-

5 68

INDEX OF SUBTECTS.

ing in the fields, 517; supposed
wish to combine, with the Gospel, 351; Ceremonial, mysteries
of, 351; in the letter,
killeth;
wants an expounder, 353.
Laws, of man, in some sort Chris-

tian, 356.

Laying out more, St. Paul, 515.
Lazarus, buried, what signified in,
494; borne by Angels, 541; told
Abraham the state of the Jews,
548.

Lectures of Rhetoricians, 545.
Leeches, 529.
Left-hand, what means, 374.
Legal purification shows not marriage
sinful, 409; was for the type of
sin, 409.

Leisure, what, had St. Paul, 466.
Leonas, messenger of Consentius,

481.

Lewdness, worse than theft, 488, 489.
Liar, not every is a, who lies, 466.
Liberty, Christian, 461, 462, 493.
Lie, never allowable, but differs much
in guilt, 243; not allowable to
save another from injury, 245;
question if ever lawful, 457 sq. ;
a joke is not a, 458; nor a misdefinition of, 458,
take, 458;
459, 494; how to be safe from,
460; question if ever useful, 460,
491; examples quoted in favor
of, 460, 495, 50O; cases of danger requiring, 460, 462, 490;
condemned as false witness, 460;
condemned more generally, and
note, 460, 468, 476; allegory is
not, 460, 491 ; sometimes allowed
in imperfect state, 461; New
Testament never favors, 461,
493; God hates, even to destroying, 462, 482; corrupts the soul,
463; any sin as easily justified,
463, 495; good men lose authority by telling, 464; about Christ,
466; several cases of, 466; none
lawful in doctrine, 466, 490; not
to be told to give pleasure, 467;
useful, question of, 467, 472,
474, 495; if not to defend crime,
467; how to escape, when questioned, 468; how to escape,
when silence betrays, 469; five
kinds of, condemned: three still
questioned, 469; wish to use,
forbidden, 472, what, threatened
with destruction, 473; Deceit is,
even if not
false witness," 473;
a harmless one, to save pudicity
of body,
eight
sorts of, all shown to be evil,
476; which sorts less culpable:
none is good, 481, 482; examples of, quoted from Scripture,
every, contrary to
482, 491 ;
truth, 482; pretending heresy
worse kind of, 4S3; metaphor or
antiphrasis, is not, 491; none is
"just," 495, 484; no holy person glories in, 496; one, leads
to another, 498; about religion
worst, 498, 500; not to be told

allowed, 475;

"

to save a soul, 499; rather trust
God, 500; put for sin in general,
500; not less than lewdness, 500.
Life, eternal, through the reward of
good works, is itself the gift of
eternal, not to be
God, 272;
given for temporal, 462, 474;
eternal
good here,
hereafter,
worth patience, 528.
real and

pretended, 348;
strong, not born at once, 361;
beauty of, a standing miracle,
coeval offspring of
364;
fire,
371.

Light,

Lips, have spoken if the heart has

consented, 338.

Literal sense, the usual one of the

Epistles, 504.
Liturgy, quoted, 449.
Living after man, is living after the

flesh, 383.

Lot, entertained Angels, 463;

his

discussed, 463,

example
489,
490; excused by perturbation,
490; knew not his guests to be
Angels, 497.

action

Love, greater than faith and hope,
274; is the end of all the commandments, 275 ;
of,
286 sq;
"perfect, casteth out
fear," 330; act of, invisible, 338;
only way to attain the highest
good, 363; submits without hope
of temporal rewards, 373;
of
husband for wife, Apostolical argument for, 38S; fears to displease God) 431; owed to God
by virgins, 433; of Christ, on
the part of virgins, 437;
the
remedy for pride, 437; of neighbor as self, 462; misdirected,
makes false estimates, 474; rectitude of, the soul's
chastity,
475, 476; of God, is His gift,
532; the ground of patience, 532,
534; kindled by The Holy Spirit, 532; of creature: already in
creature loving,
of God,
. not in creature unless given, 534.

534;

Lucan, quoted, 239, 541.
Lucretius, error of, about the soul,

352.

Lucus quod non hiceat, 491.
Lust, what is chiefly so called, 380,
381; our enemy, to be resisted,
381; its resistance the business
of man, 382; proved to be of
the soul as much as of the body,
391; how put down, 393; sexual,
its sinfulness, 401; definition of,

Maccabees, book of, referred to,

540.

Madmen, strength of, not healthy,

448.

Magic arts, 391; in bringing up Sam-

uel, 548.

Male and female, contrasted, 407.
Malefici, 500.
Man, knowledge concerning, a part
of wisdom, 306; nature of, assumed by God, 363; image of

God in, 369; begins in imperfecafter, what,
tion, 372;
living

Manhood, assumed by The Son, 329;

perfect in Christ, 249.

Manichees, object to believing on
authority, 348; their pretence of
reasons and learned discussions,
34S; refute rather than prove,
348; their contemptuous phrases:
attack the Old Testament, 349;
think
Scripture
interpolated,
and how, 350;
of what error
they accuse the Church, 353;
worship the sun, 353; boasted
of Faustus, 356; inquire origin
of evil, 365; charges of, against
Scripture: of bloodless bodies,
but coarse minds, 365, 366; their
385, 386, 388, 389; reheresy
futed: dismissed, 388, 390; their
saying, 410; their heretical opinion, 413; said the law was not
of God, 509.

Manichreans, placeclaimed for among

the Apostles, 350.

Mankind, how they might have multiplied had Adam not sinned,
399, 400.

Mansions, many in heaven, 426.
Marriage, fools should consult the
wise about, 361; many have
learned to despise, 364; its end,
391 ; not regarded as unholy by
the Fathers, 398; a lower state
than virginity: first bond of society: that of our first parents,
holy, 399; Christ went to one,
400; how a good, 400, 402, 412;
intended as well for fellowship,
400; of aged persons, 400; continence in, praise-worthy, 400;
brings good out of evil: its uses,
its grave joy,
400, 401, 402;
400; how far certain compacts
deserve the name of, 401 ;
its
abuse, not the sin of marriage,
401; Sacramental, 402, 406, 40S;
the lesser of two goods, 403,
411, 422, 423; of the just, better than the virginity of the impious, 403; not evil, but good,
402, 403, 409; in what sense it
better" not to marry, 403,
is
407; was once a duty: St. Paul's
view of, 404; not sinful, 404,
408; to be not sinful must be
without excess, 404, holy, though
the partner is unholy, 405; that
looks
to
pleasing God,
rare, 405; how piously contracted
by the old Fathers, 406, 407,
408, 413; cannot be dissolved,
except by death, 402, 411, 412;
of many wives, allowable once
406; compared to the taking of
food, 407; was once contracted
with spiritual desire, 407; hard,
to use it like Abraham, 413;
compared to
ordination, 411;
goods of, three, 413; of the old
Fathers, holier than
virginity
now, 413; summary of St. Au-

only

"

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

gustin's book on, 417; how that
of the old Fathers must be regarded, 422, 423; not even indirectly condemned by St. Paul,
422, 423, 424; its fruits thirtyof (professed)
fold only, 434;
widows wrong but valid, 441;
ends with the life of either party, 442; good of, shown, in that
the bodies of married Christians
are members of Christ, 442; due
of, not to be withheld for fear of
temptation, 442; the chastity in,
God's gift, 442, 450; evil of excess in, not of marriage, but
venial through/it, 442; ends of:
that of Sacrament: second, allowable, 443; second attacked
by Montanists, etc., 443; body
as well as spirit, holy in, 443,
444; more desirable in Old Covenant, 444; of Patriarchs, was
for
provides
not
against
needed when we may have spiritual children, 445 , 45 3 ; better than
unstable purpose of widowhood,
441; still good under the Gospel, 446; desire of, wrong after
vows, 446; argument from ' ' marriage to Christ" refuted, 446;
third or fourth, lawful, though
less worthy, 446;
seventh, allowed by our Lord to be marriage, 447; hard questions about,
448, 449; ranks below continence: holiness of, inferior by
reason of cares, 451; less needful since the world is perishing,
452.

temptation, 445;

offspring,

444;

Married, faithful women are mothers
of Christ, 419; fruitfulness may
not vie with virgin chastity, 419,
420; persons may follow the
Lamb, 427, 436; persons in one
respect cannot follow the Lamb,
427; may be fitter than virgins
for Martyrdom, 434.

Martha and Mary, 403.
Martyr, supposed terms put to a,
464; no place for, if doctrine
may be denied, 482; makes real
gain, 497.

Martyrs, effect of their sufferings on
mankind, 464; not prayed for at
the Altar, 489; patience of, in
scorn and pain, 529; true, do
not kill themselves, 530; who
suffer out of the Church, 535;
memorials of,
550;
prayers to, 542; care for others,
542, 544 sq; ashes
the living,
and bodies dispersed, of Gaul,
and elsewhere, 542, 544; overcame natural regard for the fate
of their bodies, 544; removed
from
earthly
things, 549; tormenting demons,
550.

knowledge

542,

549,

of

Martyrdom, often a hidden gift: common among Christians, 364;
higher than virginity, 435.
Mary (see Virgin), the Blessed Vir-

the Jewish race,

gin of
339;
Virgin after Christ's birth, 339,
511; Christ born of, 371; susin
pected :
chastity, 486; holy virgins become like, 449.

conceived

Christ

Marj' and Martha, 403, 413, 423.
Master, opposed to "schoolmaster,"
351; of grammar, 353; one, to
many slaves, 408; power of,
over slaves, 490.

Mechanics, became Monks, 516.
Mediator, a, needed by fallen men,
248, 253, 257; must be God in
order to redeem us, 272.

Medicine, taking, implies hope of

recovery, 361.

Meditation, in the Law of God, 452;
consistent with work, 514.
Members of sin, how mortified, 392;
all members, though differing in
honor, 444.

Memorials of

Martyrs, 539, 542;
obtain

offered

prayers
special blessings, 539, 540, 542;
buried, 550.

there,

Men, fallen, God's judgments on,
246; restored through the mercy
of God, 246; the restored part
succeeds to the place lost by the
rebellious angels, 247; not saved
by good works, but by grace
through faith, 247; needed a
mediator, 248; all born of Adam
are under condemnation, 246,
254; Christians truly so, 523;
figure the ruling principle of the
mind, 524.

Mercy of God, free and abounding,
264, 268, 271; how far an excuse
for wrong actions, 496.

Metaphor, is no lie, 491.
Midwives, believed, as to parents,
360; Hebrew, quoted for lying,
460,495; were not prophesying,
460, 496; temporarily rewarded,
460; excused as beginners, 470,
495-.

Mind, things in, perceived without
sight, 337; of others, not directly perceived, etc., 337 sq; prepared for truth by believing, 358,
362; of the wise brought in contact wT ith God, 363; sovereign
power of, disgraced by body's
sin, 487; parts of the, how figured, 524; patience a virtue of,
529; wounds of , 529; incomprehensible to itself, 569.

Miracle, spread of the Gospel a, 340.
Miracles, meant to produce faith,
363; what are, 364; better than
reasons to impress fools, 363;
point out authority, 364; some
more gracious, some more wonderful: why less frequent, and
note, 364; witness of, against
heretics, 365.

Mistrust of self, our security, 383.
Monachism, a holy purpose, 521 .
Monasteries, introduction

Carthage,
manual labor, 516;

of, into
503; good, practise
indifferent

to which one's property has been
given, 519; time divided for labor and devotion and study, 521.
Monastery, some may labor, others
instruct, 514; owes a maintenance to those who have surrendered their property to it, 519;
division of works in, 519.

Monica, St., failed not to

visit St.

Priests:

Augustin every night, 547.
Monks, not "laboring for their own
support, 503 ; the work of, occasion of
honest
writing, 504;
trades for men; a holy society,
511; laziness of, a trap, 515; cause
scandals, 516; to avoid giving
offense, to labor and be obedient, 514; ecclesiastical occupations and teaching of, 514, 515;
life holy and praiseworthy, 514;
their many religious offices, 515;
who have been delicately brought
up, to be borne with, 516; not
Evangelists nor
supporters of the Monastery, 519;
persons admitted without signs
of amendment, 516;
a heavy
sin not to admit as, slaves, peasants, mechanics: some became
exemplars, 516; kept stores of
might have
517 ;
provisions,
dressed
518;
provisions,
who have been rich not compelled
to bodily labor, 519; none to be
idle: disentangled from secular
trusting for
521;
affairs,
support in labor if able, without,
if unable: called servants of God,
521; poor of Christ, 519; objects
of the Bishop's care, 521, hypocritical and vagrant, pretended
ones, 521; a device of Satan to
discredit that life hy scandal, 521 ;
accused of wishing to be maintained in idleness: of hawking:
costuming: lying stories:
begging, 521; wearing longhair, 522;
life preferred to Bisnop's, 521;
good ones accused and unsettled
by the idle, 522; idle ones regarded as more holy, 523.
Monstrous births, and the resurrec-

520,

517,

tion, 265.

second mar-

Montanists, attacked
riages, 443.

Moral government of the world, 385.
Mortification of the members, what?

392.

Moses, veil of, 523; appeared after

death, 548.

Mothers, of Christ, who? 418, 419.
Mouth of the heart as well as the
body, 380, 381 ; not to be always
literally taken in Scripture, 380;
of the heart, 471, 472; confession with the mouth required,
486.

Multitude, testimony of followed in
common life, 355; must be led
by steps to religion, 358: is believed regarding Christ, 362;
gathered by Him in the way of
faith, 363; led by faith to ap-

5?o

prove many good things, 364,
365; witness of, against heretics,
365.

Mysteries, holy, words used in cele-

brating, 449.

Mystery, defense of, not popular,
349; to be borne with, 534.

Nabal, David right in sparing, 490.
Naboth, charge against, 491.
Name, eternal, promised

to the eu-

-

nuchs, 425.

Narration, to be employed in cate-

chising, 2S5 sq., 289.

Nations, blessed in Christ, 339; come
to God, by believing, 341.
Nativity, Eternal, of the Son, 371;

of Christ in time, 374.

Nature, the Christian knows little of,
except that the goodness of the
Creator is the cause of all things,
239; knowledge of the causes of,
unessential to happiness, 242;
wonders of, familiar, 364; all,
is good, 386; lust is a disease
of, 3S6.

Nazarites, long hair a figure of the

veil of the Law, 523.

Neighbor, even an alien is, 4S7.
Net, of the Gospel, takes bad and

good, 343.

Novations, against second marriages,

Nuns, holy, deceased, 434.
Nurses, believed as to parents, 360.

Obedience, the

Christian's work,
372; above continence, 411; implies chastity, 412; unmurmuring, duty of Monks, 514.
Old persons, why they marry, 400.
Olibrius, husband of Juliana, 452.
Omnipotence of God, 322.
Opina/io, 360.
Opinion, distinguished from knowledge and belief, 359; different
from belief, 45S.

Ordination, to be withheld from a
husband who had a second wife,
408; a sacrament, 412.

Original sin, remitted by Baptism,

386.

Pagans, soldiers: poets: yet in their
sins, 375; idolatrous heathen so
opinions of
511;
called,
burial, 540; philosophers, 540.
Paint, not to be used by women,

509,

Parables, are no lies, 494.
Paradise, man deceived

in,

372;
Adam careless in, 530; how man
also
forfeited, 531 ;
baptism necessary for admission
to, 546.

vision of,

Parcae quod non patrant, 491.
Pardon, granted, implies sin, 404; to

what granted by St. Paul, 404.

Pardon of sin, conditioned by penitence, and has reference chiefly
to the Judgment, 258; not given
to those who forgive not others,
261.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

Parents, not to be recognized when
they hinder our ministry, 325;
known by testimony, 339; known
to children by faith: yet love
due to, 360.

Parricide, Cataline, of his country,
528; why worst homicide, 530.
Passion, foretold by same writers as
things now seen fulfilled, 341;
in Jewish Scriptures, 342.
Passions, how attributed to God,

_

Patience, of Christ, 372;

527, 52S;

of Job,
372; is not to be for temporal
hopes, 372, 373; differs from endurance, 391; a great gift of
attributed to God:
God, 527;
in what sense, 527; of God,
without passion,
in
man, what, 527, 52S; waits for
good, 527, 529; compared with
worldly endurance, 528, 531; for
ill ends is no patience,
52S;
truth of, is in the cause, 528;
not like science: both in mind
and body, 529; shown without
bodily pain: of our Lord toward
Judas, 529; greatest against Sais God's
tan's
gift, 531; being from love of
God, is from grace, 532; likens
to God, 532; her words by St.
it God's gift?
Paul, 535; is
535, 536.

assaults, 530;

Patriarchs, had several wives for offmarriages of, atfed
Faustus, 448;
511; ignorant of what

spring,
tacked by
cattle,
befell the Jews, 547.

444;

Paul, his speaking by permission not
commandment, expounded,
of
262 sq. ; once a persecutor, 309;
his counsels and commands concerning marriage and virginity,
421; what "he spared," 422; the
Teacher: "vessel of election,"
442; chose the unmarried state
as higher good, 442; rightly allows
443;
cared not for men's praise, 453;
St. Peter corrected by, 461,462;
kept good repute with care, 461,
his answer to the high priest, 470;
his oaths, 470, 474, 477, right in
not
living of the Gospel,'' 470;
used sympathy, not falsehood,
476; charged by some with a lie,
477; not compelled by want to
not
his
preach,

marriage,

second

"

using

509;
506, 509, 510;
bearing
liberty,
with the weak, 509; condescending, not of craft, 509, 510; becoming all things to all men:
"becoming weak," 509; relieved
by distant Churches, 510; declined gifts to avoid suspicion
of venal
motives,
511;
labored
in temporal
well
as spiritual works, 511; avoiding
suspicion
dishonesty,
rejoicing in the liberality
513;
513; had special
of believers,

510,
as

of

and teaching,
times for labor
at Troas: at Athens, 513, 514;
could work by day and night:
515; not receiving support was
to avoid offense,
515, 517; because his ministry was among
the Gentiles, 515; not contrary
to his Lord, 518; used means
for self-preservation,
520; rapt
into Paradise, 548.

Paulinus, St., of Nola, inquires about

burial: his opinion, 569.

Peace, on earth,

257; the prize of

continence, 386.

Peasants, became Monks, 516, 519.
Pelagianism, noted by St. Augustin
widowhood,
449, 450; dangerous ap-

his book on

in

441,
proaches to, 450.

Pelagians, think patience man's attainment, 531; argument of, for
free-will, 531, 532.

Tenance, done openly in Church:
way of remission for the bapof, contized,
demned, 473.

refusal

375;

Penitence, needful for pardon of sins,

25S.

Penitents, order of, 375.
Penny, in the parable, 426.
Pentecost, 308.
Peoples, and nations, our witnesses

to Christ, 362.

Perfect, are not even to wish to lie,

472.

Perfecting, good and evil, 387.
Perjury, strangely justified by some,
498; none can be allowable,
499; real though not of truth,
499; feared even by the adulterous, 500.

Permission, not same as consent,

Persecution, flight from, 520, 521.
Perseverance,
453,454-

need of grace

for,

Persian fable of Manichees, 365.
Peter, St., his example cited, 410;
simulation of, corrected, 46 1,493;
his denial, 462; justifying him
makes St.
Paul a
477;
denied only with the mouth, yet
sinned, 4S6.

liar,

Pharisee and Publican, 428.
Physician, best judge for the sick,
sickness, loves the

373; hates
sick, 534.

Pity, how attributed to God, 527.
Plato, hidden meanings of, in amor-

ous writing, 355.

Pleasure, thought

chief good by
Epicurus, 352; in holy
labor,
452; of earthly things a known
motive to natural will, 534.
Pontius Pilate, named to mark the

date, 371.

Poor, feeding, for man's praise not
good, 487; of Christ, monks so
called, 519; patience of the, 531;
long for the inheritance, 535; of
Christ to be made rich, 536.
Posture, in prayer increases fervor,

542.

Powers that be, subjection to the,

illustrated, 306.

Prayer, the Lord's, 23S, 274; called
needed

"The Prayer,"
against temptation, 449.

375;

Prayer, the daily, of the

believer

sins,

satisfaction

makes
for
daily
260; remission of
trivial
lighter sins by, 375; does more
than exhortation, 450; spiritual
delight in, 452, 453; helped by
obedient
alms,
heard, 514; interrupted for necessary labors, 518; posture at,
yet is not
increases fervency:
necessary to
\Xy 542.

452;

the

of

Prayer, for the dead, 434; an universal practice, 539: at the Altar,
authority for, though not
540;
in Scripture: also profit of, 539,
540; do not profit all: 539, 542,
550; for all the faithful departed,
542,543; for our departed friends,
especially, 550.

Preaching,

the Gospel, reward of,
for support
509;
might offend the weak, 510, 511;
for the sake of a maintenance

the Gospel

wrong, 519.

to

eternal

life

Predestination,

Pride, and envying,

is
wholly of Qod's free grace, 268.
to be
guarded against, 531; ground of
false patience, 531.

428;

Priesthood, of the Jews become vile,

47p.

Priscillian, artful praise of, 483; himself detected without lies, 4S5.
Priscillianists, exposed by Consensus, 450; inquiries of Consensus about, 457; thought it lawful to deny doctrines, 481, 4S6,
492; some of their notions, 484;
sin less than Catholics in blas484,485; heresy of,
pheming,
overthrown by Catholic Bishops,
485; anathematize Priscillian in
pretence, 485.

Proba

Property,

note,

mother-in-law of

Faltonia,
Juliana, and
44S, 454;
grandmother of Demetrias, 451.
361;
question of lying to save, 467,
476; giving up of, a pattern to
us, 518.

management

of,

Prophecy, evidence of,

conclusive,
339,340; even for Gospel records, 340, 341; of things we
see proves things unseen: Passion foretold in, 341, 342.
Prophecies, Old Testament, fulfillment of, pointed out, 313.
Prophetic meaning of Patriarchs' care

for burial, 541.

Prophets, effect of their teaching
on multitudes, 364; in time of,
women served God by marriage:
God's ancient people a prophet,
444; marriages of, attacked by
Faustus, 448; knew only what
God thought fit, 548.

Providence, not excluding our exer-

tions, 520, 521.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

Provision, for the morrow, how forbidden, 470; to be made for the
future, 518.

Psalmody, a spiritual delight, 452;
no hindrance to work, 514.
Psalms, to be learnt by heart, 514.
Publican and Pharisee, 428.
Punishment, eternal, 341;

for sin
inevitable, 385; less for schismatics who suffer
for Christ,
Punishments,

of,
273; threatened to correct the
foolish, 351.

future, eternity

Purgatorial fire, possible, 260.
Purification, why ordered under the

Law, 409.

Quick, the, and the dead, Christ
expounded, 255,

judge,

shall

Rahab, not approved for lying, 495;
how she might have avoided it,
496.

Reading, three kinds of error in, 351,
352;
spiritual delight in, 452,
453; pursued to the neglect of
doing what is read, 514.
Reality of Christ's flesh, 3S9.
Reason, Manichees would prove all
not enough to
by, 343, 354;
keep men from sin, 351; why
not to be followed before faith,
357; unable to master religion,
360.

Refuge, is one seeking, to be saved

by a lie ? 460, 462, 468.

Regeneration, effects of, 275; prayer
for, for Catechumens, 375; in
Baptism, 386; had we no other
birth we should not sin, 500.
Relics of martyrs (pretended ones),

Religion, search

hawked about, 521.
after
true, 354;
search for true, presupposes belief in God, 361.

Repentance, true, 264; of God with-

out error, 527.

of

Report, good, duty of keeping, 453.
Resurrection, the,
body,
264 sq. ; of the saints, 266; of
the lost, 266; derided by some,
313; is certain, 332; of Christ,
prophesied, 341.

the

Retreat of monks, for praver, 517,

5T8.

Revelations, by visions,
Prophets partial, 54S.

546;

to

Reward, of Christian soldier, 453; of

evangelizing, 509.

Rhadamanthus, fable of, 352.
Rhetoric, learned from the few whom
the many acknowledge, 354.

Rhyming terminations, 527.
Rich,

humbled

the,

before
the
healed of pride,
Church, 340;
in becoming poor, 518; men,
become monks, 519.

desire

of, condemned in
widows, 452; what men will
suffer to gain, 528;
God,
53i.

of

Riches,

Right Hand of God, what meant by,

327- .373-

Rising with Christ, what, 392.
Robbers, lying in wait, 458, 459.
Rome, the usage of, in respect of
divorce, 402; love of the commonwealth, 519.

Root-virtue, continence, 412.
Ruffinus, translated Eusebius' Eccl.

Hist., 543.

Rule of Faith, the Creed, 369 sq.
Ruth, blessed, though Anna more
so, 443; continent widows may
not set themselves above: married again to be an ancestor of
Christ, 444.

Sacraments, of New Law, supersede the old, 461; truth intimated in, 475.

Sacrifice, for sin, called sin, 495.
Sacrifices, legal, not for Christians,

Sadducees, our Lord's answer to,

Saints,

the, resurrection

of, 266;
shall know at the resurrection
the benefits they have received
by grace, 267; Church daily renewed in the, 340; general effect of their examples, 364; in
heaven cannot sin, 3S5, 387; differ in merits: in glory: and joy,
426; number of the, to be completed, 453; of Old Testament
saved by grace through faith,
533. 534; intercession of: prayers to, 549; prayers to: patrons,
539, 542, sq. ; memorial chapels
of, 539. 542.

Sallust, referred to, 528.
Samuel, apparition to Saul, opin-

ions on, 548.

Sanctity, treated of, 437;

higher,
sought in separation from the
world, 514.

Sarah, her example cited, 411; an
example to wives, 444; denied
her laughing, 460; truly called
Abraham's sister, 491.

Satan, as an angel of light, 257;
tempted Job, as Adam, by woman, 372,
530; brought low,
his
after
522; tempts
pride,
through or without instruments,
530; hurt not Job, but by God's
power, 530; fell by his own will,
exorcised from children,
534;
5 6 9-

Saul (King), those who buried him
seeing Samuel,

544;

praised,
543.

Schism, a breach of charity, 535.
School, tempting discussions in, 348.
Schoolmaster, the Law a, 351.
Scipio Africanus, his daughter por-

tioned by the state, 519.

Scripture

creed

Holy,

scattered
about in, 347; statements all
forbids being
true, 422, 423;
overwise, 442; wrested, 50S; to
be learnt by memory, 514; cannot deceive, 534

INDEX OF SUBTECTS.

Scriptures, copies of, in hands of
Jews, 342; of the Old Testament
often figurative, 460; why contain examples as well as preforbid every lie,
cepts, 470;
476; no mincing of, 4771 knowledge of, praised, 481; true interpretation of, to be urged, 492;
three methods to be used with,
493; of Old Testament attacked
by Manichees, 349, 350; why
fourfold
hard to defend, 349;
sense of, 349; partial use of, 351 ;
how to deal
351, 353;
three suppositions about, 352;
Church's
353;
falsely charged with absurdity,
355; believed on Church's testimony, 362.

about,

Secular judgments imposed on Bishops by Apostolical injunction,

belief

with.

Sedes, dwellings called, 373.
Senators, became Monks, 519.
Septivira, 447.
Sermon on the mount, 42S.
Sickness of the soul, what, 3S6.
Signacula, 475.
Signs, intelligible, 2S3; employed at
the formal admission of a catechumen, 312; not known, without the thing, 361.

Similes, easy weapons to find, 348.
Simon, his example cited, 433.
Sin and Sins, results of Adam's, 246;
often put one for the other, 252;
of progenitors, 253; guilt of the
first, can be washed away only
in the blood of Christ, 253; pardon of, extends over the whole
mortal life of the saints, 25S;
trivial, 260, 263; relative magnitude of sins, 262 sq. ; two causes
of, ignorance and weakness, 264;
remission of, 331; impossible to
God: original in children, 347;
law made to restrain fools from,
351; every action not rightly
done is, 360; forgiveness of, in
Baptism, 375; none too heinous:
some are venial, some remitted
by prayers, some by penance,
374; Catechumens still under,
375; remitted to the faithful in
Baptism, 386; spiritual men not
exempt from, 390; venial and
deadly, 402, 403; none are free
from, 439; confession of, 447;
not to be committed to save life,
462 sq. ; confession of, required,
473; wrongly estimated by carnal men, 474; of others, not to
be prevented by our own, 476,
486; not to be done to detect sin,
conscience, 484;
481;
not justified by motive, 48S; yet
made less, 488, 496; venial not
allowed, 489;
of,
489, 491; of ignorance or infirmity, 490, 496, 5ro; forgiven
for subsequent good works, 496;
comes of our earthly birth: is
the sting of death. 500.

alternatives

against

Singing at work, 514.
Sinner, to protect a, is not to aid
sin, 468; not to be despaired of,
468.

Sitting, at the right hand of God,

what? 523.
fruits

Sixtyfold

of widowed life,

Slaves, many, but one master, 408;
freed to become Monks, 516;
trusted by masters, 358.
Sleep, abstinence from, 528.
Society, founded on faith, 339.
Sodom, justified in comparison of
Israel, 461; Lot's conduct in,
463, 467, 468; men of, smitten
with blindness, 497.

Soldiers of Christ, mark of, not re375;

after' desertion,

peated
Monks so called, 521.

Solomon, commanded to build God a

temple, 374.

Son, The, anointed by the Father,
339; said to suffer because His
of God is
humanity suffered:
God: of man is man: of God is
Almighty: why Only Son, 370;
doth what He will: One God
with the Father, 370; of God
suffered and died: begotten before all times, 371.

Song of the Three Holy Children,

438.

Soul, made to know truth, 356; may
be defiled, 380; meaning of, in
Scripture, 383; purity of, more
than that of the body, 463, 475,
error
476 ;
about, 484.

l'riscillianists

in

by the condition

Souls, pure, God dwells in, 353; of
the
faithful departed, at
rest,
541,543; obtain the resurrection
of the body, 542; rest of, not
affected
of
the body, 540-543; nor by the
events of the world, 547, 548;
some free from all suffering, 547.
Speech, inward, heard by God, 471.
Spirit Holy, signified by finger of
God, 305; the
Apostles filled
with, 342; continence the gift
of God's, 354; signified by men's
actions, 460; God, as dwelling in
Temple, 350; consubstantial and
called "Love," 374;
coequal:
heareth all things, 471; the fire
of Divine Love, 532; hence the
source of patience, 532, 534.
Spiritual, desire of the old Fathers,

407, 408, 413.

Spy, supposed practice of, 4S3.
Steward of the Church must have

one wife, 408.

Stewards, trusted though slaves, 358.
Stoics, wrong in making all
sins

equal, 495.

Studiousness, matter of praise, 356,

Subtance, none but what God begot

or created, 365.

Succession, Apostolic, 365.
Suffering, Jor faith and humanity,

Sufferings, endured for worldly ob-

jects, 528.

Suicide, threat of, may not move us
to sin, 462. sq. ; false claim of
martyrdom by, 531.

Supererogation, 427.
Susanna and Anna, 403, 413, 423.
Swearing, instances of, in New Testament, 470; all "comethof evil"
474, rash, of David, 490; false,
excused by some, 498.

Talking, lust

of, leads to lying,

466, 467.

Tamar, falsehood of, not to be imita-

ted, 495.

all

Tares, borne with till the harvest, 529.
implies some faith,
Teaching,
354; multitude may show where
to find, 355, 362; Catholic, origin of, 356; ordinary way of,
uses belief, 359; all requires a
master, 365.

Tediousness, in catechising causes

and remedies of 293 sq.
Temple, Christian heart a, 374.
Temptation, counsel against, from
the aged, 451; hope of gratification a, 452.

Tempting God by not avoiding dan-

ger, 508.

Terentianus Maurus, not to be read

without expositors, 355.

Tertullian, unwisely attacks second

marriage, 443.

Testament, Old,

food

349;

for
infant
agrees with New,
souls,
349; passages that seem to condemn it, 351; veil of removed,
351; what the charge against,
belief
353 ;
about, 353; St. Ambrose's exposition of, 356; charges brought
two, signified by
against, 365;
Abraham's sons, 470.

Augustin's

St.

Testimony, parents known by, 339;
of the multitude how useful,
354. 355-

Theatre, applause of, courted

by

poets, 355.

Thecla, mentioned, 434.
Theft, from rich not lawful, 467; is
"from the mouth" of the heart,
472; some think too much of, as
comparedwith sinsof luxury,474;
though to feed the poor, 488;
is less sin than lewdness: one
worse than another, 488, 489.
Thigh, signification of putting the

hand under, 409.

Thirtyfold fruit of marriage, 434.
Thought, sins of, 379, 380; goes before works, 381; of intention,
380; cannot go unpunished, 385;
a mystery, 385.

Time, shifting course of, 452.
Times, change of, 349.
Timothy, St., his example cited, 409;
circumcised by St. Paul, 461.

not circumcised, and

Titus,

St.,
why, 461.

Tobias, commended for burying the

praiseworthy, 469.

dead, 541.

Tongue, the, 4S7; not to be yielded

Vice, can use the instruments of vir-

WARFARE, of the Christian life, 3S2,

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

5 73

to sin, 4S8.

Torture, to obtain testimony, 468,
528; question of lying, to escape,
468; to be borne with iove, 470.
by St.
Paul, 511; manual, suitable to
preachers, 512.

Trades, honest, practised

Travel, in search of instruction: to

Holy Land, 355.

Tribulation, attends marriage, 422,

424.

Trinity, Holy, the, doctrine of, 327

sq., 374-

34S,

365;

349;

search

361; God is,

Truth, St. Augustin's early love of,
347; belief prepares for beholdafter,
ing.
354 sq. ; lovers of, believe authority : why, made hard
to
363;
discover,
state of mind needful for seekstatement
of every
ing,
in Scripture, 422; may be spoken
in order to deceive, 459; comprises every eternal good, 463;
eternal, distinguished from ordinary, 467, 474, 475; notion of
keeping "in the heart," 471,
486; love of, allows not false
witness, 473; may be preferred
to
external, 475,
498; not to be wronged in defending it, 481; every lie contrary to, 483; to be kept with
those without: some to be concealed from aliens, 487; nothing
against it "just," 495; defended
by examples of chastity, 499, 500.
425; apof the Three Holy

Type, woman, of what,

everything

plication
Children, 438.*

Typical, meaning of many wives,
408; view of impurity, 409.

Uncircumcision, not to be feigned,

509.

Understanding, distinguished from
belief and opinion: is by reason,
359; now known by multitudes
to be the way of knowing God,
364;
370;
faith goes before, 370.

God's gift,

quick,

Unions, three spoken of by the

Apostle, 3S8.

Unity, in Godhead illustrated by
that of souls united: but imperfectly, 370.

Unmarried, may mean widows, 442;
persons, "think of things of the
Lord,"'' 443; should give Christ
what they reserve from a con451; exhorted to forbear
sort,
marriage, 453.

Unwilling

continence

estimated,

429.

Veil,

of Scripture,

done away in
Christ, 351; of Moses, of the
Nazarite, 523.

Veils, men not to wear: why, 524.
Vengeance, less kingly than forbear-

ance, 529.
Ventilare, 351.

tue, 528

Vine, the Church in its likeness to

Christ compared to, 309.

Violence, not consented to, corrupts
not, 463, 490; lying to escape,
wrong, 463; not to be evaded by
sin, 464.

Virgil, quoted, 239, 242, 352, 355,

540.

Virgin, (see Mary,) God most fitly
born of a, 339; the Blessed, 403;
the blessed, a type and pattern,
417; what was her highest blessedness, 41 S, 419; had vowed
418; was
of
virginity,
Christ: how both a Mother and
a Virgin, 418.

born

chastity above marriage,

Virginal
422.

Virginity, preferred to marriage, 397,
420;
411, 422; is angelic, 403,
the greater of two goods, 41 1 ; to
be guarded by humility,
413;
that of the blessed Virgin, 418;
a good, for the sake of the future
life, 420, 421, 423, 424; its joys
in heaven, 426; the gift of God,
432; its fruits hundredfold, 434;
inferior to martyrdom, 435; preto conferred by St.
jugal faith, 442; goodness of,
makes not marriage evil, 442;
of children, a compensation to
448; forsaking,
parents, 445,
after profession is sinful,
445;
of the Church, 446.

Paul

Virgins, brought to

Christ everywhere, 340; all holy ones are
Mothers of Christ, 41 S; rich,
how they may give
birth to
members of Christ, 419; distinguished from sacred Virgins,
420; no "command" concerning, 421; have peculiar joys in
heaven, 426; follow the Lamb.
427; need humility, 428; their
grounds for loving God, 432;
may be less fit than married
women for martyrdom, 434, 435;
encouragement to, 437; should
love the fairness of Christ, 437;
distinguished from the "unmarbefore widows in
ried,"
the kingdom, 451 ; special song
of, 451.

442;

Virtue, what patience is

527;
instruments of, not to be yielded
to, 528.

a,

Virtues of the soul may exist un-

seen in habit, 409, 410.

Visible and invisible creation, 369.
of the unseen world, 546.
Visions,
Vows, freely made, makes what was
lawful unlawful, 443; wrong to
desire to revoke, 445; marriage
after, is not adulter}', 446; but
yet is worse, 446; of continence
recommended, 450; a
protection, 452; marriage to Christ by,
446; more laudable* because not
required, 446.

Vows of continence, 427.

337.

Washing, cnce for all in Baptism:

daily, in prayer 375.
Watchings, use of, 452.
Water, changed into wine, 303.
Whirling, about false doctrine, 523.
Wicked, the death of, eternal in the
the life of the

same sens-.; as
Saints, 273.

Widowed, chastity, above marriage,

Widowed, continence, its rank, 434.
Widowhood, forsaking, after profession is a sin, 445; this is not
adultery, but worse, 446; long
and early, greater test of continence, 447; prayer and fasting
make better, 448; hard questions about, '448.
their

Widows,

continence,

434;
Fourth Council forbade (professed widows) to marry again,
441; may be called unmarried:
better among the members of
Christ than married women, 442;
may marry again, as Ruth, 443;
more blessed if not, as Anna,
443, 447; not therefore better
than Ruth herself, 444; do better
in not marrying now that Christ
is come, 444; having family, have
no good reason to marry, 445;
should do accordwhat they
ing to their ability, 445; merits
of, in different cases compared,
447; luxurious living of, condemned, 452; humility an ornament to, 448; alms help their
prayers, 452; to draw others to
like profession, 453.

408 ;

Wife (see Husband), why created
out of husband, 399; many allowed once, why, 407, 408; onlyone belongs to a steward of the
and woman,
Church,
Greek word ambiguous, 506.
Will (see Freedom of), of God, invariable, 369; true submission of,
to God, 373; of man, admonished and healed by grace, 449;
free, made too much of, by
some, 450; if man works on,
much more God helps, 450;
God not lost but by, 530; free,
of man, gets not patience by itself, 531; why it produces hardness, yet not true patience, 531,
532; evil, made frantic by devilish incitements: the devil became devil by his own, 534; has
not love of God, but by His
gift, 534-

Wills, forgery of, 488.
Wisdom, man's true, is the fear of
God, 237; to be found in true
religion, 354; implies knowledge
concerning God and man, 360;
he who has not, knows not, 361;
prayer to God for, 363; is God's
gift, 433, 450; patience handtrue and false,
maid of, 528;
true from God, 531.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.

Wise, who are, 360; how are fools
to find them, 361; are brought
near to God, 363.

Witchcraft, not to be detected by

witchcraft, 500.

Witness, false, forbidden. 460, 467,
469; question if lawful to save
life, 464; about God or Christ,
definition
of, 467,
464, 467;
468; incompatible with love of
truth, 473; false, might seem
expedient at times, 488.

Wolves, in sheep's clothing, 485;
sheep not to wear theirs, 486.
Woman, insult offered to the sun by

a, 353-

Women, now, compared to the holy
women of old, 406, 412;
ac-

companied and supported the
Apostles: and our Lord, 506;
figure the concupiscential part
of the mind, 524.

Words, use of Greek, 349; are the
beginning of works, 400; are
deeds, 487.

Work, evil, not made good by motive, 488; to refuse, as wrong
an error, 415.

Working, understood of laboring in
spiritual things enjoined by the
Apostle, 503.

Works, are preceded by thoughts,
380, 381; and Faith. 392; good,
a better portion than children,
451, 452; precede not election,
533. 534-

World, spirit of this, puffs up. 449;
cares of, lower married holiness,
451; passing away, a reason
waits
against marrying, 452;
for the number of Saints, 453;
trials of, require patience, 529;
love of, produces worldly endurance, 532, 534; lust comes of,
but also of man's will, 532 sq.

Wounds of Christ, 437.
Wrath, in God no passion, 527.
Writers, three ways to err in using,
351; sense of, often hard to see
clearly, 352.

Zaccheus and Goliath compared,

411, 430.

FIFTEEN

DOCTRINAL AND MORAL TREATISES.

INDEX OF TEXTS.

Gen. i-iii.

i. 1

.

.

i. 27 .
i. 28 .

,

,

i. 31
ii. 1-3
ii. 17.
ii. 21, 22
iii. 5
vi. 7 .
vi. 22.

.

.

.

.

xvii. 4
xviii. 4 .
xviii. 15 .
xviii. 20 .
xix. 2.
xix. 5-1 1
xix. 8.
xx. 2, 12.
xxi. 10
xxi. 12
xxii. 12 .
xxii. 18 .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

PAGE
289, 444
. 463, 489
.412, 535
. 339, 340
. 286, 304
49 2

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

vi. 25.

Josh, ii

Ex. xxxii. 31

Lev. xix. 18
Num. vi. 5 .

Judges ix. 8-15
1 Sam. xxi. 13.

xxxiii. 19 .
xxxiv. 28 .
xxxiv. 33 .

PAGE
. 268, 533
30S
xix. 11 .
xxi. 7
Deut. v. 5 .
v. 9 .
vi. 4.
vi. 5.
xxiii. 24, 25
xxiv. 1
xxv. 5-10 . 410, 444
xxix. 5 .
xxxiv. 5
xxv. 22-35
xxviii. 11-19.
2 Sam. ii. 5 ... 544
xvi. 5-12 .
i. 21, Lat. from LXX.
372, 373
ii. 5
ii. 9, Latin from lxx.
ii. 10. .
. 373, 530
vii. 1, lxx.
. 432, 435
xiv. 1
xxv. 4.
xxviii. 28, lxx. 237, 433
.253, 34i
473. 534
. 460, 468
. 473, 481

xi. 13.
xiii. 21, 22 .
xxi. 10,
13 .
2 Kings x. 31 .

1 Kings ii. 38, lxx. .

v. 5
v. 5 6 .
v. 6 .

xxii. 18-20 .

Job i. 8

ii- 7ii. 11

v. 6, 7 .

Ps. i.

iv. 8

i- 2

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

Ps. vi. 7.

.

viii. 4 .
ix. 18

.

. 263

.471

.

.

x. 3 .
xi. 5.
xiii. 6 .
xiv. 1
xiv. 6 .
xv. 2
xvi. 2
xviii. 44
xix. 3, 4
xix. 7.
xix. 9.
xx. 8.

.

.

.

.

xxii. 1

.

xxii. 16, 17
xxii. 27, 28
xxiii. 6 .
xxv. 1 5 .
xxv. 18 .
xxvii. 1.
xxvii. 4.
xxvii. 9.
xxvii. 10
xxvii. 12
xxx. 6. 7
xxxi. 19
xxxi. 22
xxxiv. 14
xxxvi. 3
xxxvi. 9
xxxvi. 11
xxxvii. 23
xxxviii. 9
xxxix. 3
xli. 4
xli. 6-8.
xli. 9. 10
xliii. 1
xiv. 1, Vulg.
xiv. 2
. 420
xiv. 6-17
xiv. 13 .
xlvi. 8 .

.

.

xlviii. 1

1. 15.

Ii. 5
Ii. 10

Ii. 17
liv. 1

.

.

53i, 536
522, 528

53i
482, 486
43i
34i
253. 430
258, 298

Ps. Iv. 5.

.

Ivi. 4, 5
lvi. 7, lxx
lix. 9
lix. 10 . 248
lix. 11 .

.

lxii. 5
1XV. 2

.

.

lxv. 13 .
lxvi. 4 .
lxix. 21-23
lxxi. 4, 5
Ixxi. 5 .
lxxv. 7 .
lxxvii. 9
lxxviii.

lxxix. 2, 3
Ixxix. 11
Ixxxii. 6
Ixxxiv. 2
lxxxiv. 4
lxxxv. 12
xc. 9
xciv. 19
xcvi. 1 .
xcvi. 8 .

ci. 1.

.

.

ciii. 2, 3
ciii. 3
cviii. 5 .
cxi. 2, LXX
cxv. 3 .
cxvi. 11
cxvi. 12
cxvi. 15
cxviii. 22
cxix. 4-6
cxix. 133
cxix. 142
cxxiii. 4
cxxvii. 1
cxxxviii. 3, LXX.
cxxxviii. 6
cxxxix. 7
cxli. 3
cxli. 3, 4
cxli. 4
cxlvi. 8 .
cxlviii. 2

.

.

cxlviii. 5
Prov. iii. II, 12.

PAGE
262, 533
299. 342
531, 535
383, 45i
267, 547
267, 271
497, 54i
3S4
384> 433

.

.

.

.

.

xxiii.
xxiv
xxiv. 2-4
xxv. 5, 6
xxv. 9, 10
xxv. 26 .
xxvi. 7
xxvii. 16-19.
xxvii. 19 .
xxxii. 24, 25
xxxvii. 33
xxxviii. 14-18 .
xxxviii. 27-30 .
xlii

.

.

.

xlvi. 27 .
xlvii. 30 .

Ex. i. 17-20

i. 19, 20 .
iii. 14 .... 324

.

.

ix. 16 .

.

.

.

.

xii
xx. 5
xx. 12 .
xx. 13 .
xx. 14 ,
xx. 15, 16.
xx. 16 .
xxxii. 4

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. 427, 468
. 460, 468

.

.

.

.

.

.

5/6

INDEX OF TEXTS.

INDEX OF TEXTS.

PAGE

A Select library of the Nicene
and post-Nicene fathers of
the Christian church

A

BR
S46
v.3
cop. 2

PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY

