Select Orations of Saint Gregory Nazianzen.

Title Page.

Select Orations of Saint Gregory Nazianzen.

SELECT ORATIONS

OF

SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN,

Sometime Archbishop of Constantinople.

Translated by

CHARLES GORDON BROWNE, M.A.,

RECTOR OF LYMPSTONE, DEVON;

and

JAMES EDWARD SWALLOW, M.A.,

CHAPLAIN OF THE HOUSE OF MERCY, HORBURY.

Almighty.

On the Words, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and of All Things Visible and Invisible.

On the Clause, and in One Lord Jesus Christ, with a Reading from the First Epistle
to the Corinthians.

On the Words, the Only-Begotten Son of God, Begotten of the Father Very God
Before All Ages, by Whom All Things Were Made.

On the words Incarnate, and Made Man.

On the words, Crucified and Buried.

On the Words, And Rose Again from the Dead on the Third Day, and Ascended
into the Heavens, and Sat on the Right Hand of the Father.

On the Clause, And Shall Come in Glory to Judge the Quick and the Dead; Of
Whose Kingdom There Shall Be No End.

On the Article, And in One Holy Ghost, the Comforter, Which Spake in the
Prophets.

Continuation of the Discourse on the Holy Ghost.

On the Words, And in One Holy Catholic Church, and in the Resurrection of the
Flesh, and the Life Everlasting.

First Lecture on the Mysteries.

On the Mysteries. II: Of Baptism.

On the Mysteries. III: On Chrism.

On the Mysteries. IV: On the Body and Blood of Christ.

On the Mysteries. V: On the Sacred Liturgy and Communion.

Select Orations of Saint Gregory Nazianzen.

Title Page.

Prolegomena.

The Life.

The Writings.

Literature.

On Easter and His Reluctance.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination to the
Priesthood, with an Exposition of the Character of the Priestly Office.

To Those Who Had Invited Him, and Not Come to Receive Him.

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

iii

On his Sister Gorgonia.

To His Father, When He Had Entrusted to Him the Care of the Church of
Nazianzus.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

On the Death of His Father.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

Introduction to the 'Theological' Orations.

The First Theological Oration. A Preliminary Discourse Against the Eunomians.

The Second Theological Oration.

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

Against The Arians, and Concerning Himself.

On the Arrival of the Egyptians.

On the Words of the Gospel, 'When Jesus Had Finished These Sayings,' Etc.--S.
Matt. xix. 1.

On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

On Pentecost.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

The Second Oration on Easter.

Select Letters of Saint Gregory Nazianzen.

Title Page.

Letters on the Apollinarian Controversy.

Introduction.

To Nectarius, Bishop of Constantinople.

To Cledonius the Priest Against Apollinarius.

Against Apollinarius; The Second Letter to Cledonius.

To Olympius.

Correspondence with Saint Basil the Great, Archbishop of Caesarea.

iv

To Basil His Comrade.

Letter II.

Letter IV.

Letter V.

Letter VI.

Letter VIII.

Letter XIX.

To Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea.

To Eusebius, Archbishop of Caesarea.

Letter XVIII. To Eusebius of Caesarea.

To the Great Basil.

Letter XLI. To the People of Caesarea, in His Father's Name.

To the Bishops.

To Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata.

To Basil.

To Basil.

To Basil.

To Basil.

To Basil. (The Praises of Quiet.)

To Basil.

To Basil.

To Basil.

To Basil.

Miscellaneous Letters.

To His Brother Caesarius.

Letter VII.

Letter XIV.

Letter XXIII.

Letter XX.

To S. Gregory of Nyssa.

Letter I.

Letter LXXII.

v

Letter LXXIII.

Letter LXXIV.

Letter LXXVI.

Letter LXXXI.

Letter CLXXXII.

A Letter of Condolence on the Death of His Sister Theosebia.

To Eusebius Bishop of Samosata.

Letter XLII.

Letter XLIV.

Letter LXIV.

Letter LXV.

Letter LXVI.

To Sophronius, Prefect of Constantinople.

Letter XXI.

Letter XXII.

Letter XXIX.

Letter XXXVII.

Letter XXXIX.

Letter XCIII.

Letter CXXXV.

To Amphilochius the Younger.

Letter IX.

Letter XIII.

Letter XXV.

Letter XXVI.

Letter XXVII.

Letter XXVIII.

Letter LXII.

To Amphilochius the Elder.

Letter CLXXI.

Letter CLXXXIV.

To Nectarius Archbishop of Constantinople.

vi

Letter LXXXVIII.

Letter XCI.

Letter CLI.

Letter CLXXXV.

Letter CLXXXVI.

Letter CCII.

To Theodore, Bishop of Tyana.

Letter LXXVII.

Letter CXV.

Letter CXXI.

Letter CXXII.

Letter CXXIII.

Letter CXXIV.

Letter CLII.

To Bosporius, Bishop of Colonia.

To Theodore, Archbishop of Tyana.

Letter CLXIII.

Letter CLXXXIII.

Letter CXXXIX.

To Nicobulus.

Letter XII.

Letter LI.

Letter LII.

Letter LIII.

Letter LIV.

Letter LV.

To Olympius.

Letter CIV.

Letter CV.

Letter CVI.

Letter CXXV.

Letter CXXVI.

vii

Letter CXXXI.

Letter CXL.

Letter CXLI.

Letter CXLII.

Letter CXLIII.

Letter CXLIV.

Letter CXLV.

To Olympius.

Letter CLIV.

Indexes

Index of Scripture References

Greek Words and Phrases

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

viii

This PDF file is from the Christian Classics Ethereal Library, www.ccel.org. The mission of
the CCEL is to make classic Christian books available to the world.

• This book is available in PDF, HTML, ePub, Kindle, and other formats. See

http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/npnf207.html.

• Discuss this book online at http://www.ccel.org/node/3407.

The CCEL makes CDs of classic Christian literature available around the world through the
Web and through CDs. We have distributed thousands of such CDs free in developing
countries. If you are in a developing country and would like to receive a free CD, please
send a request by email to cd-request@ccel.org.

The Christian Classics Ethereal Library is a self supporting non-profit organization at
Calvin College. If you wish to give of your time or money to support the CCEL, please visit
http://www.ccel.org/give.

This PDF file is copyrighted by the Christian Classics Ethereal Library. It may be freely
copied for non-commercial purposes as long as it is not modified. All other rights are reserved. Written permission is required for commercial use.

ix

Prolegomena.

The Life.

Prolegomena.

------------

Section I.-The Life.

Prolegomena.

S. Gregory Nazianzen, called by the Ecumenical Council of Ephesus "The Great," and
universally known as "The Theologian" or "The Divine," a title which he shares with S. John
the Evangelist alone among the Fathers of the Church, was, like the great Basil of Caesarea
and his brother Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa, by birth a Cappadocian. He was born at Arianzus,
a country estate belonging to his father, in the neighbourhood of Nazianzus.

This latter, sometimes called Nazianzum, is a place quite unknown to early writers, and
derives all its importance from its connection with our Saint. The Romans seem to have
called it Diocaesarea. This would place it in the south-western portion of the district called
Cappadocia Secunda, a sub-division of the Province, which had previously included the
whole country of Cappadocia under the Prefect of Caesarea. The Emperor Valens made the
division for financial purposes about a.d. 371, and assigned Tyana as its civil Metropolis,
and, as we shall see, thereby caused an ecclesiastical quarrel which had considerable effect
on the life of S. Gregory. Tyana was situated at no great distance south and east of Nazianzus,
which place is usually identified with some interesting ruins about eighteen miles southeast of Ak Serai, on a rocky platform at the foot of the mountains called Hassan Dagh. 
Amongst other ruined buildings here are the remains of three Byzantine churches of great
age, but more recent than the rest of the town.

His father, who bore the same name with himself, had originally belonged to an obscure
sect called Hypsistarians or Hypsistians, of whom we know little except what we learn from
Gregory of Nazianzus and his namesake of Nyssa. They seem to have held a sort of syncretist
doctrine, containing elements derived from heathen, Christian, and Jewish sources. They
were very strict monotheists, rejecting both polytheism and the doctrine of the Trinity, and
worshipping the One Supreme Being under the names of The Most High and The Almighty,
and the emblems of Fire and Light, but with no external cultus; for they rejected sacrifice
and every outward form of worship, holding adoration to be an exclusively interior and
spiritual act. With singular inconsistency, however, they adopted the observance of the
Jewish Sabbath, and the Levitical prohibition of certain kinds of food. They were but few
in number, and their influence was insignificant even in Cappadocia, which was the
headquarters of sect.2525 From this form of error the elder Gregory was converted by the

ἐκ δύοιν ἐναντιωτάτοιν συγκεκραμένης, ἑλληνικῆς τε καὶ νομικῆς τερατείας· ὧν αμφοτέρων τὰ μέρη

φυγὼν, ἐκ μέρων συνετέθη. Τῆς μέν γὰρ τὰ εἴδωλα καὶ τὰς θυσίας ἀποπεμπόμενοι, τιμῶσι τὸ πῦρ καὶ τὰ λυχνα·

τῆς δὲ τὸ σάββατον αἰδούμενοι καὶ τὰ περὶ τὰ βρώματά ἐστιν ἃ μικρολογίαν, τὴν περιτομὴν ἀτιμάζουσιν.-Or.

xviii. 5.

The Life.

influence of his wife, Nonna; and soon after his conversion was consecrated to the bishopric
of Nazianzus.

Nonna, the mother of our Saint, was the daughter of Christian parents, and had been
very carefully brought up. Like S. John Chrysostom and S. Augustine, Gregory had the inestimable advantage of being reared at the knee of a mother of conspicuous holiness. There
were three children of the marriage-a sister, Gorgonia, probably somewhat older than
Gregory, who was devotedly fond of her, and a brother, Caesarius, perhaps younger, who
was a distinguished physician, and occupied a post of confidence at the Court of Constantinople. Gregory was certainly born at a late period of the life of his mother. He tells
us that, like so many other holy men of whom we read both in the Bible and outside its
pages, he was consecrated to God by his mother even before his birth. The precise date is
uncertain. There are two lines in his poem on his own life which seem to indicate clearly
that it took place after his father's elevation to the Episcopate, or at any rate after his ordination to the Priesthood. Speaking of the great desire of the elder Gregory to see his son ordained to the Priesthood, in order that he might have him as a coadjutor and aid to his own
declining years and failing strength, he gives the arguments by which the old man sought
to persuade him to take upon himself a burden which he dreaded; and among them we find
the father saying to the son:2526 "You have not been yet so long in life as I have spent in
sacrifice." And though the Roman Catholic writers on the subject strain every nerve to get
rid of the obvious meaning, by ingenious manipulation of the text or by far-fetched interpretations, yet the conclusion remains unshaken, and is supported also by another passage,
to be cited presently, that he was at any rate born during the Priesthood of his father. He
tells us that he left Athens in or about his thirtieth year,2527 and also that the Emperor Julian
was his contemporary there. Now Julian was at Athens in 355; so that we must place
Gregory's birth not earlier than 325; and if we give its natural meaning to the first passage
quoted, not earlier than 330, the latest date available for his father's consecration as Bishop. 
This is not inconsistent with the Athenian chronology of his life, as he certainly spent many
years there, and probably did not leave the place till 357.

As soon as the children's age permitted, Gregory and his brother Caesarius were sent
to school at Caesarea, under the care of a good man named Carterius, who as long as he
lived retained a great influence over the mind of his elder pupil. This is perhaps the same
Carterius who afterwards presided over the monasteries of Antioch in Syria, and was one
of the instructors of S. John Chrysostom. The following is a free rendering of one of four
funeral epigrams written in later years by our Saint in honour of his old friend and tutor:

"Whither, Carterius, best beloved of friends,

2526 Carm. de vita sua, 511.

Ib. 339.

The Life.

O whither hast thou gone, and left me here
Alone amid the many toils of earth?
Thou who didst hold the rudder of my youth,
When in another land I learned to weigh
The words and stories of a learned age;
Thou who didst bind me to the uncarnal life.
Truly the Christ, whom thou possessest now,
Took thee unto Himself, the King thou lov'st.
O thou bright lightning of most glorious Christ,
Thou best protection of my early days,
Thou charioteer of all my younger life,
Remember now the Gregory whom erst
Thou trainedst in the ways of virtuous life,
Carterius, master of the life of grace."

It was probably at Caesarea that the acquaintance between Gregory and S. Basil the Great
began, which was afterwards to ripen into a lifelong friendship. But their association did
not last long at this period, for Basil soon went to Constantinople to continue his education,
while Gregory and his brother removed to the Palestinian Caesarea; probably as much for
the sake of making a pilgrimage to the Holy Sepulchre, as for the advantage of the schools
of that learned resort. Caesarius soon went on to Alexandria; but Gregory was tempted by
the flourishing Palestinian school of rhetoric to remain a while and study that art. One of
his fellow-students here was Euzoius, the future heresiarch. From Palestine he too went on
to Alexandria, where he found his brother enjoying an excellent character, and highly distinguished among the students of the University. S. Athanasius was at this time the Bishop,
and Didymus head of the famous Catechetical School; but as Gregory, though one of his
orations is a panegyric on S. Athanasius, does not mention having ever met either of these
two great men, we must suppose that the former was at this time suffering one of his many
periods of exile-his second banishment lasted from 340 to 347. Gregory does not seem to
have remained very long at Alexandria; the fascination exercised on his mind by a yet more
famous seat of learning-Athens-soon drew him thither. He could not even wait for a favourable time of year, but must start at once. He took passage in the month of November
in a ship bound for Aegina, with some of whose crew he was acquainted. They had a prosperous voyage until they were in sight of Cyprus, when they were assailed by a tremendous
storm, and the ship, swept by the heavy seas, became waterlogged, and would not answer
her helm. At the same time the violence of the sea burst the water-tanks, and the ship's
company were left in dire distress. Gregory, who was not yet baptized, was thrown into
terrible distress at thus finding himself in peril of death while yet outside the Covenant of
God. In earnest prayer he renewed his self-dedication, and vowed to give himself wholly

The Life.

to the service of God, if his life might be spared to receive Holy Baptism. He tells the story
at some length and with great graphic power in his long poem on his own life, from which
we subjoin a cento,2528 and also in his oration spoken at his father's funeral (Orat. XVIII,
c. 31, p. 352 Ed. Ben.). It is, however, uncertain whether he was baptized immediately after
this deliverance, or whether he waited till his return to Nazianzus. At any rate he reached
Athens in safety, and shortly afterwards was joined there by Basil; when the early acquaintance which was now renewed soon deepened into an intimacy of brotherly affection, which,
though often sorely tried, never grew cold in Gregory's heart. In the funeral oration which

2528 What time I parted from Egyptian shores, Whence I had somewhat culled of ancient lore, We weighed,

and under Cyprus cut the waves In a straight course for Hellas, when there rose A mighty strife of winds, and

shook the ship; And all was night; earth, seas, and darkened skies; And thunders echoed to the lightning's shock.

Whistled the rigging of the swelling sails, And bent the mast; the helm had lost its power, For none could hold

it in the raging seas. The ship was filled with overwhelming waves; Mingled the shout of sailor, and the cries Of

helmsman, captain, and of passenger, And those who till that fearful hour had been Unconscious of a God; for

fear can teach. And, worst of all our dread impending woes, No water had we, for the ship began To labour, and

the beakers soon were broke Which held our treasure of sweet water scant; And famine fought with surging and

with storm To slay us. But God sent a swift release. For Punic sailors suddenly appeared, Who in their own sore

terror soon perceived By our sad cries our danger, and with oars (For they were strong) came up and saved our

barque And us, who now all but sea-corpses were; Like fish forsaken of their native wave, Or lamp that dies for

want of nourishment. But while we all were fearing sudden death, Mine was a worse, because a secret, fear. The

cleansing waters ne'er had passed on me, That slay our foe and join us to our God. This was my lamentation,

this my dread. For this I stretched my hands and cried to God, And cried above the noise of surging waves, And

rent my clothes, and lay in misery. But, though ye scarce believe it, yet ‘tis true, All those on whom our common

danger pressed Forgot themselves, and came and prayed with me. And Thou wast then, O Christ, my great defence,

Who now deliverest from the storm of life. For when no good hope dawned upon our eyes, Nor isle, nor continent,

nor mountain top, Nor torch, nor star to light the mariners, Nor small nor great of earthly things appeared,

What port was left for troubled sailor-folk? Despairing of all else, I look to thee; Life, breath, salvation, light,

and strength to men, Who frightest, smitest, smilest, healest all, And ever weavest good from human ill. I call

to mind Thy wonders of old time, By which we recognize Thy mighty hand; The sea divided-Israel's host

brought through- Their foes defeated by Thy lifted hand- And Egypt crushed by scourges, chiefs and all-

Nature subdued, and walls thrown down by shout. And, adding mine to those old famous acts, Thine own, I

said, am I, both erst and now; Twice shalt Thou take me for Thine own, a gift Of earth and sea, a doubly hallowed

gift, By prayers of mother and by fateful sea. To Thee I live, if I escape the waves, And gain baptismal dews; and

Thou wilt lose A faithful servant if Thou cast me off, E'en now Thine own disciple, in the deep; Shake off for

me Thy slumber, and arise, And stay my fear. So prayed I-and the noise Of winds grew still, the surges ceased,

the ship Held straight upon her course; my prayer was heard.

The Life.

he pronounced over his friend, Gregory has left us a most interesting account of University
life in the middle of the fourth century, of which we give a summary here, referring the
reader for details to the oration itself, which will be found in the present volume. Basil's
reputation, he says, preceded him to Athens, where he was received with much enthusiasm. 
Many of the silliest students there are mad upon Sophists, and are divided upon the respective
merits of their teachers with as much excitement as is shown by the partisans of the various
chariots in the Hippodromes. And so a new-comer is laid hold of by them in this fashion. 
First of all, he is entertained by the first who can get hold of him-either a relation or a
friend or a fellow-countryman, or a leading Sophister, who is in favour with his master, and
touts for him. There he is unmercifully chaffed, and with more or less of rough horseplay,
by everybody, to take down his pride; and is then escorted processionally through the streets
to the Baths; after which process he is regarded as free of the students' guild. Basil, however,
through the good offices of his friend Gregory, was spared this trial of his nerves, out of respect for his great attainments; and this kind action was the beginning of their long and affectionate intimacy. Among the students, however, were a number of young Armenians,
some of whom had been at school with Basil, and were very jealous of him. These young
men, with the object of destroying his reputation if possible, were continually harassing him
with disputations upon hard and sophistical questions. Basil was quite able to hold his own
against them, but Gregory, jealous for the honour of his University, and not at first perceiving
the malice of these young men, sided with them and made the conflict more equal. As soon,
however, as he began to see their real purpose, he forsook them and took his stand by his
friend, whose victory was thus made not only assured but easy. The young gentlemen naturally did not like this, and Gregory became, much to Basil's distress, very unpopular among
them, as they chose to regard his conduct in the matter as treason against his University,
and especially against the students of his own year.

The city of Athens at this time was full of dangerous distractions for young men; feasts,
theatres, assemblies, wine parties, etc. Gregory and his friend resolved to renounce all these,
and to allow themselves to know only two roads-one, that which led to the Church and
its holy teachers; the other, that which took them to their University lectures. Amongst
other famous students of Gregory's day was Prince Julian, afterwards the Emperor who
apostatized and endeavoured to restore the ancient heathenism, and galvanize it into
something like a new life. Gregory claims even at this early period to have foreseen and
dreaded the result of Julian's accession. "I had long foreseen," he says, "how matters would
be, from the time that I was with him at Athens. He had come there shortly after the violent
measures against his brother, having asked permission of the Emperor to do so. He had
two reasons for this sojourn-the one more honest, namely, to visit Greece and its schools,
the other more secret and known only to a few persons, namely, to consult with the heathen
priests and charlatans about his plans, because his wickedness was not as yet declared. Even

The Life.

then I made no bad guess about the man, although I am not one of those skilled in such
matters; but I was made a prophet by the unevenness of his disposition and the very unsettled
condition of his mind. I used these very words about him: ‘What an evil the Roman State
is nourishing,' though I prefaced them with a wish that I might prove a false prophet."
(Orat. V. 23, 24.) Gregory must have been a long time at Athens. He seems to have gone
there at about the age of eighteen, and not to have left till he was past thirty. Basil left before
him and returned to Cappadocia, and as soon as he could follow he went to Constantinople,
where he met his brother, who had just come there to practice as a Court Physician, but
resolved to throw up his practice and return with his brother to Nazianzus. They found
their parents still living and their father occupying the Episcopal Throne. From this time
onward Gregory divided his time between his parents and his friend, living partly at
Arianzus, and partly with Basil in Pontus, in monastic seclusion. At his Baptism, which it
seems most probable took place at this period, he made a solemn vow never to swear, and
to devote his whole energies and powers solely to the glory of God, and the defence and
spreading of the faith. Caesarius did not remain long in the retirement of home, but soon
returned to the Capital, where a brilliant career seemed opening before him. Gregory, whose
mind was strongly impressed with the dangers and temptations of a life at Court, did not
altogether approve of this step, yet he does not very severely blame it. He himself, however,
felt very strongly drawn to the monastic life; but as retirement from the world did not seem
to him to be his vocation, he resolved to continue to live in the world, and to be a help and
support to his now aged parents, and especially to his father in the duties of his Episcopate,
but at the same time to live under the strictest ascetic rule. He had, however, always a secret
hankering after the Solitary life, which he had once (Ep. i.) promised Basil to share with
him; and he did find himself able for some years to spend part of his time with his friend in
his retirement in the wilds of Pontus. They portioned out their days very carefully between
prayer, meditation and study, and manual labour, on the principles laid down by Basil in a
letter to his friend, which afterwards were developed into the celebrated Rule still observed
by the entire body of the Religious of the Eastern Church. Retirement, he says, does not
consist in the act of removal from the world in bodily presence, but in this, that we tear away
the soul from those bodily influences which stir up the passions; that we give up our parental
city and our father's house, our possessions and goods, friendship and wedlock, business
and profession, art and science, and everything, and are quite ready to take into our hearts
nothing but the impressions of the divine teaching.

In solitude, Basil thinks, it is possible altogether to tame the passions, like wild beasts,
by gentle treatment; to lull them to sleep, to disarm them. By turning away the soul from
the enticements of sense, and withdrawing into one's self for the contemplation of God and
of Eternal Beauty, it is possible to raise man to a forgetfulness of natural wants, and to a
spiritual freedom from care. The means to this spiritual elevation are in his view the reading

The Life.

of Holy Scripture, which sets before us rules of life-but especially the pictures of the lives
of godly men; Prayer which draws down the Godhead to us, and makes our mind a pure
abode for It; and an earnest silence, more inclined to learn than to teach, but by no means
morose or unfriendly. At the same time Basil desires that the outward appearance of one
who thus practises solitude shall be in keeping with his inner life; with humble downcast
eye, and dishevelled hair, in dirty untidy clothes he must go about, neither lazily loitering
nor passionately quick, but quietly. His garment, girt upon his loins with a belt, is to be
coarse, not of a bright colour, suited for both summer and winter, close enough to keep the
body warm without additional clothing; and his shoes adapted to their purpose, but without
ornament. For food, let him use only the most necessary, chiefly vegetables; for drink, water-at least in health. For mealtime, which begins and ends with prayer, one hour is to be
fixed. Sleep is to be short, light, and never so dead as to let the soul be open to the impressions
of corrupting dreams.

They gave themselves especially to the study of Holy Scripture, and to the practice of
devotional exercises. In their study their great principle was to interpret the holy writings
not by their own individual judgment, but on the lines laid down for them by the authority
of ancient interpreters. Of uninspired commentators they had the greatest respect for Origen,
whose errors, however, they happily avoided. From his exegetical writings they compiled
a book of Extracts, which they published in twenty-seven books, to which they gave the
name of Philocalia, i.e., what in modern language is called a Christology. This is happily
still extant, and is valuable as preserving for us many passages otherwise lost, or existing
only in a Latin translation. Gregory sent a copy of this work to his friend and subsequent
companion at Constantinople, Theodore, Bishop of Tyana, as an Easter gift many years afterwards, and accompanied it with a letter, in which he speaks of the work as a memorial
of himself and Basil, and as intended for an aid to scholars; and begs that his friend will give
a proof of its usefulness, with the help of diligence and the Holy Spirit. Socrates says that
this careful study of Origen was of the greatest service to the two friends in their subsequent
controversies with the Arians; for these heretics quoted him in support of their errors, but
the two Fathers were enabled to confute them readily, by shewing that they were completely
ignorant of the meaning of Origen's argument.

But Gregory does not appear to have stayed long in Basil's Monastery;-although Rufinus
speaks of a sojourn of thirteen years. This cannot for chronological reasons have been a
continuous stay, although it is true that Basil's monastic life in Pontus, and Gregory's various
visits to him there extended over a period of about that length, from his first retirement in
357 to his consecration to the Episcopate in 370. It was after about three years that Gregory
returned to Nazianzus (360), possibly, as Ullmann suggests, because of circumstances which
had arisen at his home, which seemed to call imperatively for his presence in the interests

The Life.

of the peace of the Diocese, and for the assistance which he might, though a layman, be able
to give to his aged Father, who had got into trouble through a piece of imprudent conduct.
The Emperor Constantius, who was an Arian, had in 359 assembled at Ariminum (the
modern Rimini) a Council of 400 Western Bishops, and these, partly duped, partly compelled
by the Imperial Officers, had put out a Creed, which, while acknowledging the proper Deity
of the Son, and confessing Him to be Like the Father, omitted to say Like In All Points, and
refused the word Consubstantial; thus, while condemning the extreme followers of Arius,
favouring the views of the Semi-Arian party. At the same time another Synod, of 150 Eastern
Bishops, was assembled under Court influence at Seleucia, and promulgated a similar formula. The Bishop of Nazianzus, though still as always a staunch upholder of Nicene orthodoxy, was in some way induced to attach his signature to this compromising Creed; and
this action led to most important consequences. The Monks of his Diocese took the matter
up with the usual earnestness of Religious, and, with several also of the Bishops, withdrew
from Communion with their own Bishop. This may have been the reason for his son's return. He induced his Father to apologize for his involuntary error and to put out an orthodox
Confession, and so he healed the schism. To this period belongs his first Oration on Peace;
in which, after an eloquent encomium on the Religious life, he sets forth the blessings of
peace and concord, and contrasts them with the misery of discord; begging the people to
be very slow indeed on this account to sever themselves from the Communion of those
whom they think to be erring brethren; and thanking God for the restoration of peace. He
concludes the whole with a splendid setting forth of the Catholic doctrine concerning the
Trinity, in the following terms:-

"Would to God that none of us may perish, but that we may all abide in one spirit, with
one soul labouring together for the faith of the Gospel, of one mind, minding the same
thing, armed with the shield of faith, girt about the loins with truth, knowing only the one
war against the Evil One, and those who fight under his orders, not fearing them that kill
the body but cannot lay hold of the soul; but fearing Him Who is the Lord both of soul and
body; guarding the good deposit which we have received from our fathers, adoring Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, knowing the Father in the Son, and the Son in the Holy Ghost-into
which Names we were baptized, in Which we have believed, under Whose banner we have
been enlisted ; dividing Them before we combine Them, and combining before we divide;
not receiving the Three as one Person (for They are not impersonal, or names of one Person,
as though our wealth lay in Names alone and not in facts), but the Three as one Thing. For
They are One, not in Person, but in Godhead, Unity adored in Trinity, and Trinity summed
up in Unity; all adorable, all royal, of one throne and one glory; above the world, above time,
uncreated, invisible, impalpable, uncircumscript; in Its relation to Itself known only to Itself;
but to us equally venerable and adorable; Alone dwelling in the Holiest, and leaving all
creatures outside and shut off, partly by the First Veil, and partly also by the Second;-by

The Life.

the first, the heavenly and angelic host, parted from Godhead; and by the second, we men,
severed from the Angels. This let us do; let this be our mind, Brethren; and those that are
otherwise minded let us look upon as diseased in regard to the truth, and as far as may be,
let us take and cure them; but if they be incurable let us withdraw from them, lest we share
their disease before we impart to them our own health. And the God of Peace that passeth
all understanding shall be with you in Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen."

Gregory the Elder was now aged and infirm, and began to feel his need of a Coadjutor
in his pastoral duties. So, by the great desire of the people of Nazianzus, he ordained his
son to the Priesthood, much against the will of the said son. This Ordination took place at
some great Festival, probably at Christmas of the year 361. Gregory the Younger was much
aggrieved at this gentle violence, which even in after years he describes as an act of tyranny,
and says he cannot bring himself to speak of it in other terms, though he asks pardon of the
Holy Spirit for his language. Immediately after his Ordination he made his escape to Pontus,
apparently reaching Basil about Epiphany, 362. Here he had time for reflection on the
obedience he now owed to his father, not only as son to father, but as Priest to Bishop; and
with a truer view of his duty he returned to Nazianzus, where he was present in the Church
on Easter day 362, and preached his first Sermon as a Priest, in apology for his reluctance. 
Strange to say, though it was so great a Festival, and though the preacher was so well known
and so much beloved in Nazianzus, the congregation was very small;-probably many refrained from going to Church in order to mark their feeling about Gregory's flight to Pontus. 
Anyhow he felt the discourtesy keenly, and in his next sermon took occasion to reprove
them severely for their inconsistency in receiving him so badly after having compelled him
for their sakes to finally renounce the solitude he loved so well. Of this discourse the Abbé
Benoît speaks as follows:-

"It is not very long, and it seems to us a model of the tact and art which a Minister of
the Gospel ought to use in his speech when just grievances compel him to address deserved
reproaches to the faithful. It would be impossible to blame with greater force, to complain
with more frankness, and yet to do it in a way less offensive to the hearers. Praise, indeed,
is so mingled with blame in this discourse, and there is in its tone something so earnest and
affectionate, that the audience, though sharply reprimanded, not only could not take offence,
but was compelled to conceive a yet greater affection and admiration for him who so reproved
them."

Gregory took the opportunity to write another very long Oration as his apology for his
flight. In it he sets forth at great length his conception of the nature and responsibilities of
the Priestly Office, and justifies himself both for having shrunk from such a charge, and for
having so soon returned to take it up. It is very improbable that this Oration, numbered II.
in the Benedictine Edition, was ever delivered vivâ voce; but it was published, and is a
complete Treatise on the Priesthood, used both by S. John Chrysostom as the foundation

The Life.

of his Six Books on the Priesthood, and by S. Gregory the Great as the basis of his Treatise
on the Pastoral Rule. It has also furnished material to many of the best Ecclesiastical writers
of all ages.

Julian had now succeeded to the Empire, and had entered Constantinople in 361. He
had by this time completely broken with the Church, and renounced even the outward
semblance of Christianity. He persuaded Caesarius, however, to retain his position at Court,
hoping perhaps that he might succeed in perverting him. This was a matter of deep regret
to his father and brother, and they felt, the latter says, obliged to keep the fact from the
knowledge of his mother. Gregory wrote his brother a letter of most affectionate though
earnest remonstrance; with the result that Caesarius soon made up his mind to retire, and
put his resolution in practice on the opportunity afforded by the departure of the Emperor
from Constantinople to assume the direction of his campaign against the Persians. Nazianzus
was not allowed to remain without attempts being made against its Christianity, for the
Prefect of the Province was sent with an armed escort of considerable strength to demand
possession of the Church. But the aged Bishop, supported by his son and by his people,
boldly refused to comply with the Imperial commands, and there seemed such a probability
of powerful resistance that the Prefect felt compelled to withdraw his force, and never came
to Nazianzus again on such an errand. The Gregorys, father and son, frequently came into
collision with Julian during his stay in Cappadocia on his way to Persia; and indeed it is not
too much to say that the firm stand which they made on behalf of the right was, under God,
the means of diverting the Emperor from his purpose of making a vehement assault upon
the faith and rights of the Church in that Province. As the Abbé Benoît remarks, Julian saw
that he must be careful in dealing with a province where Christian faith was such a living
power, and where a simple village Bishop could dare to make so stout a stand against Imperial Authority; but he declared his intention of avenging himself upon his opponents on his
return from his expedition. The Providence of God, however, interfered, and he never did
return, but was defeated and killed.

In 363 or 364 Basil, like Gregory, was ordained Priest much against his will. The Bishop
of Caesarea, Metropolitan of Cappadocia, was Eusebius. He had been elected in 362 by a
popular clamour, while yet only a Catechumen, and was very unwillingly consecrated by
the Bishops of the Province. He felt it necessary to have at hand a Priest who by his skill in
Theology would be a help to him in the controversies of the times, and he selected Basil. 
But for some unknown reason, possibly no more than a certain jealousy of Basil's superior
reputation and influence, within a very short time Eusebius quarrelled with him, and endeavoured to deprive him. This might easily have led to a serious schism, had Basil been a

The Life.

self-seeking man, but as it was, he quietly retired to his Community in Pontus, accompanied
by his friend Gregory, who, however, was not able to remain long in that congenial society,
as his presence was still much needed by his father. On the succession of Valens, an Arian,
to the Throne of the Empire, Eusebius wrote to Gregory, entreating him to come to Caesarea
and give him the benefit of his advice. Gregory, however, respectfully declined the invitation
on the grounds of his sense of the wrong which his friend had suffered, and after some
correspondence he succeeded in effecting a reconciliation between the latter and his Metropolitan, in the year 365.

Caesarius meantime had returned to the Court and had received from Valens a valuable
piece of preferment in Bithynia; but in the end of 368 or beginning of 369, having been terrified by a great earthquake, during which he had been in considerable danger, he was arranging matters for his final retirement, when he was seized with illness, and very soon died,
leaving all his property, which must have amounted to a considerable sum, to his brother
in trust for the poor. He was buried at Nazianzus, and on the occasion of his funeral his
brother preached the Sermon which is numbered VIII. in the Benedictine Edition. About
the same time, but a little later, Gorgonia also departed, and he preached a funeral sermon
on her too. Eusebius of Caesarea died in 370, and Basil at once wrote an urgent letter to
Gregory, begging him to come to Caesarea, probably in order to get him elected Archbishop. 
Gregory, however, declined to go, and he and his father exerted themselves to the utmost
of their power to procure the election of Basil; the elder Gregory writing through his son
two letters, one addressed to the people of Caesarea, the other to the Provincial Synod, urging
Basil's claims very strongly. Though ill at the time, he managed to convey himself to the
Metropolis in time for the meeting of the Synod; and Basil was elected and consecrated. 
Gregory wrote him a letter of congratulation; not, however, a very warm one; but when
troubles began to arise he spoke out with all the fervour of their early friendship in support
of the Archbishop. About this time Valens divided the civil Province of Cappadocia into
two, one of which had Caesarea, the other Tyana, for its Metropolis. Anthimus, Bishop of
the latter See, thereupon claimed to be ipso facto Metropolitan of the new Province, a claim
which Basil strenuously resisted, as savouring of what we call Erastianism. A long dispute
followed, in the course of which Basil, to assert his rights as Metropolitan, and to strengthen
his own hands, erected several new Bishoprics in the disputed Province; and to one of these,
Sasima, a miserable little village he consecrated his friend Gregory, almost by force. Gregory
was, not unnaturally, indignant at this treatment; while Basil, whose great object had been
to strengthen himself against Anthimus, took it as unkind of Gregory to be so reluctant to
comply with his friend's wishes. So the two were for a long time in very strained relations
to one another. Although, however, Gregory ultimately yielded to the earnest wish of his
father, and submitted to the authority of the Archbishop, yet he did not disguise his reluctance, and in the Sermons which he preached on the occasion (Or. ix. x.) he spoke very

The Life.

strongly on the point. Anthimus, however, occupied the village of Sasima with troops, and
prevented Gregory from taking peaceable possession of his See, which it is probable he
never actually administered, for his father begged him to remain at Nazianzus and continue
his services as coadjutor Bishop. The contest about the Metropolitanate of Tyana went on
for some time, but in the end, mainly by Gregory's mediation, it was amicably settled. In
374 Gregory the elder died, and his wife also, and thus our Saint was set free from the charge
of the diocese. He spoke a panegyric at his father's funeral, and wrote a number of little "In
Memoriam" poems to his mother's memory; and out of respect for his father continued to
administer the See of Nazianzus for about a year, making great efforts meanwhile to secure
the appointment of a Bishop. But, perceiving that his efforts would be fruitless, because of
the devotion of the people to himself, he at length withdrew, after a very serious illness, to
Seleucia in Isauria (375,) where he lived three or four years, attached to the famous Church
of S. Thecla. Very little is known of his life there; but it must have been at this period that
he heard of the death of Basil, upon whom two years later in the Cathedral of Caesarea he
pronounced a splendid panegyric.

In 379 the Church at Constantinople, which for forty years had been oppressed by a
succession of Arian Archbishops, and was well nigh crushed out of existence by the multitude
of other heresies, Eunomian, Macedonian, Novatian, Apollinarian, etc., which Arian rule
had fostered, besought the great Theologian to come to their aid. Theodosius the new Emperor, who was a fervent Catholic, backed their entreaty, as did also numerous Bishops. 
Gregory resisted the call for a long time; but at last he came to see that it was the will of God
that he should accept the Mission, and he consented to go and fill the gap, until such time
as the Catholics of the Capital might be able to elect an Archbishop.

The following account of the religious condition of Constantinople at this time is con-

densed from Ullmann:-

"Religious feeling like everything else had become to the idle and empty mind a subject
of joke and amusement. What belonged to the theatre was brought into the Church, and
what belonged to the Church into the theatre. The better Christian feelings were not seldom
held up in comedies to the sneer of the multitude. Everything was so changed by the Constantinopolitans into light jesting, that earnestness was stripped of its worth by wit, and that
which is holy became a subject for banter and scoffing in the refined conversation of worldly
people. Yet worse was it that the unbridled delight of these men in dissipating enjoyments
threatened to turn the Church into a theatre, and the Preacher into a play actor. If he would
please the multitude, he must adapt himself to their taste, and entertain them amusingly in
the Church. They demanded also in the preaching something that should please the ear,
glittering declamation with theatrical gesticulation; and they clapped with the same pleasure
the comedian in the holy place and him on the stage. And alas there were found at that
period too many preachers who preferred the applause of men to their souls' health. At this

The Life.

period the objects of the faith excited, particularly in Constantinople, a very universal and
lively interest, which was entertained from the Court downwards, though not always in the
most creditable manner; but it was in great part not the interest of the heart, but that of a
hypercritical and disputatious intellect, where it was not something far lower, to which the
dispute about matters of faith served only as a pretext for attaining the exterior aims of avarice
or ambition. While the sanctifying and beatifying doctrines of the Gospel, which are directed
to the conversion of the whole inner man were let lie quiet, everyone from the Emperor to
the beggar busied himself with incredible interest about a few questions concerning which
the Gospel communicates only just so much as is beneficial to the human spirit and necessary
to salvation, and whose fuller expression at any rate belongs rather to the school than to
practical life. But the more violently these doctrinal disputes were kindled, disturbing and
dividing States, cities, and families, so much the more people lost sight of the practical essentials of Christianity; it seemed more important to maintain the Tri-unity of God than to
love God with all the heart; to acknowledge the Consubstantiality of the Son, than to follow
Him in humility and self-denial; to defend the Personality of the Holy Spirit, than to bring
forth the fruits of the Spirit, love, peace, righteousness....In addition to these religious disputes came also political struggles, namely, the hard-fought wars of the Roman Empire with
the Goths; so that the Empire at large presented the picture of a sea, tossed by violent storms. 
But the unhappy schisms which at this time were severing Christians everywhere, shewed
themselves in a particularly discouraging form in the Capital. Under the late reigns several
parties had been favoured; but especially those which, though again divided among themselves by differences of opinion, yet agreed in this that they all rejected the Nicene system
of doctrine. Constantius had bestowed his favour on the Arians; Julian during his short
reign on all parties, at least in appearance,-to crush them all. After Jovian's early death
Valens succeeded to power in the East, and with him, even more than with Constantius,
Arianism, which he not only protected, but also sought to make predominant by horrible
atrocities against the friends of the Nicene Decrees. These had now been forbidden the use
of all Churches and Church property, and the Arians had been put in possession of them. 
But Constantinople still remained the scene of ecclesiastical strifes and partizanships. Here
where with a little good so much evil flowed from all three parts of the world, all opinions
had their adherents; but the following parties in particular shewed themselves:-The Eunomians, professing an intellectual theology, which claimed to be able completely to explore
the Being of God by logical definitions, and maintained in strict Arian fashion the Unlikeness
of the Son to the Father, were very numerous in Constantinople (as is shewn by the fact that
most of Gregory's polemical utterances were directed against them), and injured earnest
religious thought principally by this, that they used the doctrines of the faith exclusively as
subjects for an argumentative dialectic. The Macedonians, addicted to the Semi-Arian
dogma of the Like Substance, and thereby somewhat more nearly approaching the Orthodox,

The Life.

and distinguished besides by an estimable earnestness of demeanour, and a monk-like
strictness of manner, were indeed themselves excluded by the pure Arians from the property
of the Church, but were ever being abundantly multiplied, partly in Constantinople itself,
partly in the neighbouring regions of the Hellespont, Thrace, Bithynia, and Phrygia. The
Novatians, who even overstepped the Macedonians in the strictness of their practical principles, had somewhat earlier been on the point of uniting themselves with the Orthodox,
from whom they did not differ on the chief doctrine in dispute, and with whom they found
themselves under like oppression from the Arians; but the malevolent disposition of a few
of the party leaders had stood in the way, and so they remained separate, and swelled the
number of the opponents of Orthodoxy. Lastly the Apollinarians too began to establish
themselves there. Their teaching was opposed to the acknowledgment of true and perfect
Manhood in Jesus (for true Manhood lies in the reason especially); and there was at that
time, as Gregory informs us, a report that an assembly of Apollinarian bishops was to be
held at Constantinople, with a view of raising their teaching as to Christ into general notice,
and forcing it upon the Churches.

In such a crisis Gregory came most unwillingly to the Capital. At first he lodged in the
house of a relation of his own, part of which he arranged as a Chapel, and dedicated under
the title Anastasia, as the place where the Catholic faith was to rise again. There he began
at once to carry out the rule of the Church as to daily service, to which he added his own
splendid preaching.

His constant theme was the worship of the Trinity. After two Sermons in deprecation
of religious contentiousness, he preached those famous Five Orations which have won for
him the title of the Theologian. To analyse these belongs to another portion of this work;
it will be enough in this place to say, that after warning his audience against the frivolity
with which the Arians were dragging religious subjects of the most solemn kind into the
most unsuitable places and occasions, he proceeds in four magnificent discourses to set
forth the Catholic doctrine of the Trinity, shewing carefully the difference between Sabellian
confusion of Persons and Tritheistic division of Substance. The Arians, however, persecuted
him bitterly; even, on one occasion at least, hiring an assassin to murder him; and their
persecution was all the more bitter because of the wonderful success which attended Gregory's
preaching. S. Jerome, who came to Constantinople at this time, has left on record the
pleasure with which he listened to and conversed with the great Defender of the Faith.

Unfortunately Gregory now let himself be taken in by a plausible adventurer named
Maximus, who had come to Constantinople in the hope of obtaining the Bishopric for
himself. He attached himself to Gregory and won his confidence, the latter even going so
far as to deliver a panegyric upon him as a sufferer for the Faith. After a short time, however,
Maximus managed to procure his own consecration secretly from some Egyptian Bishops,
who during an illness of Gregory enthroned him at night in the Church. In the morning,

The Life.

when the people discovered what had been done, they were very indignant, and Maximus
and his friends were driven out of the Church and forced to leave the City. Meanwhile the
rank and fashion of Constantinople began to dislike Gregory, who would not condescend
to the arts of the popular preacher, and whose simple retiring life and gentle demeanour
were made matter of reproach to him. Gregory was quite willing to retire, and was only
prevented from doing so by the earnest remonstrances of his friends, who solemnly assured
him that if he went away the Faith would depart with him; so he consented to remain till a
fitter man could be found. Late in 380 Theodosius came to Constantinople, where almost
his first act was to deprive the Arians of the Churches, and to put Gregory in possession of
the Cathedral of S. Sophia. The next year the great Council of Eastern Bishops, which ranks
as the Second Ecumenical Council, met at the Capital, under the presidency of Meletius of
Antioch. Its first care was to sanction the translation of Gregory from the See of Sasima to
that of the Metropolis of the Empire, and to enthrone him in S. Sophia, and thus he became
the recognised Archbishop of the Imperial City. Meletius shortly afterwards died, and
Gregory assumed the Presidency of the Council. He failed in his endeavours to heal the
schism which was troubling the Church of Antioch, and when the Egyptian Bishops on their
arrival shewed a disposition to take up the case of Maximus, and were determined at any
rate to oust Gregory from the Patriarchal Throne on the ground of a Nicene canon forbidding
translations, which had virtually been rescinded by the act of the Council, he made up his
mind to resign. He obtained a reluctant assent to this course from the Emperor, and then
took leave of the Synod in one of the most magnificent of all his Orations, in which he gives
a graphic account of his work in the Metropolis. Nectarius, Prefect of the City, who was
only a catechumen, was elected in his place, and Gregory went home to Nazianzus. He administered the affairs of the Church there for a little while, and then, having procured the
election of Eulalius as Bishop, he retired to Arianzus, where he passed the few remaining
years of his life in seclusion, but still continued to take an active interest in the affairs of the
Church. His own city was greatly disturbed by Apollinarian teachers, whose efforts to establish themselves within the Church were very persevering. Apollinarius, or as he is frequently called in the West, Apollinaris, was a Bishop of Laodicea in the latter half of the
Fourth Century, and was at one time greatly respected for his learning and orthodoxy by S.
Athanasius and S. Basil. He was even an instructor of S. Jerome in 374, but he seceded from
the Church in the next year, owing to views which he had come to hold about the nature of
our Lord; these really prepared the way for various forms of the Monophysite heresy. He
fell into the error of a partial denial of our Lord's true Humanity, attributing to Christ a
human body and a human soul, but not a reasoning spirit, whose place, according to him,
was supplied by the Divine Logos. This view had first appeared in 362, when it came before
a Council at Alexandria. Those who were accused of holding it denied it, and expressed
their sense of the absurdity of such a view, pointing out that our Lord could not be said to

The Life.

be really incarnate if He had no human mind; but about 369 it assumed a definite form
(though even then it was not known to be the teaching of Apollinarius). Arguing from the
Divinity of Christ that He cannot have had a human mind, for if He had He would have
had sinful inclinations, and the one Christ would have been two persons, Apollinarius and
his followers went on to maintain that the Incarnation only meant a certain converse between
God and Man; and that Christ's Body was not really born of Mary, but was a part of the
Godhead converted into flesh. S. Athanasius wrote two Books against these two propositions,
but did not name Apollinarius, most probably because he did not believe him to be committed
to them. The fundamental error of the system was the idea that the Incarnation was, not
the Union of the two Natures, but only a blending so close, that in the mind of these teachers
all the Divine Attributes were transferred to the human nature, and all the human ones to
the Divine, and the two were merged in one compound being.

In 377 a Roman Synod excommunicated Apollinarius and his adherents, and S. Damasus wrote a letter containing twenty-five anathemas, which he sent to Paulinus of Antioch
and others. This condemnation is in almost the identical words used by S. Gregory in the
first of two letters on the question which he wrote to Cledonius, a Priest of Nazianzus, and
which were adopted as symbolic at the Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon. Of these letters
Canon Bright says that they belong to that class of documents of the Fourth Century which
refuted by anticipation the heresies of the Fifth. Gregory affirmed True Godhead and True
Manhood to be combined in the One Person of the Crucified, Who was the adorable Son,
Whose Mother was the Mother of God, and Who assumed, in order to redeem it, the entire
nature that fell in Adam. In his seclusion, says Mr. Crake, his sole luxuries were a garden
and a fountain. He spent his last days in continual devotion. His knees were worn with
kneeling, and his whole thoughts and aspirations had gone before to the long home to which
he was hastening. After the manner of the Saints, he was very rigorous in his self-denial. 
His bed was of straw with a covering of sackcloth, and a single tunic was all the outward
clothing of him who had been Bishop of Constantinople. Yet his glory was only in the Lord. 
"As a fish cannot swim without water, and a bird cannot fly without air, he said, so a
Christian cannot advance a single step without Christ." He died in 391, and in the same
year that he passed from the roll of the earthly episcopate Augustine was ordained Priest at
Hippo Regius in Africa.

Ullmann gives the following description of his character and personal appearance:
"Gregory was of middle height and somewhat pale; but his pallor became him. His hair
was thick and blanched by age, his short beard and conspicuous eyebrows were thicker. 
On his right eye he had a scar. His manner was friendly and attractive; his conduct simple. 
The keynote of his inner being was piety; his soul was full of fiery strength of faith, turned
to God and Christ; a lofty zeal for divine things led him all his life. This zeal manifested itself
above all in a steadfast adherence to and defence of certain dogmas which that age held to

The Life.

be specially important; as well as in lively conflicts, not always free from partisanship, with
opposing convictions; but not less in a hearty and living apprehension of practical Christianity, the establishment and enlargement of which in men's minds was to him all important. 
His asceticism was overdone; it injured his health; yet it did not degenerate into hypocrisy;
it was to him the means for elevating and liberating the mind, but not in and for its own
sake a higher virtue. An inborn and inbred love of solitude hindered him from turning all
his powers to a publicly useful activity. His seclusion did not allow him to become familiar
with the knowledge of men and of the world; lacking in knowledge of men, carelessly confident, sometimes distrustful and bitter in his judgment of others, he demanded from others
much, but from himself most. Susceptible of great resolves, and full of fiery zeal for all good,
he was not always steadfast and persevering in carrying them out. In endurance and conflict
he was noble and high-minded; in victory moderate; in prosperity humble; never flattering
the great, but an ever ready helper to the oppressed and persecuted, and to the poor a loving
father. The most excellent qualities were in Gregory mingled with faults; he was not quite
free from vanity, he was very irritable and sensitive, but also readily forgave and cherished
no grudges. He was a man feeling after holiness, and striving after the highest good, but
not perfect, as no man upon earth is."

Before leaving Constantinople he made his will, in which he bequeathed all his property

to the Deacon Gregory for life, with reversion to the poor of Nazianzus.

The Writings.

The Writings.

Division II.-The Writings.

I. The Orations.-These-forty-five in number-raise him to equality with the best

Orators of antiquity.

a. The Five Theological Orations.-These won him the title of The Theologian. They
were delivered in Constantinople, in defence of the Church's faith in the Trinity, against
Eunomians and Macedonians. In the First and Second he treats of the existence, nature,
being, and attributes of God, so far as man's finite intellect can comprehend them. In the
Third and Fourth the subject is the Godhead of the Son, which he establishes by exposition
of Scripture, and by refutation of the specious arguments brought forward by the heretics. 
In the Fifth he similarly maintains the Deity, and Personality of the Holy Ghost.

b. The Two Invectives against Julian.-These were delivered at Nazianzus after the death
of the Emperor, and present us with a very dark picture of his character. The orator dwells
upon his attempt to rebuild the Temple at Jerusalem, and its failure, and his overthrow in
the campaign against Persia. From these facts he demonstrates the power of God's Justice,
and sets forth the Christian doctrine of the Divine Providence inculcating a lesson of trust
in God.

c. Moral Orations.-(1) The Apology for his flight. As was said above, it is most
probable that this discourse was never actually spoken; if it was, it certainly must have been
considerably enlarged afterwards. In it Gregory dwells on the motive of his flight and his
return after his forced ordination; he speaks of his love of retirement, but most of all lays
stress upon the difficulty of the Priestly Office, its heavy responsibilities and grave dangers,
and upon his own sense of unworthiness. His return, he says, was prompted by respect for
his hearers and by care for his aged parents; by the fear of losing his father's blessing; and
by the recollection of what befel the Prophet Jonas on account of his resistance to the will
of God. The remainder of the Oration is practically a treatise on the Priesthood, and was
made use of by S. Chrysostom and S. Gregory the Great in their books on the subject.

(2) The Farewell Oration at Constantinople, containing an account of his work there.
(3) On Love of the Poor.
(4) On the Indissolubility of Marriage, the only Sermon of S. Gregory on a definite text

which has come down to us.

(5) Three Orations on Peace.
(6) One on Moderation in theological discussion.
d. The Festal Orations.-On Christmas, Epiphany (on the Baptism of Christ in the river
Jordan, followed up next day by a long one on Holy Baptism), two on Easter (one of these
his first sermon, the other almost if not quite his last). On Low Sunday, and on Pentecost.

The Writings.

e. Panegyrics on Saints.-The Maccabee Brothers and their Mother; S. Cyprian of
Carthage (in which there is evidence of the cultus of the Blessed Virgin Mary and of the
practice of invocation of the Saints); and on S. Athanasius.

f. Funeral Orations on Eminent People.-On his Father, preached before his Mother
and S. Basil. On Caesarius, in presence of his parents, consoling them by the picture of his
brother's virtue, especially in having withstood Julian's efforts to pervert him, and in
resigning his post at Court and leaving the Capital. On Gorgonia, whom he praises as a
model Christian Matron, and whose wonderful cure before the Altar he relates. On S. Basil.
g. Occasional Orations, of which we mention three: (1) On a plague of hail. (2) On

the consecration of Eulalius of Doara. (3) On his own consecration to Sasima.

II. The Letters, of which two hundred and forty-three are extant, are characterised by
a clear, concise, and pleasant style and spirit. Some of them treat of the theological questions
of the day, as for example the two to Cledonius, and one to Nectarius his Successor in the
See of Constantinople; these deal with the Apollinarian errors. Most of them however are
letters to private friends; sometimes of condolence or congratulation, sometimes of recommendation, sometimes on mere general subjects of interest. To this section must be ascribed
his Will, which is probably genuine.

III. The Poems, five hundred and seven in number, are in various metres. While leaving
much to be desired, these verses shew much real poetic feeling, and at times rise to genuine
beauty. Thirty-eight are dogmatic, on the Trinity, on the works of God in Creation, on
Providence, on Angels and Men, on the Fall, on the Decalogue, on the Prophets Elias and
Elissaeus, on the Incarnation, the Miracles and Parables of our Lord, and the canonical Books
of the Bible. Forty are Moral; two hundred and six Historical and Autobiographical; one
hundred and twenty-nine are Epitaphs, or rather funeral Epigrams; ninety-four are Epigrams.
There is also a long Tragedy, called Christus Patiens which is the first known attempt
at a Christian drama; the parts are sustained by Christ, The Blessed Virgin, S. Joseph, S.
Mary Magdalene, Nicodemus, Pontius Pilate, Theologus, Nuntius, and others. The Benedictine Editors however doubt the genuineness of this Tragedy and Caillau, who published
the second volume of this Edition after the troubles of the French Revolution, thinks it is
to be ascribed to another Gregory, Bishop of Antioch in the Sixth Century, and relegates it
to an Appendix. None of The Theologian's Odes or Hymns have, however, found a place
in the liturgical poetry of the Church.

Literature.

Literature.

Division III.-Literature.

There are perhaps more MSS. of the works of Gregory than of any other Father. The
great Benedictine Edition of his works contains long lists of MSS., and of Versions, and
previous Editions. The most famous of these is that of the Abbat Jacobus Billius in 1589,
which was accompanied by the Scholia of Nicetas, etc. In 1571 Leuvenklavius published an
edition at Basle containing the Scholia of Elias Cretensis and others. In 1778 appeared the
first volume of the great Edition of the Benedictine Fathers of the Abbey of S. Maur near
Paris, which had been in preparation ever since 1708. But the Monks were driven away by
the French Revolution, and the second volume did not appear till 1842. It has been reprinted
in Migne's "Patrologia Graeca," vols. 35-38. Of modern works on the life and writings of
our Saint, the best are those of Dr. Ullmann, and that of the Abbé Benoît. A valuable comparison of Gregory and Basil is to be found in Newman's "Church of the Fathers," and last,
but not least in value, may be mentioned the long biographical article by Professor Watkins
in Smith's "Dictionary of Christian Biography," and a useful short summary in Schaff's
Church History (311-600, vol. ii.).

On Easter and His Reluctance.

On Easter and His Reluctance.

GREGORY NAZIANZEN.

Oration I.

On Easter and His Reluctance.

I. It is the Day of the Resurrection, and my Beginning has good auspices. Let us then
keep the Festival with splendour,2529 and let us embrace one another. Let us say Brethren,
even to those who hate us; much more to those who have done or suffered aught out of love
for us. Let us forgive all offences for the Resurrection's sake: let us give one another pardon,
I for the noble tyranny which I have suffered (for I can now call it noble); and you who exercised it, if you had cause to blame my tardiness; for perhaps this tardiness may be more
precious in God's sight than the haste of others. For it is a good thing even to hold back
from God for a little while, as did the great Moses of old,2530 and Jeremiah2531 later on; and
then to run readily to Him when He calls, as did Aaron2532 and Isaiah,2533 so only both be
done in a dutiful spirit;-the former because of his own want of strength; the latter because
of the Might of Him That calleth.

II. A Mystery2534 anointed me; I withdrew a little while at a Mystery, as much as was
needful to examine myself; now I come in with a Mystery, bringing with me the Day as a
good defender of my cowardice and weakness; that He Who to-day rose again from the
dead may renew me also by His Spirit; and, clothing me with the new Man, may give me to
His New Creation, to those who are begotten after God, as a good modeller and teacher for
Christ, willingly both dying with Him and rising again with Him.

III. Yesterday the Lamb was slain and the door-posts were anointed,2535 and Egypt
bewailed her Firstborn, and the Destroyer passed us over, and the Seal was dreadful and
reverend, and we were walled in with the Precious Blood. To-day we have clean escaped
from Egypt and from Pharaoh; and there is none to hinder us from keeping a Feast to the
Lord our God-the Feast of our Departure; or from celebrating that Feast, not in the old

Isa. lxvi. 5.

Ex. iv. 10.

Jer. i. 6.

Ex. iv. 27.

Isa. i. 6.

2534 Mystery, according to Nicetas, is frequently used by S. Gregory in the sense of Festival. He also explains

the Anointing as meaning the Imposition of hands at Ordination.

Ex. xii. A fine piece of mystical interpretation.

On Easter and His Reluctance.

leaven of malice and wickedness, but in the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth,2536
carrying with us nothing of ungodly and Egyptian leaven.

IV. Yesterday I was crucified with Him; today I am glorified with Him; yesterday I died
with Him; to-day I am quickened with Him; yesterday I was buried with Him; to-day I rise
with Him. But let us offer to Him Who suffered and rose again for us-you will think perhaps
that I am going to say gold, or silver, or woven work or transparent and costly stones, the
mere passing material of earth, that remains here below, and is for the most part always
possessed by bad men, slaves of the world and of the Prince of the world. Let us offer
ourselves, the possession most precious to God, and most fitting; let us give back to the Image
what is made after the Image. Let us recognize our Dignity; let us honour our Archetype;
let us know the power of the Mystery, and for what Christ died.

V. Let us become like Christ, since Christ became like us. Let us become God's for His
sake, since He for ours became Man. He assumed the worse that He might give us the better;
He became poor that we through His poverty might be rich;2537 He took upon Him the
form of a servant that we might receive back our liberty; He came down that we might be
exalted; He was tempted that we might conquer; He was dishonoured that He might glorify
us; He died that He might save us; He ascended that He might draw to Himself us, who
were lying low in the Fall of sin. Let us give all, offer all, to Him Who gave Himself a Ransom
and a Reconciliation for us. But one can give nothing like oneself, understanding the Mystery,
and becoming for His sake all that He became for ours.

VI. As you see, He offers you a Shepherd; for this is what your Good Shepherd,2538
who lays down his life for his sheep, is hoping and praying for, and he asks from you his
subjects; and he gives you himself double instead of single, and makes the staff of his old
age a staff for your spirit. And he adds to the inanimate temple a living one; to that exceedingly beautiful and heavenly shrine, this poor and small one,2539 yet to him of great value,
and built too with much sweat and many labours. Would that I could say it is worthy of
his labours. And he places at your disposal all that belongs to him (O great generosity!-or
it would be truer to say, O fatherly love!) his hoar hairs, his youth, the temple, the high
priest, the testator, the heir, the discourses which you were longing for; and of these not
such as are vain and poured out into the air, and which reach no further than the outward

1 Cor. v. 8.

2 Cor. viii. 9.

2538 Nicetas says that this refers to S. Gregory's Father, who had ordained him Priest, to assist him in the

Cure of Souls, and whose one desire was that his Son might succeed him in the Bishopric.

S. Gregory's father had, according to the same authority, rebuilt the Church at Nazianus with great

splendour. He thinks that the expression "heavenly" may refer to the great dome. The "living temple" is of

course S. Gregory himself.

On Easter and His Reluctance.

ear; but those which the Spirit writes and engraves on tables of stone, or of flesh, not merely
superficially graven, nor easily to be rubbed off, but marked very deep, not with ink, but
with grace.

VII. These are the gifts given you by this august Abraham, this honourable and reverend
Head, this Patriarch, this Restingplace of all good, this Standard of virtue, this Perfection
of the Priesthood, who to-day is bringing to the Lord his willing Sacrifice, his only Son,2540
him of the promise. Do you on your side offer to God and to us obedience to your Pastors,
dwelling in a place of herbage, and being fed by water of refreshment;2541 knowing your
Shepherd well, and being known by him;2542 and following when he calls you as a Shepherd
frankly through the door; but not following a stranger climbing up into the fold like a robber
and a traitor; nor listening to a strange voice when such would take you away by stealth and
scatter you from the truth on mountains,2543 and in deserts, and pitfalls, and places which
the Lord does not visit; and would lead you away from the sound Faith in the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, the One Power and Godhead, Whose Voice my sheep always
heard (and may they always hear it), but with deceitful and corrupt words would tear them
from their true Shepherd. From which may we all be kept, Shepherd and flock, as from a
poisoned and deadly pasture; guiding and being guided far away from it, that we may all be
one in Christ Jesus our Lord, now and unto the heavenly rest. To Whom be the glory and
the might for ever and ever. Amen.

S. Gregory had an elder sister Gorgonia, and a younger brother Caesarius, so that this expression must

not be taken too literally, but is rather to be read in connection with the "promise," his Mother having looked

upon his birth as a special answer to prayer, and having dedicated him to God from his infancy.

Ps. xxiii. 2.

John x. 14.

Ezek. xxxiv. 6.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination to the Priesthood, with an Exposition of the Character of the Priestly Office.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

Introduction to Oration II.

It is generally agreed that this oration was not intended for oral delivery. Its object was
to explain and defend S. Gregory's recent conduct, which had been severely criticised by
his friends at Nazianzus. He had been recalled by his father probably during the year a.d.
361 from Pontus, where he had spent several years in monastic seclusion with his friend S.
Basil. His father, not content with his son's presence at home as a support for his declining
years, and feeling assured of his fitness for the sacred office, had proceeded, with the loudly
expressed approval of the congregation, in spite of Gregory's reluctance, to ordain him to
the priesthood on Christmas Day a.d. 361. S. Gregory, even after the lapse of many years,
speaks of his ordination as an act of tyranny, and at the time, stung almost to madness, as
an ox by a gadfly, rushed away again to Pontus, to bury in its congenial solitude, consoled
by an intimate friend's deep sympathy, his wounded feelings. Before long the sense of duty
reasserted itself, and he returned to his post at his father's side before Easter a.d. 362. On
Easter day he delivered his first Oration before a congregation whose scantiness marked
the displeasure with which the people of Nazianzus had viewed his conduct. Accordingly
he set himself to supply them in this Oration with a full explanation of the motives which
had led to his retirement. At the same time, as the secondary title of the Oration shows, he
has supplied an exposition of the obligations and dignity of the Priestly Office which has
been drawn upon by all later writers on the subject. S. Chrysostom in his well-known
treatise, S. Gregory the Great in his Pastoral Care, and Bossuet in his panegyric on S. Paul,
have done little more than summarise the material or develop the considerations contained
in this eloquent and elaborate dissertation.

Oration II.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination to the

Priesthood, with an Exposition of the Character of the Priestly Office.

1. I have been defeated, and own my defeat. I subjected myself to the Lord, and prayed
unto Him.2544 Let the most blessed David supply my exordium, or rather let Him Who
spoke in David, and even now yet speaks through him. For indeed the very best order of
beginning every speech and action, is to begin from God,2545 and to end in God. As to the

Ps. xxxvii. 7 (LXX).

Begin from God. Possibly an adaptation of the exordium of Theocr. Idyll, xvii. 1. ἐκ Διὸς ἀρχώμεσθα,

καὶ ἐις Δία λήγετε, μοῖσαι. "Let Zeus inspire our opening strain, And Muses, end your song in Zeus again." 

Cf. Demosth. Epist. 1.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

cause, either of my original revolt and cowardice, in which I got me away far off, and remained2546 away from you for a time, which perhaps seemed long to those who missed me;
or of the present gentleness and change of mind, in which I have given myself up again to
you, men may think and speak in different ways, according to the hatred or love they bear
me, on the one side refusing to acquit me of the charges alleged, on the other giving me a
hearty welcome. For nothing is so pleasant to men as talking of other people's business,
especially under the influence of affection or hatred, which often almost entirely blinds us
to the truth. I will, however, myself, unabashed, set forth the truth, and arbitrate with justice
between the two parties, which accuse or gallantly defend us, by, on the one side, accusing
myself, on the other, undertaking my own defence.

2. Accordingly, that my speech may proceed in due order, I apply myself to the question
which arose first, that of cowardice. For I cannot endure that any of those who watch with
interest the success, or the contrary, of my efforts, should be put to confusion on my account,
since it has pleased God that our affairs should be of some consequence to Christians, so I
will by my defence relieve, if there be any such, those who have already suffered; for it is
well, as far as possible, and as reason allows, to shrink from causing, through our sin or
suspicion, any offence or stumbling-block to the community: inasmuch as we know how
inevitably even those who offend one of the little ones2547 will incur the severest punishment
at the hands of Him who cannot lie.

3. For my present position is due, my good people, not to inexperience and ignorance,
nay indeed, that I may boast myself a little,2548 neither is it due to contempt for the divine
laws and ordinances. Now, just as in the body there is2549 one member2550 which rules
and, so to say, presides, while another is ruled over and subject; so too in the churches, God
has ordained, according either to a law of equality, which admits of an order of merit, or to
one of providence, by which He has knit all together, that those for whom such treatment
is beneficial, should be subject to pastoral care and rule, and be guided by word and deed
in the path of duty; while others should be pastors and teachers,2551 for the perfecting of
the church, those, I mean, who surpass the majority in virtue and nearness to God, perform-

Ps. lv. 7.

S. Matt. xviii. 6.

2 Cor. xi. 16.

2549 One member. The Ben. editors object to this translation (which is that of Rufinus, Billius and Gabriel)

as inconsistent with the following allusion to the relation of the soul to the body. It seems, however, more in

harmony with the figure of S. Paul, who compares the arrangement of the members of the body to the hierarchy

of the Church.

2550 Rom. xii. 4; 1 Cor. xii. 12.

Eph. iv. 11.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

ing the functions of the soul in the body, and of the intellect in the soul; in order that both
may be so united and compacted together, that, although one is lacking and another is preeminent, they may, like the members of our bodies, be so combined and knit together by
the harmony of the Spirit, as to form one perfect body,2552 really worthy of Christ Himself,
our Head.2553

4. I am aware then that anarchy2554 and disorder cannot be more advantageous than
order and rule, either to other creatures or to men; nay, this is true of men in the highest
possible degree, because the interests at stake in their case are greater; since it is a great
thing2555 for them, even if they fail of their highest purpose-to be free from sin-to attain
at least to that which is second best, restoration from sin. Since this seems right and just,
it is, I take it, equally wrong and disorderly that all should wish to rule, and that no one
should accept2556 it. For if all men were to shirk this office, whether it must be called a
ministry or a leadership, the fair fulness2557 of the Church would be halting in the highest
degree, and in fact cease to be fair. And further, where, and by whom would God be worshipped among us in those mystic and elevating rites which are our greatest and most precious privilege, if there were neither king, nor governor, nor priesthood, nor sacrifice,2558
nor all those highest offices to the loss of which, for their great sins, men were of old condemned in consequence of their disobedience?

5. Nor indeed is it strange or inconsistent for the majority of those who are devoted to
the study of divine things, to ascend to rule from being ruled, nor does it overstep the limits
laid down by philosophy,2559 or involve disgrace; any more than for an excellent sailor to
become a lookout-man, and for a lookout-man, who has successfully kept watch over the
winds, to be entrusted with the helm; or, if you will, for a brave soldier to be made a captain,

1 Cor. xii. 20; Eph. iv. 15.

Eph. iv. 15.

2554 Anarchy, &c. Comp. Plato Legg. XII. 2.

2555 A great thing. The Ben. editors note the obscurity of the original here.

Accept, δέχεσθαι. Many mss have ἅρχεσθαι, preserving the play upon the word ἄρχειν. The latter

reading, the Ben. editors suggest, may have an active sense, as Hom. Il. II. 345.

Eph. i. 23.

2558 Hos. iii. 4.

Philosophy. φιλοσοφία is used by S. Greg. and other Fathers in various senses, not always clearly distin-

guishable. Sometimes it refers to the ancient philosophical teachers and schools: sometimes to the Christian

philosophy, which inculcates Divine truth, and teaches the principles of a good and holy life: sometimes to the

practice of these principles, either in regard to some special virtue, e.g. patience, or, in general, in the lives of

individual Christians, and further, as involving the most careful and extensive reduction of these principles to

practice-the discipline of the monastic life. Cf. Suicer, in verb.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

and a good captain to become a general, and have committed to him the conduct of the
whole campaign. Nor again, as perhaps some of those absurd and tiresome people may
suppose, who judge of others' feelings by their own, was I ashamed of the rank of this grade
from my desire for a higher. I was not so ignorant either of its divine greatness or human
low estate, as to think it no great thing for a created nature, to approach in however slight
degree to God, Who alone is most glorious and illustrious, and surpasses in purity every
nature, material and immaterial alike.

6. What then were my feelings, and what was the reason of my disobedience? For to
most men I did not at the time seem consistent with myself, or to be such as they had known
me, but to have undergone some deterioration, and to exhibit greater resistance and selfwill than was right. And the causes of this you have long been desirous to hear. First, and
most important, I was astounded at the unexpectedness of what had occurred, as people are
terrified by sudden noises; and, losing the control of my reasoning faculties, my self-respect,
which had hitherto controlled me, gave way. In the next place, there came over me an eager
longing2560 for the blessings of calm and retirement, of which I had from the first been enamoured to a higher degree, I imagine, than any other student of letters, and which amidst
the greatest and most threatening dangers I had promised to God, and of which I had also
had so much experience, that I was then upon its threshold, my longing having in consequence been greatly kindled, so that I could not submit to be thrust into the midst of a
life of turmoil by an arbitrary act of oppression, and to be torn away by force from the holy
sanctuary of such a life as this.

7. For nothing seemed to me so desirable as to close the doors of my senses, and, escaping
from the flesh and the world, collected within myself, having no further connection than
was absolutely necessary with human affairs, and speaking to myself and to God,2561 to live
superior to visible things, ever preserving in myself the divine impressions pure and unmixed
with the erring tokens of this lower world, and both being, and constantly growing more
and more to be, a real unspotted mirror of God and divine things, as light is added to light,
and what was still dark grew clearer, enjoying already by hope the blessings of the world to
come, roaming about with the angels, even now being above the earth by having forsaken
it, and stationed on high by the Spirit. If any of you has been possessed by this longing, he
knows what I mean and will sympathise with my feelings at that time. For, perhaps, I ought
not to expect to persuade most people by what I say, since they are unhappily disposed to
laugh at such things, either from their own thoughtlessness, or from the influence of men
unworthy of the promise, who have bestowed upon that which is good an evil name, calling

Eager longing. Nearly all mss. read "pity"-which would have to be understood in the sense of "regretful

affection."

1 Cor. xiv. 28.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

philosophy nonsense, aided by envy and the evil tendencies of the mob, who are ever inclined
to grow worse: so that they are constantly occupied with one of two sins, either the commission of evil, or the discrediting of good.

8. I was influenced besides by another feeling, whether base or noble I do not know,
but I will speak out to you all my secrets. I was ashamed of all those others, who, without
being better than ordinary people, nay, it is a great thing if they be not worse, with unwashen
hands,2562 as the saying runs, and uninitiated souls, intrude into the most sacred offices;
and, before becoming worthy to approach the temples, they lay claim to the sanctuary,2563
and they push and thrust around the holy table, as if they thought this order to be a means
of livelihood, instead of a pattern of virtue, or an absolute authority, instead of a ministry
of which we must give account. In fact they are almost more in number than those whom
they govern; pitiable as regards piety,2564 and unfortunate in their dignity; so that, it seems
to me, they will not, as time and this evil alike progress, have any one left to rule, when all
are teachers, instead of, as the promise says, taught of God,2565 and all prophesy,2566 so that
even "Saul is among the prophets,"2567 according to the ancient history and proverb. For
at no time, either now or in former days, amid the rise and fall of various developments,
has there ever been such an abundance, as now exists among Christians, of disgrace and
abuses of this kind. And, if to stay this current is beyond our powers, at any rate it is not
the least important duty of religion to testify the hatred and shame we feel for it.

9. Lastly, there is a matter more serious than any which I have mentioned, for I am now
coming to the finale2568 of the question: and I will not deceive you; for that would not be
lawful in regard to topics of such moment. I did not, nor do I now, think myself qualified
to rule a flock or herd, or to have authority over the souls of men. For in their case it is
sufficient to render the herd or flock as stout and fat as possible; and with this object the
neatherd and shepherd will look for well watered and rich pastures, and will drive his charge
from pasture to pasture, and allow them to rest, or arouse, or recall them, sometimes with
his staff, most often with his pipe; and with the exception of occasional struggles with wolves,

S. Mark vii. 5.

2563 The sanctuary. i.e. That which gave the right to a place in the sanctuary,-the priesthood. Billius wrongly

takes it of the episcopate.

Piety-for it is a mere external pretence, deceiving themselves as well as others. εἰσέβαια here has the

double sense of piety and orthodoxy-the former being the more prominent.

Is. liv. 13; S. John vi. 45.

2566 Numb. xi. 29; 1 Cor. xiv. 24.

1 Sam. x. 11; xix. 24.

The finale of the question, or "the main conclusion of my subject," lit. "the colophon of my reason." 

λόγος cannot here mean "of my speech," for it has only just begun.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

or attention to the sickly, most of his time will be devoted to the oak and the shade and his
pipes, while he reclines on the beautiful grass, and beside the cool water, and shakes down
his couch in a breezy spot, and ever and anon sings a love ditty, with his cup by his side,
and talks to his bullocks or his flock, the fattest of which supply his banquets or his pay. 
But no one ever has thought of the virtue of flocks or herds; for indeed of what virtue are
they capable? Or who has regarded their advantage as more important than his own pleasure?
10. But in the case of man, hard as it is for him to learn how to submit to rule, it seems
far harder to know how to rule over men, and hardest of all, with this rule of ours, which
leads them by the divine law, and to God, for its risk is, in the eyes of a thoughtful man,
proportionate to its height and dignity. For, first of all, he must, like silver or gold, though
in general circulation in all kinds of seasons and affairs, never ring false or alloyed, or give
token of any inferior matter, needing further refinement in the fire;2569 or else, the wider
his rule, the greater evil he will be. Since the injury which extends to many is greater than
that which is confined to a single individual.

11. For it is not so easy to dye deeply a piece of cloth, or to impregnate with odours,
foul or the reverse, whatever comes near to them; nor is it so easy for the fatal vapour, which
is rightly called a pestilence, to infect the air, and through the air to gain access to living
being, as it is for the vice of a superior to take most speedy possession of his subjects, and
that with far greater facility than virtue its opposite. For it is in this that wickedness especially
has the advantage over goodness, and most distressing it is to me to perceive it, that vice is
something attractive and ready at hand, and that nothing is so easy as to become evil, even
without any one to lead us on to it; while the attainment of virtue is rare and difficult, even
where there is much to attract and encourage us. And it is this, I think, which the most
blessed Haggai had before his eyes, in his wonderful and most true figure:2570-"Ask the
priests concerning the law, saying: If holy flesh borne in a garment touch meat or drink or
vessel, will it sanctify what is in contact with it? And when they said No; ask again if any of
these things touch what is unclean, does it not at once partake of the pollution? For they
will surely tell you that it does partake of it, and does not continue clean in spite of the
contact."

12. What does he mean by this? As I take it, that goodness can with difficulty gain a
hold upon human nature, like fire upon green wood; while most men are ready and disposed
to join in evil, like stubble,2571 I mean, ready for a spark and a wind, which is easily kindled
and consumed from its dryness. For more quickly would any one take part in evil with
slight inducement to its full extent, than in good which is fully set before him to a slight

2569 Cf. 1 Cor. iii. 12.

2570 Hagg. ii. 12 et seq.

Job xxi. 18; Ps. lxxxiii. 13; Isai. v. 24; Joel ii. 5.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

degree. For indeed a little wormwood most quickly imparts its bitterness to honey; while
not even double the quantity of honey can impart its sweetness to wormwood: and the
withdrawal of a small pebble would draw headlong a whole river, though it would be difficult
for the strongest dam to restrain or stay its course.

13. This then is the first point in what we have said, which it is right for us to guard
against, viz.: being found to be bad painters2572 of the charms of virtue, and still more, if
not, perhaps, models for poor painters, poor models for the people, or barely escaping the
proverb, that we undertake to heal others2573 while ourselves are full of sores.

14. In the second place, although a man has kept himself pure from sin, even in a very
high degree; I do not know that even this is sufficient for one who is to instruct others in
virtue. For he who has received this charge, not only needs to be free from evil, for evil is,
in the eyes of most of those under his care, most disgraceful, but also to be eminent in good,
according to the command, "Depart from evil and do good."2574 And he must not only
wipe out the traces of vice from his soul, but also inscribe better ones, so as to outstrip men
further in virtue than he is superior to them in dignity. He should know no limits in goodness
or spiritual progress, and should dwell upon the loss of what is still beyond him, rather than
the gain of what he has attained, and consider that which is beneath his feet a step to that
which comes next: and not think it a great gain to excel ordinary people, but a loss to fall
short of what we ought to be: and to measure his success by the commandment and not by
his neighbours, whether they be evil, or to some extent proficient in virtue: and to weigh
virtue in no small scales, inasmuch as it is due to the Most High, "from Whom are all things,
and to Whom are all things."2575

15. Nor must he suppose that the same things are suitable to all, just as all have not the
same stature, nor are the features of the face, nor the nature of animals, nor the qualities of
soil, nor the beauty and size of the stars, in all cases the same: but he must consider base
conduct a fault in a private individual, and deserving of chastisement under the hard rule
of the law; while in the case of a ruler or leader it is a fault not to attain to the highest possible
excellence, and always make progress in goodness, if indeed he is, by his high degree of
virtue, to draw his people to an ordinary degree, not by the force of authority, but by the
influence of persuasion. For what is involuntary apart from its being the result of oppression,
is neither meritorious nor durable. For what is forced, like a plant2576 violently drawn aside
by our hands, when set free, returns to what it was before, but that which is the result of

Painters, i.e. in our discourses; models by our lives and examples.

S. Luke iv. 23.

Ps. xxxvii. 27.

2575 Rom. xi. 35.

2576 A plant. Cf. Orat. vi. 8, xxiii. 1. A favourite figure of S. Gregory.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

choice is both most legitimate and enduring, for it is preserved by the bond of good will. 
And so our law and our lawgiver enjoin upon us most strictly that we should "tend the flock
not by constraint but willingly."2577

16. But granted that a man is free from vice, and has reached the greatest heights of
virtue: I do not see what knowledge or power would justify him in venturing upon this office. 
For the guiding of man, the most variable and manifold of creatures, seems to me in very
deed to be the art of arts2578 and science of sciences. Any one may recognize this, by comparing the work of the physician of souls with the treatment of the body; and noticing that,
laborious as the latter is, ours is more laborious, and of more consequence, from the nature
of its subject matter, the power of its science, and the object of its exercise. The one labours
about bodies, and perishable failing matter, which absolutely must be dissolved and undergo
its fate,2579 even if upon this occasion by the aid of art it can surmount the disturbance
within itself, being dissolved by disease or time in submission to the law of nature, since it
cannot rise above its own limitations.

17. The other is concerned with the soul, which comes from God and is divine, and
partakes of the heavenly nobility, and presses on to it, even if it be bound to an inferior
nature. Perhaps indeed there are other reasons also for this, which only God, Who bound
them together, and those who are instructed by God in such mysteries, can know, but as far
as I, and men like myself can perceive, there are two: one, that it may inherit the glory above
by means of a struggle and wrestling2580 with things below, being tried as gold in the fire2581
by things here, and gain the objects of our hope as a prize of virtue, and not merely as the
gift of God. This, indeed, was the will of Supreme Goodness, to make the good even our
own, not only because sown in our nature, but because cultivated by our own choice, and
by the motions of our will,2582 free to act in either direction. The second reason is, that it
may draw to itself and raise to heaven the lower nature, by gradually freeing it from its
grossness, in order that the soul may be to the body what God is to the soul, itself leading
on the matter which ministers to it, and uniting it, as its fellow-servant, to God.

18. Place and time and age and season and the like are the subjects of a physician's
scrutiny; he will prescribe medicines and diet, and guard against things injurious, that the

1 Pet. v. 2.

The art of arts. This is the original of the frequently quoted commonplace, which in S. Gregory the

Great's Pastoral Care, i. 1, takes the form "ars artium est regimen animarum."

2579 Gen. iii. 19.

Eph. vi. 12.

1 Pet. i. 7.

2582 Our will. Clémencet compares S. Bernard, de Gratia et Libero Arbitrio, xiv. 47 (tom. i. 1397, Gaume). 

Petavius, de Incarn., tom. v., p. 416, lib. IX., iii., 11, comments on this passage in treating of free will.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

desires of the sick may not be a hindrance to his art. Sometimes, and in certain cases, he
will make use of the cautery or the knife or the severer remedies; but none of these, laborious
and hard as they may seem, is so difficult as the diagnosis and cure of our habits, passions,
lives, wills, and whatever else is within us, by banishing from our compound nature
everything brutal and fierce, and introducing and establishing in their stead what is gentle
and dear to God, and arbitrating fairly between soul and body; not allowing the superior to
be overpowered by the inferior, which would be the greatest injustice; but subjecting to the
ruling and leading power that which naturally takes the second place: as indeed the divine
law enjoins, which is most excellently imposed on His whole creation, whether visible or
beyond our ken.

19. This further point does not escape me, that the nature of all these objects of the
watchfulness of the physician remains the same, and does not evolve out of itself any crafty
opposition, or contrivance hostile to the appliances of his art, nay, it is rather the treatment
which modifies its subject matter,2583 except where some slight insubordination occurs on
the part of the patient, which it is not difficult to prevent or restrain. But in our case, human
prudence and selfishness, and the want of training and inclination to yield ready submission
are a very great obstacle to advance in virtue, amounting almost to an armed resistance to
those who are wishful to help us. And the very eagerness with which we should lay bare
our sickness to our spiritual physicians, we employ in avoiding this treatment,2584 and shew
our bravery by struggling against what is for our own interest, our skill in shunning what
is for our health.

20. For we either hide away our sin, cloaking it over in the depth of our soul, like some
festering and malignant disease, as if by escaping the notice of men we could escape the
mighty eye of God and justice. Or else we allege excuses in our sins,2585 by devising pleas
in defence of our falls, or tightly closing our ears, like the deaf adder that stoppeth her ears,
we are obstinate in refusing to hear the voice of the charmer, and be treated with the medicines of wisdom,2586 by which spiritual sickness is healed. Or, lastly, those of us who are
most daring and self-willed shamelessly brazen out our sin before those who would heal it,
marching with bared head, as the saying is, into all kinds of transgression. O what madness,
if there be no term more fitting for this state of mind! Those whom we ought to love as our
benefactors we keep off, as if they were our enemies, hating those who reprove in the gates,
and abhorring the righteous word;2587 and we think that we shall succeed in the war that

Its subject matter, i.e. the affection of the sick body, which it is the object of medicine to change to its

opposite. So Combefis.

This treatment: the treatment of the spiritual physician.

Ps. cxli. 4 (LXX.).

Ps. lviii. 5, 6 (LXX.).

2587 Amos v. 10.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

we are waging against those who are well disposed to us by doing ourselves all the harm we
can, like men who imagine they are consuming the flesh of others when they are really
fastening upon their own.

21. For these reasons I allege that our office as physicians far exceeds in toilsomeness,
and consequently in worth, that which is confined to the body; and further, because the
latter is mainly concerned with the surface, and only in a slight degree investigates the causes
which are deeply hidden. But the whole of our treatment and exertion is concerned with
the hidden man of the heart,2588 and our warfare is directed against that adversary and foe
within us, who uses ourselves as his weapons against ourselves, and, most fearful of all,
hands us over to the death of sin. In opposition then, to these foes we are in need of great
and perfect faith, and of still greater co-operation on the part of God, and, as I am persuaded,
of no slight countermanoeuvring on our own part, which must manifest itself both in word
and deed, if ourselves, the most precious possession we have, are to be duly tended and
cleansed and made as deserving as possible.

22. To turn however to the ends in view in each of these forms of healing, for this point
is still left to be considered, the one preserves, if it already exists, the health and good habit
of the flesh, or if absent, recalls it; though it is not yet clear whether or not these will be for
the advantage of those who possess them, since their opposites very often confer a greater
benefit on those who have them, just as poverty and wealth, renown or disgrace, a low or
brilliant position, and all other circumstances, which are naturally indifferent, and do not
incline in one direction more than in another, produce a good or bad effect according to
the will of, and the manner in which they are used by the persons who experience them. 
But the scope of our art is to provide the soul with wings, to rescue it from the world and
give it to God, and to watch over that which is in His image,2589 if it abides, to take it by the
hand, if it is in danger, or restore it, if ruined, to make Christ to dwell in the heart2590 by
the Spirit: and, in short, to deify, and bestow heavenly bliss upon, one who belongs to the
heavenly host.

23. This is the wish of our schoolmaster2591 the law, of the prophets who intervened
between Christ and the law, of Christ who is the fulfiller and end2592 of the spiritual law; of
the emptied Godhead,2593 of the assumed flesh,2594 of the novel union between God and

1 Pet. iii. 4.

2589 Gen. i. 26.

Eph. iii. 17.

2591 Gal. iii. 24.

2592 Heb. xii. 2.

Phil. ii. 7.

2594 Heb. ii. 14.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

man, one consisting2595 of two, and both in one. This is why God was united2596 to the
flesh by means of the soul,2597 and natures so separate were knit together by the affinity to
each of the element which mediated between them: so all became one for the sake of all,
and for the sake of one, our progenitor, the soul because of the soul which was disobedient,
the flesh because of the flesh which co-operated with it and shared in its condemnation,
Christ, Who was superior to, and beyond the reach of, sin, because of Adam, who became
subject to sin.

24. This is why the new was substituted for the old,2598 why He Who suffered was for
suffering recalled to life, why each property of His, Who was above us, was interchanged
with each of ours, why the new mystery took place of the dispensation, due to loving kindness
which deals with him who fell through disobedience. This is the reason for the generation
and the virgin, for the manger and Bethlehem; the generation on behalf of the creation,2599
the virgin on behalf of the woman,2600 Bethlehem2601 because of Eden, the manger because
of the garden, small and visible things on behalf of great and hidden things. This is why the
angels2602 glorified first the heavenly, then the earthly,2603 why the shepherds saw the glory
over the Lamb and the Shepherd, why the star led the Magi to worship and offer gifts,2604
in order that idolatry might be destroyed. This is why Jesus was baptized,2605 and received
testimony from above, and fasted,2606 and was tempted, and overcame him who had overcome. This is why devils were cast out,2607 and diseases healed, and the mighty preaching
was entrusted to, and successfully proclaimed by men of low estate.

2595 One consisting, &c. "These words," says Gabriel, "are indeed a two-edged sword against the heretics,

for one clause mortally wounds Nestorius who separates the Divine from the Human Nature-the other Eutyches,

who empties the human into the Divine."

2596 Was united, ἀνεκράθη, lit., "was blended"-cf. Orat. xxxviii. 13. This and similar terms used by Gregory

and his contemporaries in an orthodox sense were laid aside by later Fathers, in consequence of their having

been perverted in favor of the Eutychian heresy.

By means of the soul, Cf. Orat. xxix. 19; xxxviii. 13; Epist. 101 (tom. 2, p. 90 A.): Poem. Dogmat., x.,

55-61 (tom. 2, p. 256); Petavius de Incarn. IV. xiii. 2.

2598 Heb. viii. 8-13.

Lit. "of the formation"-the substantive here corresponds to the verb in Gen. ii. 7 (LXX.).

2600 Gen. ii. 7.

S. Luke ii. 7.

S. Luke ii. 14.

1 Cor. xv. 49.

S. Matt. ii. 9, 11.

S. Matt. iii. 13, 17.

S. Matt. iv. 2.

S. Matt. x. 7, 8.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

25. This is why the heathen rage and the peoples imagine vain things;2608 why tree2609
is set over against tree,2610 hands against hand, the one stretched out in self indulgence,2611
the others in generosity; the one unrestrained, the others fixed by nails,2612 the one expelling
Adam, the other reconciling the ends of the earth. This is the reason of the lifting up to
atone for the fall, and of the gall for the tasting, and of the thorny crown for the dominion
of evil, and of death for death, and of darkness for the sake of light, and of burial for the return
to the ground, and of resurrection for the sake of resurrection.2613 All these are a training
from God for us, and a healing for our weakness, restoring the old Adam to the place whence
he fell, and conducting us to the tree of life,2614 from which the tree of knowledge estranged
us, when partaken of unseasonably, and improperly.

26. Of this healing we, who are set over others, are the ministers and fellow-labourers;2615
for whom it is a great thing to recognise and heal their own passions and sicknesses: or
rather, not really a great thing, only the viciousness of most of those who belong to this order
has made me say so: but a much greater thing is the power to heal and skilfully cleanse
those of others, to the advantage both of those who are in want of healing and of those whose
charge it is to heal.

27. Again, the healers of our bodies will have their labours and vigils and cares, of which
we are aware; and will reap a harvest of pain for themselves from the distresses of others,
as one of their wise men2616 said; and will provide for the use of those who need them, both
the results of their own labours and investigations, and what they have been able to borrow
from others: and they consider none, even of the minutest details, which they discover, or
which elude their search, as having other than an important influence upon health or danger. 
And what is the object of all this? That a man may live some days longer on the earth,
though he is possibly not a good man, but one of the most depraved, for whom it had perhaps
been better, because of his badness, to have died long ago, in order to be set free from vice,
the most serious of sicknesses. But, suppose he is a good man, how long will he be able to

Ps. ii. 1.

2609 Gen. iii. 3. Why tree, &c. A striking contrast of the means of Redemption by the Cross of Christ with

the circumstances of the Fall.

S. John xix. 17.

2611 Gen. iii. 6-23.

S. Matt. xxvii. 35.

For the sake of resurrection. One translator carries on the contrast, and renders "to atone for the insur-

rection," sc. of Adam. The preposition ὑπερ seems decisive against this.

2614 Rev. ii. 7; xxii. 14.

1 Cor. iii. 9; iv. 1; 2 Cor. vi. 1.

2616 One of their wise men, the author of the treatise περὶ φυσῶν, ascribed to Hippocrates.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

live? Forever? Or what will he gain from life here, from which it is the greatest of blessings,
if a man be sane and sensible, to seek to be set free?

28. But we, upon whose efforts is staked the salvation of a soul, a being blessed and
immortal, and destined for undying chastisement or praise, for its vice or virtue,-what a
struggle ought ours to be, and how great skill do we require to treat, or get men treated
properly, and to change their life, and give up the clay to the spirit. For men and women,
young and old, rich and poor, the sanguine and despondent, the sick and whole, rulers and
ruled, the wise and ignorant, the cowardly and courageous, the wrathful and meek, the
successful and failing, do not require the same instruction and encouragement.

29. And if you examine more closely, how great is the distinction between the married
and the unmarried, and among the latter between hermits and those who2617 live together
in community, between those who are proficient and advanced in contemplation and those
who barely hold on the straight course, between townsfolk again and rustics, between the
simple and the designing, between men of business and men of leisure, between those who
have met with reverses and those who are prosperous and ignorant of misfortune. For these
classes differ sometimes more widely from each other in their desires and passion than in
their physical characteristics; or, if you will, in the mixtures and blendings of the elements
of which we are composed, and, therefore, to regulate them is no easy task.

30. As then the same medicine and the same food are not in every case administered
to men's bodies, but a difference is made according to their degree of health or infirmity;
so also are souls treated with varying instruction and guidance. To this treatment witness
is borne by those who have had experience of it. Some are led by doctrine, others trained
by example; some need the spur, others the curb; some are sluggish and hard to rouse to
the good, and must be stirred up by being smitten with the word; others are immoderately
fervent in spirit, with impulses difficult to restrain, like thoroughbred colts, who run wide
of the turning post, and to improve them the word must have a restraining and checking
influence.

2617 Those who, &c. μιγάδας, cf. xxi., 10, where μοναδικοὶ and οἱ τῆς ἐρηυίας are distinguished from μιγάδες

and οἱ τῆς ἐπιμιξίας. Clémencet here holds that οἱ τῆς ἐρημίας are hermits as distinguished from coenobites,

but does not hint at any further subdivision between the κοινωνικοὶ and the μιγάδες. Cf. also xliii. 62; xxi. 19. 

Montaut, "Revue Critique, &c." (pp. 48-52) attempts to distinguish between the μιγάδες and the κοινωνικοί. 

But although he confirms the overthrow by Clémencet of the views of previous translators, he leaves Clémencet's

own position really unweakened. S. Gregory uses the two terms as practically convertible. In xxi., § 19, (which

Montaut misinterprets) he explains that the life of the coenobite is a hermit-life in its relation to the world which

he has forsaken, while it has opportunities in community-life for the growth of those virtues which are required

by the relation of man to man. Cf. Bened. edition (Clémencet), Praef. Gener., Pars. II., § iii. sub finem.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

31. Some are benefited by praise, others by blame, both being applied in season; while
if out of season, or unreasonable, they are injurious; some are set right by encouragement,
others by rebuke; some, when taken to task in public, others, when privately corrected. For
some are wont to despise private admonitions, but are recalled to their senses by the condemnation of a number of people, while others, who would grow reckless under reproof
openly given, accept rebuke because it is in secret, and yield obedience in return for sympathy.
32. Upon some it is needful to keep a close watch, even in the minutest details, because
if they think they are unperceived (as they would contrive to be), they are puffed up with
the idea of their own wisdom. Of others it is better to take no notice, but seeing not to see,
and hearing not to hear them, according to the proverb, that we may not drive them to
despair, under the depressing influence of repeated reproofs, and at last to utter recklessness,
when they have lost the sense of self-respect, the source of persuasiveness.2618 In some
cases we must even be angry, without feeling angry, or treat them with a disdain we do not
feel, or manifest despair, though we do not really despair of them, according to the needs
of their nature. Others again we must treat with condescension2619 and lowliness, aiding
them readily to conceive a hope of better things. Some it is often more advantageous to
conquer-by others to be overcome, and to praise or deprecate, in one case wealth and
power, in another poverty and failure.

33. For our treatment does not correspond with virtue and vice, one of which is most
excellent and beneficial at all times and in all cases, and the other most evil and harmful;
and, instead of one and the same of our medicines invariably proving either most wholesome
or most dangerous in the same cases-be it severity or gentleness, or any of the others which
we have enumerated-in some cases it proves good and useful, in others again it has the
contrary effect, according, I suppose, as time and circumstance and the disposition of the
patient admit. Now to set before you the distinction between all these things, and give you
a perfectly exact view of them, so that you may in brief comprehend the medical art, is quite
impossible, even for one in the highest degree qualified by care and skill: but actual experience and practice are requisite to form2620 a medical system and a medical man.

34. This, however, I take to be generally admitted-that just as it is not safe for those
who walk on a lofty tight rope to lean to either side, for even though the inclination seems

The source of persuasiveness, lit., "the medicine of persuasion."

condescension, lit., ‘equity,' dealing gently with their weakness, not exacting the literal fulfilment of the

law.

2620 Are requisite to form, lit., by ‘actual...they become clear to.'

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

slight, it has no slight consequences, but their safety depends upon their perfect balance: 
so in the case of one of us, if he leans to either side, whether from vice or ignorance, no slight
danger of a fall into sin is incurred, both for himself and those who are led by him. But we
must really walk in the King's highway,2621 and take care not to turn aside from it either to
the right hand or to the left,2622 as the Proverbs say. For such is the case with our passions,
and such in this matter is the task of the good shepherd, if he is to know properly the souls
of his flock, and to guide them according to the methods of a pastoral care which is right
and just, and worthy of our true Shepherd.

35. In regard to the distribution of the word, to mention last the first of our duties, of
that divine and exalted word, which everyone now is ready to discourse upon; if anyone
else boldly undertakes it and supposes it within the power of every man's intellect, I am
amazed at his intelligence, not to say his folly. To me indeed it seems no slight task, and
one requiring no little spiritual power, to give in due season2623 to each his portion of the
word, and to regulate with judgment the truth of our opinions, which are concerned with
such subjects as the world or worlds,2624 matter, soul, mind, intelligent natures, better or
worse, providence which holds together and guides the universe, and seems in our experience
of it to be governed according to some principle, but one which is at variance with those of
earth and of men.

36. Again, they are concerned with our original constitution, and final restoration, the
types of the truth, the covenants, the first and second coming of Christ, His incarnation,
sufferings and dissolution,2625 with the resurrection, the last day, the judgment and recompense, whether sad or glorious; I, to crown all, with what we are to think of the original2626
and blessed Trinity. Now this involves a very great risk to those who are charged with the
illumination2627 of others, if they are to avoid contracting2628 their doctrine to a single
Person, from fear of polytheism, and so leave us empty terms, if we suppose the Father and
the Son and the Holy Spirit to be one and the same Person only: or, on the other hand,
severing It into three, either foreign and diverse, or disordered and unprincipled, and, so

2621 Numb. xx. 17.

Prov. iv. 27.

S. Luke xii. 42.

2624 Worlds, i.e. the invisible and visible, of which S. Greg. held that the former was created before the latter.

cf. Orat. xviii. 3; xxvii. 10; xxviii. 31; xxxviii. 10; xl. 45.

2625 Dissolution; some translate ‘return'-i.e. of the Ascension; referring the ‘resurrection, &c.' to mankind

in general.

2626 Original. Perhaps better ‘supreme.'

Illumination. Some apply this to Holy Baptism, with its preliminary instruction.

2628 Contracting, i.e. by the Sabellian heresy. A parallel passage in almost identical terms is Orat. xx. 6.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

to say, opposed divinities, thus falling from the opposite side into an equally dangerous error: 
like some distorted plant if bent far back in the opposite direction.

37. For, amid the three infirmities in regard to theology, atheism, Judaism, and polytheism, one of which is patronised by Sabellius the Libyan, another by Arius of Alexandria,
and the third by some of the ultra-orthodox among us, what is my position, can I avoid
whatever in these three is noxious, and remain within the limits of piety; neither being led
astray by the new analysis and synthesis into the atheism2629 of Sabellius, to assert not so
much that all are one as that each is nothing, for things which are transferred and pass into
each other cease to be that which each one of them is, of that we have an unnaturally compound deity, like those mythical creatures, the subject of a picturesque imagination: nor
again, by alleging a plurality of severed natures, according to the well named madness2630
of Arius, becoming involved in a Jewish poverty, and introducing envy into the divine
nature, by limiting the Godhead to the Unbegotten One alone, as if afraid that our God
would perish, if He were the Father of a real God of equal nature: nor again, by arraying
three principles in opposition to, or in alliance with, each other, introducing the Gentile
plurality of principles from which we have escaped?

38. It is necessary neither to be so devoted to the Father, as to rob Him of His Fatherhood, for whose Father would He be, if the Son were separated and estranged from Him,
by being ranked with the creation, (for an alien being, or one which is combined and confounded with his father, and, for the sense is the same, throws him into confusion, is not a
son); nor to be so devoted to Christ, as to neglect to preserve both His Sonship, (for whose
son would He be, if His origin were not referred to the Father?) and the rank of the Father
as origin, inasmuch as He is the Father and Generator; for He would be the origin of petty
and unworthy beings, or rather the term would be used in a petty and unworthy sense, if
He were not the origin of Godhead and goodness, which are contemplated in the Son and
the Spirit: the former being the Son and the Word, the latter the proceeding and indissoluble
Spirit. For both the Unity of the Godhead must be preserved, and the Trinity of Persons
confessed, each with His own property.

39. A suitable and worthy comprehension and exposition of this subject demands a
discussion of greater length than the present occasion, or even our life, as I suppose, allows,
and, what is more, both now and at all times, the aid of the Spirit, by Whom alone we are
able to perceive, to expound, or to embrace, the truth in regard to God. For the pure alone

2629 Atheism. This term is used of Sabellianism xviii. 16. xx. 6. xxi. 13. xliii. 30, in the sense in which it is

here explained. Cf. Petav. de Trin. I. vi. 3, sqq.

2630 Madness of Arianism, xxi. 13. xxxiv. 8. xliii. 30. This term is applied in a letter of Constantine after the

Council of Nicaea. It is called Judaism also Orat. xx. 6 as frequently by S. Athanasius. Cf. Petav. de Trin. I. ix.

8.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

can grasp Him Who is pure and of the same disposition as himself; and I have now briefly
dwelt upon the subject, to show how difficult it is to discuss such important questions, especially before a large audience, composed of every age and condition, and needing like an
instrument of many strings, to be played upon in various ways; or to find any form of words
able to edify them all, and illuminate them with the light of knowledge. For it is not only
that there are three sources from which danger springs, understanding, speech, and hearing,
so that failure in one, if not in all, is infallibly certain; for either the mind is not illuminated,
or the language is feeble, or the hearing, not having been cleansed, fails to comprehend, and
accordingly, in one or all respects, the truth must be maimed: but further, what makes the
instruction of those who profess to teach any other subject so easy and acceptable-viz. the
piety2631 of the audience-on this subject involves difficulty and danger.

40. For having undertaken to contend on behalf of God, the Supreme Being, and of
salvation, and of the primary hope2632 of us all, the more fervent they are in the faith, the
more hostile are they to what is said, supposing that a submissive spirit indicates, not piety,
but treason to the truth, and therefore they would sacrifice anything rather than their private
convictions, and the accustomed doctrines in which they have been educated. I am now
referring to those who are moderate and not utterly depraved in disposition, who, if they
have erred in regard to the truth, have erred from piety, who have zeal, though not according
to knowledge,2633 who will possibly be of the number of those not excessively condemned,
and not beaten with many stripes,2634 because it is not through vice or depravity that they
have failed to do the will of their Lord; and these perchance would be persuaded and forsake
the pious opinion which is the cause of their hostility, if some reason either from their own
minds, or from others, were to take hold of them, and at a critical moment, like iron from
flint, strike fire from a mind which is pregnant and worthy of the light, for thus a little spark
would quickly kindle the torch of truth within it.

Piety, εὐλάβεια. i.e. The pious readily and attentively receive instruction in morality or generally received

truth, but are more suspicious and intolerant than ordinary people, if, at a time when any theological question

is hotly debated, a preacher touches upon any point connected with it, and so stirs party feeling or personal

prejudice.

The primary hope. This term is used of the full knowledge and confession of the doctrine of the Holy

Trinity, Orat. xxxii. 23; where its necessary connection with Christianity and the life of the soul is insisted on. 

For its vital importance cf. Liddon, Bamp. Lect. pp. 435, 6, and its bearing on the Mediatorial Work of Christ,

and so on our salvation. Ibid. Lect. VIII. esp. pp. 472-9 (5th ed.). S. Cyr. Hier. Catech. 13. 2. S. Cyr. Alex. de

S. Trin. dial. 4. tom v. pp. 508, 509. S. Proclus Hom. in Incarn. 5. 6. 9. Bright. Hist. of the Church. p. 149.

2633 Rom. x. 2.

Luke xii. 47.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

41. But what is to be said of those who, from vain glory or arrogance, speak unrighteousness against the most High,2635 arming themselves with the insolence of Jannes and
Jambres,2636 not against Moses, but against the truth, and rising in opposition to sound
doctrine? Or of the third class, who through ignorance and, its consequence, temerity, rush
headlong against every form of doctrine in swinish fashion, and trample under foot the fair
pearls2637 of the truth?

42. What again of those who come with no private idea, or form of words, better or
worse, in regard to God, but listen to all kinds of doctrines and teachers, with the intention
of selecting from all what is best and safest, in reliance upon no better judges of the truth
than themselves? They are, in consequence, borne and turned about hither and thither by
one plausible idea after another, and, after being deluged and trodden down by all kinds of
doctrine,2638 and having rung the changes on a long succession of teachers and formulae,
which they throw to the winds as readily as dust, their ears and minds at last are wearied
out, and, O what folly! they become equally disgusted with all forms of doctrine, and assume
the wretched character of deriding and despising our faith as unstable and unsound; passing
in their ignorance from the teachers to the doctrine: as if anyone whose eyes were diseased,
or whose ears had been injured, were to complain of the sun for being dim and not shining,
or of sounds for being inharmonious and feeble.

43. Accordingly, to impress the truth upon a soul when it is still fresh, like wax not yet
subjected to the seal, is an easier task than inscribing pious doctrine on the top of inscriptions-I mean wrong doctrines and dogmas2639-with the result that the former are confused
and thrown into disorder by the latter. It is better indeed to tread a road which is smooth
and well trodden than one which is untrodden and rough, or to plough land which has often
been cleft and broken up by the plough: but a soul to be written upon should be free from
the inscription of harmful doctrines, or the deeply cut marks of vice: otherwise the pious
inscriber would have a twofold task, the erasure of the former impressions and the substitution of others which are more excellent, and more worthy to abide. So numerous are they
whose wickedness is shown, not only by yielding to their passions, but even by their utterances, and so numerous the forms and characters of wickedness, and so considerable the
task of one who has been intrusted with this office of educating and taking charge of souls. 
Indeed I have omitted the majority of the details, lest my speech should be unnecessarily
burdensome.

Ps. lxxiii. 8. (LXX.).

2 Tim. iii. 8.

S. Matt. vii. 6; viii. 32.

Eph. iv. 14.

2639 Doctrines and dogmas. Elias takes the former to refer to morality and the latter to belief.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

44. If anyone were to undertake to tame and train an animal of many forms and shapes,
compounded of many animals of various sizes and degrees of tameness and wildness, his
principal task, involving a considerable struggle, would be the government of so extraordinary
and heterogeneous a nature, since each of the animals of which it is compounded would,
according to its nature or habit, be differently affected with joy, pleasure or dislike, by the
same words, or food, or stroking with the hand, or whistling, or other modes of treatment. 
And what must the master of such an animal do, but show himself manifold and various in
his knowledge, and apply to each a treatment suitable for it, so as successfully to lead and
preserve the beast? And since the common body of the church is composed of many different
characters and minds, like a single animal compounded of discordant parts, it is absolutely
necessary that its ruler should be at once simple in his uprightness in all respects, and as far
as possible manifold and varied in his treatment of individuals, and in dealing with all in
an appropriate and suitable manner.

45. For some need to be fed with the milk2640 of the most simple and elementary doctrines, viz., those who are in habit babes and, so to say, new-made, and unable to bear the
manly food of the word: nay, if it were presented to them beyond their strength, they would
probably be overwhelmed and oppressed, owing to the inability of their mind, as is the case
with our material bodies,2641 to digest and appropriate what is offered to it, and so would
lose even their original power. Others require the wisdom which is spoken among the perfect,2642 and the higher and more solid food, since their senses have been sufficiently exercised to discern2643 truth and falsehood, and if they were made to drink milk, and fed on
the vegetable diet of invalids,2644 they would be annoyed. And with good reason, for they
would not be strengthened2645 according to Christ, nor make that laudable increase, which
the Word produces in one who is rightly fed, by making him a perfect man, and bringing
him to the measure of spiritual stature.2646

46. And who is sufficient for these things? For we are not as the many, able to corrupt2647 the word of truth, and mix the wine,2648 which maketh glad the heart of man,2649

1 Cor. iii. 1, 2; Heb. v. 12-14.

2641 Our material bodies, lit., "matter." This, together with "dust," "mire" or "clay" and other similar terms,

is often used by S. Gregory as a synonym of "the body."

1 Cor. ii. 6.

2643 Heb. v. 14.

2644 Rom. xiv. 2.

2645 Col. i. 11, 16, 17.

Eph. iv. 13.

2 Cor. ii. 16, 17.

Isai. i. 22.

Ps. civ. 15.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

with water, mix, that is, our doctrine with what is common and cheap, and debased, and
stale, and tasteless, in order to turn the adulteration to our profit, and accommodate ourselves
to those who meet us, and curry favor with everyone, becoming ventriloquists2650 and
chatterers, who serve their own pleasures by words uttered from the earth, and sinking into
the earth, and, to gain the special good will of the multitude, injuring in the highest degree,
nay, ruining ourselves, and shedding the innocent blood of simpler souls, which will be required at our hands.2651

47. Besides, we are aware that it is better to offer our own reins to others more skilful
than ourselves, than, while inexperienced, to guide the course of others, and rather to give
a kindly hearing than stir an untrained tongue; and after a discussion of these points with
advisers who are, I fancy, of no mean worth, and, at any rate, wish us well, we preferred to
learn those canons of speech and action which we did not know, rather than undertake to
teach them in our ignorance. For it is delightful to have the reasoning2652 of the aged come
to one even until the depth of old age, able, as it is, to aid a soul new to piety. Accordingly,
to undertake the training of others before being sufficiently trained oneself, and to learn, as
men say, the potter's art on a wine-jar, that is, to practise ourselves in piety at the expense
of others' souls seems to me to be excessive folly or excessive rashness-folly, if we are not
even aware of our own ignorance; rashness, if in spite of this knowledge we venture on the
task.

48. Nay, the wiser of the Hebrews tell us that there was of old among the Hebrews a
most excellent and praiseworthy law,2653 that every age was not entrusted with the whole
of Scripture, inasmuch as this would not be the more profitable course, since the whole of
it is not at once intelligible to everyone, and its more recondite parts would, by their apparent
meaning, do a very great injury to most people. Some portions therefore, whose exterior2654
is unexceptionable, are from the first permitted and common to all; while others are only
entrusted to those who have attained their twenty-fifth year, viz., such as hide their mystical
beauty under a mean-looking cloak, to be the reward of diligence and an illustrious life;
flashing forth and presenting itself only to those whose mind has been purified, on the
ground that this age alone2655 can be superior to the body, and properly rise from the letter
to the spirit.

2650 Ventriloquists. Isai. viii. 19, "Wizards."

Ezek. iii. 20; xxxiii. 8.

I.e., venerable for wisdom due to experience.

Law. Not definitely enacted, but a custom constantly observed. It applied to the earlier and later chapters

of Ezekiel and the Song of Solomon.

Exterior, Origen, Hom. 5, in Levit., speaks of the ‘body, soul, and spirit of Scripture.'

2655 Alone. If, as many mss. we read μόλις, "with difficulty." This is preferred by the Bened. note.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

49. Among us, however, there is no boundary line between giving and receiving instruction, like the stones of old between the tribes within and beyond the Jordan: nor is a certain
part entrusted to some, another to others; nor any rule for degrees2656 of experience; but
the matter has been so disturbed and thrown into confusion, that most of us, not to say all,
almost before we have lost our childish curls and lisp, before we have entered the house of
God, before we know even the names of the Sacred Books, before we have learnt the character
and authors of the Old and New Testaments: (for my present point is not our want of
cleansing from the mire and marks of spiritual shame which our viciousness has contracted)
if, I say, we have furnished ourselves with two or three expressions of pious authors, and
that by hearsay, not by study; if we have had a brief experience of David, or clad ourselves
properly in a cloaklet, or are wearing at least a philosopher's girdle, or have girt about us
some form and appearance of piety-phew! how we take the chair and show our spirit! 
Samuel was holy even in his swaddling-clothes:2657 we are at once wise teachers, of high
estimation in Divine things, the first of scribes and lawyers; we ordain ourselves men of
heaven and seek to be called Rabbi by men;2658 the letter is nowhere, everything is to be
understood spiritually, and our dreams are utter drivel, and we should be annoyed if we
were not lauded to excess. This is the case with the better and more simple of us: what of
those who are more spiritual and noble?2659 After frequently condemning us, as men of
no account, they have forsaken us, and abhor fellowship with impious people such as we
are.

50. Now, if we were to speak gently to one of them, advancing, as follows, step by step
in argument: "Tell me, my good sir, do you call dancing anything, and flute-playing?"
"Certainly," they would say. "What then of wisdom and being wise, which we venture to
define as a knowledge of things divine and human?" This also they will admit. "Are then
these accomplishments better than and superior to wisdom, or wisdom by far better than
these?" "Better even than all things," I know well that they will say. Up to this point they
are judicious. "Well, dancing and flute-playing require to be taught and learnt, a process
which takes time, and much toil in the sweat of the brow, and sometimes the payment of
fees, and entreaties for initiation, and long absence from home, and all else which must be
done and borne for the acquisition of experience: but as for wisdom, which is chief of all
things, and holds in her embrace everything which is good, so that even God himself prefers
this title to all the names which He is called; are we to suppose that it is a matter of such

2656 Degrees, etc. Heb. v. 14 V. "use" (in the singular), the sense is "any rule for confining the use of difficult

passages of Holy Scripture to those whose experience is a guarantee against their abuse."

1 Sam. ii. 11.

S. Matt. xxiii. 7.

"More spiritual and noble."-This is ironical.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

slight consequence, and so accessible, that we need but wish, and we would be wise?" "It
would be utter folly to do so." If we, or any learned and prudent man, were to say this to
them, and try by degrees to cleanse them from their error, it would be sowing upon rocks,2660
and speaking to ears of men who will not hear:2661 so far are they from being even wise
enough to perceive their own ignorance. And we may rightly, in my opinion, apply to them
the saying of Solomon: There is an evil which I have seen under the sun,2662 a man wise in
his own conceit;2663 and a still greater evil is to charge with the instruction of others a man
who is not even aware of his own ignorance.

51. This is a state of mind which demands, in special degree, our tears and groans, and
has often stirred my pity, from the conviction that imagination robs us in great measure of
reality, and that vain glory is a great hindrance to men's attainment of virtue. To heal and
stay this disease needs a Peter or Paul, those great disciples of Christ, who in addition to
guidance in word and deed, received their grace,2664 and became all things to all men, that
they might gain all.2665 But for other men like ourselves, it is a great thing to be rightly
guided and led by those who have been charged with the correction and setting right of
things such as these.

52. Since, however, I have mentioned Paul, and men like him, I will, with your permission, pass by all others who have been foremost as lawgivers, prophets, or leaders, or in any
similar office-for instance, Moses, Aaron, Joshua, Elijah, Elisha, the Judges, Samuel, David,
the company of Prophets, John, the Twelve Apostles, and their successors, who with many
toils and labors exercised their authority, each in his own time; all these I pass by, to set
forth Paul as the witness to my assertions, and for us to consider by his example how important a matter is the care of souls, and whether it requires slight attention and little judgment. 
But that we may recognize and perceive this, let us hear what Paul himself says of Paul.

53. I say nothing of his labours, his watchings, his sufferings in hunger and thirst, in
cold and nakedness, his assailants from without, his adversaries within.2666 I pass over the
persecutions, councils, prisons, bonds, accusers, tribunals, the daily and hourly deaths, the
basket, the stonings, beatings with rods, the travelling about, the perils by land and sea, the

S. Luke viii. 6.

Ecclus. xxv. 9.

Eccles. x. 5.

Prov. xxvi. 12.

2664 Their grace, τὸ χάρισμα. Elias takes this of the power to heal diseases. Tillemont of miracles in general. 

Perhaps better of the special position as Apostles to the Jews and to the Gentiles (Gal. ii. 8, 9) where the term is

χάρις.

1 Cor. ix. 22.

2 Cor. xi. 23 et seq.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

deep, the shipwrecks, the perils of rivers, perils of robbers, perils from his countrymen,
perils among false brethren, the living by his own hands, the gospel without charge,2667 the
being a spectacle to both angels and men,2668 set in the midst between God and men to
champion His cause,2669 and to unite them to Him, and make them His own peculiar
people,2670 beside those things that are without.2671 For who could worthily detail these
matters, the daily pressure,2672 the individual solicitude, the care of all the churches, the
universal sympathy, and brotherly love? Did anyone stumble, Paul also was weak; did another suffer scandal, it was Paul who was on fire.

54. What of the laboriousness of his teaching? The manifold character of his ministry? 
His loving kindness? And on the other hand his strictness? And the combination and
blending of the two; in such wise that his gentleness should not enervate, nor his severity
exasperate? He gives laws for slaves and masters,2673 rulers and ruled,2674 husbands and
wives,2675 parents and children,2676 marriage and celibacy,2677 self-discipline and indulgence,2678 wisdom and ignorance,2679 circumcision and uncircumcision,2680 Christ and
the world, the flesh and the spirit.2681 On behalf of some he gives thanks, others he upbraids. 
Some he names his joy and crown,2682 others he charges with folly.2683 Some who hold a
straight course he accompanies, sharing in their zeal; others he checks, who are going wrong. 
At one time he excommunicates,2684 at another he confirms his love;2685 at one time he

1 Cor. iv. 12; ix. 18.

Ib. iv. 9.

2669 His cause reading τοῦ: v. 1. τῶν.

2670 Tit. ii. 14.

2 Cor. xi. 28, 29.

Pressure ἐπιστασίαν, 2 Cor. xi. 28, ἐπίστασιν.

Eph. vi. 5, 9.

2674 Rom. xiii. 1-3.

Eph. v. 25, 22.

Eph. vi. 1-4.

1 Cor. vii. 3, 8, 25, 31.

2678 Rom. xiv. 3, 6.

1 Cor. i. 27; iii. 18.

2680 Rom. ii. 25, 29.

2681 Gal. v. 16.

Phil. iv. 1.

2683 Gal. iii. 1.

1 Cor. v. 5.

2 Cor. ii. 8.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

grieves, at another rejoices; at one time he feeds with milk, at another he handles mysteries;2686 at one time he condescends, at another he raises to his own level; at one time he
threatens a rod,2687 at another he offers the spirit of meekness; at one time he is haughty
toward the lofty, at another lowly toward the lowly. Now he is least of the apostles,2688 now
he offers a proof of Christ speaking in him;2689 now he longs for departure and is being
poured forth as a libation,2690 now he thinks it more necessary for their sakes to abide in
the flesh. For he seeks not his own interests, but those of his children,2691 whom he has
begotten in Christ by the gospel.2692 This is the aim of all his spiritual authority, in everything
to neglect his own in comparison with the advantage of others.

55. He glories in his infirmities and distresses. He takes pleasure in the dying of Jesus,2693 as if it were a kind of ornament. He is lofty in carnal things,2694 he rejoices in things
spiritual; he is not rude in knowledge,2695 and claims to see in a mirror, darkly.2696 He is
bold in spirit, and buffets his body,2697 throwing it as an antagonist. What is the lesson and
instruction he would thus impress upon us? Not to be proud of earthly things, or puffed
up by knowledge, or excite the flesh against the spirit. He fights for all, prays for all, is jealous
for all, is kindled on behalf of all, whether without law, or under the law; a preacher of the
Gentiles,2698 a patron of the Jews. He even was exceedingly bold on behalf of his brethren
according to the flesh,2699 if I may myself be bold enough to say so, in his loving prayer that
they might in his stead be brought to Christ. What magnanimity! what fervor of spirit! He
imitates Christ, who became a curse for us,2700 who took our infirmities and bore our

1 Cor. ii. 7; iii. 2.

Ib. iv. 21.

Ib. xv. 9.

2 Cor. xiii. 3.

Phil. i. 23; ii. 17.

1 Cor. x. 33.

Ib. iv. 15.

2 Cor. iv. 10; xii. 9, 10.

2694 Rom. v. 3; Phil. iii. 4.

2 Cor. xi. 6.

1 Cor. xiii. 12.

Ib. ix. 27.

2 Tim. i. 11.

2699 Rom. ix. 3.

2700 Gal. iii. 13.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

sicknesses;2701 or, to use more measured terms, he is ready, next to Christ, to suffer anything,
even as one of the ungodly, for them, if only they be saved.

56. Why should I enter into detail? He lived not to himself, but to Christ and his
preaching. He crucified the world to himself,2702 and being crucified to the world and the
things which are seen, he thought all things little,2703 and too small to be desired; even
though from Jerusalem and round about unto Illyricum2704 he had fully preached the
Gospel, even though he had been prematurely caught up to the third heaven, and had a
vision of Paradise, and had heard unspeakable words.2705 Such was Paul, and everyone of
like spirit with him. But we fear that, in comparison with them, we may be foolish princes
of Zoan,2706 or extortioners, who exact the fruits of the ground, or falsely bless the
people:2707 and further make themselves happy, and confuse the way of your feet,2708 or
mockers ruling over you, or children in authority,2709 immature in mind, not even having
bread and clothing enough to be rulers over any;2710 or prophets teaching lies,2711 or rebellious princes,2712 deserving to share the reproach of their elders for the straitness of the
famine,2713 or priests very far from speaking comfortably2714 to Jerusalem, according to
the reproaches and protests urged by Isaiah, who was purged by the Seraphim with a live
coal.2715

57. Is the undertaking then so serious and laborious to a sensitive and sad heart-a very
rottenness to the bones2716 of a sensible man: while the danger is slight, and a fall not worth
consideration? Nay the blessed Hosea inspires me with serious alarm, where he says that
to us priests and rulers pertaineth the judgment,2717 because we have been a snare to the

S. Matt. viii. 17.

2702 Gal. vi. 14.

Phil. iii. 8.

2704 Rom. xv. 19.

2 Cor. xii. 2, 4.

Isa. xix. 11.

Ib. ix. 16.

Ib. iii. 12.

Ib. iii. 4.

Ib. iii. 7.

Ib. ix. 15.

Ib. i. 23.

Ib. viii. 21.

Ib. xl. 2.

Ib. vi. 6, 7.

Prov. xiv. 30.

2717 Hos. v. 1, 2.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

watchtower; and as a net spread upon Tabor, which has been firmly fixed by the hunters of
men's souls, and he threatens to cut off the wicked prophets,2718 and devour their judges
with fire, and to cease for a while from anointing a king and princes,2719 because they ruled
for themselves, and not by Him.2720

58. Hence again the divine Micah, unable to brook the building of Zion with blood,
however you interpret the phrase, and of Jerusalem with iniquity, while the heads thereof
judge for reward, and the priests teach for hire, and the prophets divine for money-what
does he say will be the result of this? Zion shall be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem be as a
lodge in a garden, and the mountain of the house be reckoned as a glade in a thicket.2721 
He bewails also the scarcity of the upright, there being scarcely a stalk or a gleaning grape
left, since both the prince asketh, and the judge curries favour,2722 so that his language is
almost the same as the mighty David's: Save me, O Lord, for the godly man ceaseth:2723 
and says that therefore their blessings shall fail them, as if wasted by the moth.

59. Joel again summons us to wailing, and will have the ministers of the altar lament
under the presence of famine: so far is he from allowing us to revel in the misfortunes of
others: and, after sanctifying a fast, calling a solemn assembly, and gathering the old men,
the children, and those of tender age,2724 we ourselves must further haunt the temple in
sackcloth and ashes,2725 prostrated right humbly on the ground, because the field is wasted,
and the meat-offering and the drink-offering is cut off from the house of the Lord, till we
draw down mercy by our humiliation.

60. What of Habakkuk? He utters more heated words, and is impatient with God
Himself, and cries down, as it were our good Lord, because of the injustice of the judges. 
O Lord, how long shall I cry and Thou wilt not hear? Shall I cry out unto Thee of violence,
and Thou wilt not save? Why dost Thou show me toil and labour, causing me to look upon
perverseness and impiety? Judgment has been given against me, and the judge is a spoiler. 
Therefore the law is slacked, and judgment doth never go forth. Then comes the denunciation, and what follows upon it. Behold, ye despisers, and regard, and wonder marvellously,
and vanish away, for I work a work.2726 But why need I quote the whole of the denunciation? 

Ib. vi. 5.

Ib. vii. 7.

Ib. viii. 4.

2721 Mic. iii. 10-12.

Ib. vii. 1-4.

Ps. xii. 1.

Joel i. 13, seq.

Isa. lviii. 5.

2726 Hab. i. 2 et seq.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

A little further on, however, for I think it best to add this to what has been said, after upbraiding and lamenting many of those who are in some respect unjust or depraved, he upbraids the leaders and teachers of wickedness, stigmatising vice as a foul disorder, and an
intoxication and aberration of mind; charging them with giving their neighbours drink in
order to look upon the darkness of their soul,2727 and the dens of creeping things and wild
beasts, viz.: the dwelling places of wicked thoughts. Such indeed they are, and such teachings
do they discuss with us.

61. How can it be right to pass by Malachi, who at one time brings bitter charges against
the priests, and reproaches them with despising the name of the Lord,2728 and explains
wherein they did this, by offering polluted bread upon the altar, and meat which is not
firstfruits, which they would not have offered to one of their governors, or, if they had offered
it, they would have been dishonoured; yet offering these in fulfilment of a vow to the King
of the universe, to wit, the lame and the sick, and the deformed, which are utterly profane
and loathsome.2729 Again he reminds them of the covenant of God, a covenant of life and
peace, with the sons of Levi, and that they should serve Him in fear, and stand in awe of the
manifestation of His Name. The law of truth, he says, was in his mouth, and unrighteousness
was not found in his lips; he walked with me uprightly in peace, and turned away many
from iniquity: for the priest's lips shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek the law at his
mouth. And how honourable and at the same time how fearful is the cause! for he is the
messenger of the Lord Almighty.2730 Although I pass over the following imprecations, as
strongly worded,2731 yet I am afraid of their truth. This however may be cited without offence, to our profit. Is it right, he says, to regard your sacrifice, and receive it with good will
at your hands,2732 as if he were most highly incensed, and rejecting their ministrations
owing to their wickedness.

62. Whenever I remember Zechariah, I shudder at the reaping-hook,2733 and likewise
at his testimony against the priests, his hints in reference to the celebrated Joshua, the high
priest, whom he represents as stripped of filthy and unbecoming garments and then clothed
in rich priestly apparel.2734 As for the words and charges to Joshua which he puts into the
angel's mouth, let them be treated with silent respect, as referring perhaps to a greater2735

Ib. ii. 15.

2728 Mal. i. 6.

Ib. i. 13.

Ib. ii. 5-7.

Strongly worded, βλάσφημον, perh. "ill omened."

Ib. ii. 13.

Zech. v. 1 (LXX.).

Ib. iii. 1 et seq.

2735 A greater, &c. i.e. they refer to the Person of Jesus Christ Himself.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

and higher object than those who are many priests:2736 but even at his right hand stood
the devil, to resist him. A fact, in my eyes, of no slight significance, and demanding no slight
fear and watchfulness.

63. Who is so bold and adamantine of soul as not to tremble and be abashed at the
charges and reproaches deliberately urged against the rest of the shepherds. A voice, he
says, of the howling of the shepherds, for their glory is spoiled. A voice of the roaring of
lions,2737 for this hath befallen them. Does he not all but hear the wailing as if close at hand,
and himself wail with the afflicted. A little further is a more striking and impassioned strain. 
Feed, he says, the flock of slaughter, whose possessors slay them without repentance, and
they that sell them say, "Blessed be the Lord, for we are rich:" and their own shepherds are
without feeling for them. Therefore, I will no more pity the inhabitants of the land, saith
the Lord Almighty.2738 And again: Awake, O sword, against the shepherds, and smite the
shepherds, and scatter the sheep, and I will turn My Hand upon the shepherds;2739 and,
Mine anger is kindled against the shepherds, and I will visit the lambs:2740 adding to the
threat those who rule over the people. So industriously does he apply himself to his task
that he cannot easily free himself from denunciations, and I am afraid that, did I refer to
the whole series, I should exhaust your patience. This must then suffice for Zechariah.

64. Passing by the elders in the book of Daniel;2741 for it is better to pass them by, together with the Lord's righteous sentence and declaration concerning them, that wickedness
came from Babylon from ancient judges, who seemed to govern the people; how are we affected by Ezekiel, the beholder and expositor of the mighty mysteries and visions? By his
injunction to the watchmen2742 not to keep silence concerning vice and the sword impending
over it, a course which would profit neither themselves nor the sinners; but rather to keep
watch and forewarn, and thus benefit, at any rate those who gave warning, if not both those
who spoke and those who heard?

65. What of his further invective against the shepherds, Woe shall come upon woe, and
rumour upon rumour, then shall they seek a vision of the prophet, but the law shall perish
from the priest, and counsel from the ancients,2743 and again, in these terms, Son of man,
say unto her, thou art a land that is not watered, nor hath rain come upon thee in the day

2736 Heb. vii. 23.

Zech. xi. 3.

Zech. xi. 5, 6.

Ib. xiii. 7.

Ib. x. 3.

2741 Hist. Susann., 5.

Ezek. xxxiii. 2.

Ib. vii. 26.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

of indignation: whose princes in the midst of her are like roaring lions, ravening the prey,
devouring souls in their might.2744 And a little further on: Her priests have violated My
laws and profaned My holy things, they have put no difference between the holy and profane,
but all things were alike to them, and they hid their eyes from My Sabbaths, and I was profaned among them.2745 He threatens that He will consume both the wall and them that
daubed it,2746 that is, those who sin and those who throw a cloak over them; as the evil
rulers and priests have done, who caused the house of Israel to err according to their own
hearts which are estranged in their lusts.2747

66. I also refrain from entering into his discussion of those who feed themselves, devour
the milk, clothe themselves with the wool, kill them that are fat, but feed not the flock,
strengthen not the diseased, nor bind up that which is broken, nor bring again that which
is driven away, nor seek that which is lost, nor keep watch over that which is strong, but
oppress them with rigour, and destroy them with their pressure;2748 so that, because there
was no shepherd, the sheep were scattered over every plain and mountain, and became meat
for all the fowls and beasts,2749 because there was no one to seek for them and bring them
back. What is the consequence? As I live, saith the Lord, because these things are so, and
My flock became a prey,2750 behold I am against the shepherds, and I will require My flock
at their hands, and will gather them and make them My own: but the shepherds shall suffer
such and such things, as bad shepherds ought.

67. However, to avoid unreasonably prolonging my discourse, by an enumeration of
all the prophets, and of the words of them all, I will mention but one more, who was known
before he was formed, and sanctified from the womb,2751 Jeremiah: and will pass over the
rest. He longs for water over his head, and a fountain of tears for his eyes, that he may adequately weep for Israel;2752 and no less does he bewail the depravity of its rulers.

68. God speaks to him in reproof of the priests: The priests said not, Where is the Lord,
and they that handled the law knew Me not; the pastors also transgressed against Me.2753 
Again He says to him: The pastors are become brutish, and have not sought the Lord, and

Ib. xxii. 24 seq.

Ib. xxii. 26.

Ib. xiii. 14.

Ezek. xiv. 5.

Ib. xxxiv. 2 et seq.

Ib. xxxix. 17.

Ib. xxxiv. 8.

Jer. i. 5.

Ib. ix. 1.

Ib. ii. 8.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

therefore all their flock did not understand, and was scattered.2754 Again, Many pastors
have destroyed My vineyard, and have polluted My pleasant portion, till it was reduced to
a trackless wilderness.2755 He further inveighs against the pastors again: Woe be to the
pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of My pasture! Therefore thus saith the Lord
against them that feed My people: Ye have scattered My flock, and driven them away, and
have not visited them: behold I will visit upon you the evil of your doings.2756 Moreover
he bids the shepherds to howl, and the rams of the flock to lament, because the days of their
slaughter are accomplished.2757

69. Why need I speak of the things of ancient days? Who can test himself by the rules
and standards which Paul laid down for bishops and presbyters, that they are to be temperate,
soberminded, not given to wine, no strikers, apt to teach, blameless in all things, and beyond
the reach of the wicked,2758 without finding considerable deflection from the straight line
of the rules? What of the regulations of Jesus for his disciples, when He sends them to
preach?2759 The main object of these is-not to enter into particulars-that they should be
of such virtue, so simple and modest, and in a word, so heavenly, that the gospel should
make its way, no less by their character than by their preaching.

70. I am alarmed by the reproaches of the Pharisees, the conviction of the Scribes. For
it is disgraceful for us, who ought greatly surpass them, as we are bidden, if we desire the
kingdom of heaven, to be found more deeply sunk in vice: so that we deserve to be called
serpents, a generation of vipers, and blind guides, who strain out a gnat and swallow a camel,
or sepulchres foul within, in spite of our external comeliness, or platters outwardly clean,
and everything else, which they are, or which is laid to their charge.2760

71. With these thoughts I am occupied night and day: they waste my marrow, and feed
upon my flesh, and will not allow me to be confident or to look up. They depress my soul,
and abase my mind, and fetter my tongue, and make me consider, not the position of a
prelate, or the guidance and direction of others, which is far beyond my powers; but how I
myself am to escape the wrath to come, and to scrape off from myself somewhat of the rust
of vice. A man must himself be cleansed, before cleansing others: himself become wise,
that he may make others wise; become light, and then give light: draw near to God, and so

Ib. x. 21.

Ib. xii. 10.

Ib. xxiii. 1, 2.

Ib. xxv. 34.

1 Tim. iii. 2. 3; Tit. i. 7.

S. Matt. x. 9; S. Luke ix. 3.

S. Matt. xxiii. 13 et seq.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

bring others near; be hallowed, then hallow them; be possessed of hands to lead others by
the hand, of wisdom to give advice.

72. When will this be, say they who are swift but not sure in every thing, readily building
up, readily throwing down. When will the lamp be upon its stand,2761 and where is the
talent?2762 For so they call the grace.2763 Those who speak thus are more fervent in
friendship than in reverence. You ask me, you men of exceeding courage, when these things
shall be, and what account I give of them? Not even extreme old age would be too long a
limit to assign. For hoary hairs combined with prudence are better than inexperienced
youth, well-reasoned hesitation than inconsiderate haste, and a brief reign than a long
tyranny: just as a small portion honourably won is better than considerable possessions
which are dishonourable and uncertain, a little gold than a great weight of lead, a little light
than much darkness.

73. But this speed, in its untrustworthiness and excessive haste, is in danger of being
like the seeds which fell upon the rock,2764 and, because they had no depth of earth,2765
sprang up at once, but could not bear even the first heat of the sun; or like the foundation
laid upon the sand,2766 which could not even make a slight resistance to the rain and the
winds. Woe to thee, O city, whose king is a child,2767 says Solomon. Be not hasty of
speech,2768 says Solomon again, asserting that hastiness of speech is less serious than heated
action. And who, in spite of all this, demands haste rather than security and utility? Who
can mould, as clay-figures are modelled in a single day, the defender of the truth, who is to
take his stand with Angels, and give glory with Archangels, and cause the sacrifice to ascend
to the altar on high, and share the priesthood of Christ, and renew the creature, and set
forth the image, and create inhabitants for the world above, aye and, greatest of all, be God,
and make others to be God?

74. I know Whose ministers we are, and where we are placed, and whither we are
guides. I know the height of God, and the weakness of man, and, on the contrary, his power. 
Heaven is high, and the earth deep;2769 and who of those who have been cast down by sin
shall ascend?2770 Who that is as yet surrounded by the gloom here below, and by the

Ib. v. 15.

Ib. xxv. 15.

"The grace" i.e. the grace of the priesthood.

S. Luke viii. 6.

S. Matt. xiii. 5.

Ib. vii. 26.

Eccles. x. 16.

Prov. xxix. 20.

Ib. xxv. 3.

Ps. xxiv. 3.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

grossness of the flesh can purely gaze with his whole mind upon that whole mind, and amid
unstable and visible things hold intercourse with the stable and invisible? For hardly may
one of those who have been most specially purged, behold here even an image of the Good,
as men see the sun in the water. Who hath measured the water with his hand, and the
heaven with a span, and the whole earth in a measure? Who hath weighed the mountains
in scales, and the hills in a balance?2771 What is the place of his rest?2772 and to whom shall
he be likened?2773

75. Who is it, Who made all things by His Word,2774 and formed man by His Wisdom,
and gathered into one things scattered abroad, and mingled dust with spirit, and compounded
an animal visible and invisible, temporal and immortal, earthly and heavenly, able to attain
to God but not to comprehend Him, drawing near and yet afar off. I said, I will be wise,
says Solomon, but she (i.e. Wisdom) was far from me beyond what is:2775 and, Verily, he
that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow.2776 For the joy of what we have discovered
is no greater than the pain of what escapes us; a pain, I imagine, like that felt by those who
are dragged, while yet thirsty, from the water, or are unable to retain what they think they
hold, or are suddenly left in the dark by a flash of lightning.

76. This depressed and kept me humble, and persuaded me that it was better to hear
the voice of praise2777 than to be an expounder of truths beyond my power; the majesty,
and the height, and the dignity, and the pure natures scarce able to contain the brightness
of God, Whom the deep covers, Whose secret place is darkness,2778 since He is the purest
light,2779 which most men cannot approach unto; Who is in all this universe, and again is
beyond the universe; Who is all goodness,2780 and beyond all goodness; Who enlightens
the mind, and escapes the quickness and height of the mind, ever retiring as much as He is
apprehended, and by His flight and stealing away when grasped, withdrawing to the things
above one who is enamoured of Him.

77. Such and so great is the object of our longing zeal, and such a man should he be,
who prepares and conducts souls to their espousals. For myself, I feared to be cast, bound

Isai. xl. 12.

Ib. lxvi. 1.

Ib. xl. 18, 25.

Ps. xxxiii. 6.

Eccles. vii. 24.

Ib. i. 18.

Ps. xxvi. 7 (LXX.).

Ib. xviii. 12; civ. 6.

1 Tim. vi. 16.

Exod. xxxiii. 19.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

hand and foot,2781 from the bride-chamber, for not having on a wedding-garment, and for
having rashly intruded among those who there sit at meat. And yet I had been invited from
my youth, if I may speak of what most men know not, and had been cast upon Him from
the womb,2782 and presented by the promise of my mother, afterwards confirmed in the
hour of danger: and my longing grew up with it, and my reason agreed to it, and I gave as
an offering my all to Him Who had won me and saved me, my property, my fame, my health,
my very words, from which I only gained the advantage of being able to despise them, and
of having something in comparison of which I preferred Christ. And the words of God
were made sweet as honeycombs2783 to me, and I cried after knowledge and lifted up my
voice for wisdom.2784 There was moreover the moderation of anger, the curbing of the
tongue, the restraint of the eyes, the discipline of the belly, and the trampling under foot of
the glory which clings to the earth. I speak foolishly,2785 but it shall be said, in these pursuits
I was perhaps not inferior to many.

78. One branch of philosophy is, however, too high for me, the commission to guide
and govern souls-and before I have rightly learned to submit to a shepherd, or have had
my soul duly cleansed, the charge of caring for a flock: especially in times like these, when
a man, seeing everyone else rushing hither and thither in confusion, is content to flee from
the melee and escape, in sheltered retirement, from the storm and gloom of the wicked one: 
when the members are at war with one another, and the slight remains of love, which once
existed, have departed, and priest is a mere empty name, since, as it is said, contempt2786
has been poured upon princes.2787

79. Would that it were merely empty! And now may their blasphemy fall upon the
head of the ungodly! All fear has been banished from souls, shamelessness has taken its
place, and knowledge2788 and the deep things of the Spirit2789 are at the disposal of anyone
who will; and we all become pious by simply condemning the impiety of others; and we
claim the services of ungodly judges,2790 and fling that which is holy to the dogs, and cast

S. Matt. xxii. 13.

Ps. xxii. 11.

Ib. xix. 10; cxix. 103.

Prov. ii. 3.

2 Cor. xi. 23.

Ps. cvii. 40.

Princes, ἄρχοντας. i.e. The office of the priesthood, which is one of dignity, has been brought into con-

tempt by the unworthiness of those ordained to it, who have, by their want of the virtues requisite for their office,

made it an empty name-and, not only so, but have been actively vicious.

2788 Knowledge, &c. cf. the ironical passage, §§ 49, 50.

1 Cor. ii. 10.

Ib. vi. 1, 7.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

pearls before swine,2791 by publishing divine things in the hearing of profane souls, and,
wretches that we are, carefully fulfil the prayers of our enemies, and are not ashamed to go
a whoring with our own inventions.2792 Moabites and Ammonites, who were not permitted
even to enter the Church of the Lord,2793 frequent our most holy rites. We have opened to
all not the gates of righteousness,2794 but, doors of railing and partizan arrogance; and the
first place among us is given, not to one who in the fear of God refrains from even an idle
word, but to him who can revile his neighbour most fluently, whether explicitly, or by covert
allusion; who rolls beneath his tongue mischief and iniquity, or to speak more accurately,
the poison of asps.2795

80. We observe each other's sins, not to bewail them, but to make them subjects of reproach, not to heal them, but to aggravate them, and excuse our own evil deeds by the
wounds of our neighbours. Bad and good men are distinguished not according to personal
character, but by their disagreement or friendship with ourselves. We praise one day what
we revile the next, denunciation at the hands of others is a passport to our admiration; so
magnanimous are we in our viciousness, that everything is frankly forgiven to impiety.

81. Everything has reverted to the original state of things2796 before the world, with its
present fair order and form, came into being. The general confusion and irregularity cry
for some organising hand and power. Or, if you will, it is like a battle at night by the faint
light of the moon, when none can discern the faces of friends or foes; or like a sea fight on
the surge, with the driving winds, and boiling foam, and dashing waves, and crashing vessels,
with the thrusts of poles, the pipes of boatswains, the groans of the fallen, while we make
our voices heard above the din, and not knowing what to do, and having, alas! no opportunity
for showing our valour, assail one another, and fall by one another's hands.

82. Nor indeed is there any distinction between the state of the people and that of the
priesthood: but it seems to me to be a simple fulfilment of the ancient curse, "As with the
people so with the priest."2797 Nor again are the great and eminent men affected otherwise
than the majority; nay, they are openly at war with the priests, and their piety is an aid to
their powers of persuasion. And indeed, provided that it be on behalf of the faith, and of
the highest and most important questions, let them be thus disposed, and I blame them not;
nay, to say the truth, I go so far as to praise and congratulate them. Yea! would that I were

S. Matt. vii. 6.

Ps. cvi. 39.

2793 Deut. xxiii. 3.

Ps. cxviii. 19.

Ib. x. 7; cxl. 3.

2796 Gen. i. 2.

Isai. xxiv. 2; Hos. iv. 9.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

one of those who contend and incur hatred for the truth's sake: or rather, I can boast of
being one of them. For better is a laudable war than a peace which severs a man from God: 
and therefore it is that the Spirit arms the gentle warrior, as one who is able to wage war in
a good cause.

83. But at the present time there are some who go to war even about small matters and
to no purpose, and, with great ignorance and audacity, accept, as an associate in their illdoing, anyone whoever he may be. Then everyone makes the faith his pretext, and this
venerable name is dragged into their private quarrels. Consequently, as was probable, we
are hated, even among the Gentiles, and, what is harder still, we cannot say that this is
without just cause. Nay, even the best of our own people are scandalized, while this result
is not surprising in the case of the multitude, who are ill-disposed to accept anything that
is good.

84. Sinners are planning upon our backs;2798 and what we devise against each other,
they turn against us all: and we have become a new spectacle, not to angels and men,2799
as says Paul, that bravest of athletes, in his contest with principalities and powers,2800 but
to almost all wicked men, and at every time and place, in the public squares, at carousals,
at festivities, and times of sorrow. Nay, we have already-I can scarcely speak of it without
tears-been represented on the stage, amid the laughter of the most licentious, and the most
popular of all dialogues and scenes is the caricature of a Christian.

85. These are the results of our intestine warfare, and our extreme readiness to strive
about goodness and gentleness, and our inexpedient excess of love for God. Wrestling, or
any other athletic contest, is only permitted according to fixed laws, and the man will be
shouted down and disgraced, and lose the victory, who breaks the laws of wrestling, or acts
unfairly in any other contest, contrary to the rules laid down for the contest, however able
and skilful he may be; and shall anyone contend for Christ in an unchristlike manner, and
yet be pleasing to peace for having fought unlawfully in her name.

86. Yea, even now, when Christ is invoked, the devils tremble,2801 and not even by our
ill-doing has the power of this Name been extinguished, while we are not ashamed to insult
a cause and name so venerable; shouting it, and having it shouted in return, almost in public,
and every day; for My Name is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you.2802

87. Of external warfare I am not afraid, nor of that wild beast, and fulness of evil, who
has now arisen against the churches, though he may threaten fire, sword, wild beasts, pre-

Ps. cxxix. 3 (LXX.).

1 Cor. iv. 9.

Eph. vi. 12.

S. James ii. 19.

Isai. lii. 5; Rom. ii. 24.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

cipices, chasms; though he may show himself more inhuman than all previous madmen,
and discover fresh tortures of greater severity. I have one remedy for them all, one road to
victory; I will glory in Christ2803 namely, death for Christ's sake.

88. For my own warfare, however, I am at a loss what course to pursue, what alliance,
what word of wisdom, what grace to devise, with what panoply to arm myself, against the
wiles of the wicked one.2804 What Moses is to conquer him by stretching out his hands
upon the mount,2805 in order that the cross, thus typified and prefigured, may prevail? 
What Joshua, as his successor, arrayed alongside the Captain of the Lord's hosts?2806 What
David, either by harping, or fighting with his sling,2807 and girded by God with strength
unto the battle,2808 and with his fingers trained to war?2809 What Samuel, praying2810 and
sacrificing for the people, and anointing as king one who can gain the victory? What
Jeremiah, by writing lamentations for Israel, is fitly to lament these things?

89. Who will cry aloud, Spare Thy People, O Lord, and give not Thine heritage to reproach, that the nations should rule over them?2811 What Noah, and Job,2812 and Daniel,
who are reckoned together as men of prayer, will pray for us, that we may have a slight respite
from warfare, and recover ourselves, and recognize one another for a while, and no longer,
instead of united Israel, be Judah2813 and Israel, Rehoboam and Jeroboam, Jerusalem and
Samaria, in turn delivered up because of our sins, and in turn lamented.

90. For I own that I am too weak for this warfare, and therefore turned my back, hiding
my face in the rout, and sat solitary,2814 because I was filled with bitterness2815 and sought
to be silent, understanding that it is an evil time,2816 that the beloved had kicked,2817 that

Phil. iii. 3.

Eph. vi. 11.

Exod. xvii. 11.

Josh. v. 14.

1 Sam. xvi. 16; xvii. 49.

Ps. xviii. 39.

Ib. cxliv. 1.

1 Sam. vii. 5.

Joel ii. 17.

Ezek. xiv. 14, 20.

Judah, etc., cf. Orat. vi. 7; xxxii. 4.

Lam. iii. 28.

Ib. iii. 19.

2816 Mic. ii. 3.

2817 Deut. xxxii. 15.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

we were become backsliding children,2818 who are the luxuriant vine,2819 the true vine, all
fruitful, all beautiful,2820 springing up splendidly with showers from on high.2821 For the
diadem of beauty,2822 the signet of glory,2823 the crown of magnificence2824 has been
changed for me into shame; and if anyone, in face of these things, is daring and courageous,
he has my blessing on his daring and courage.

91. I have said nothing yet of the internal warfare within ourselves, and in our passions,
in which we are engaged night and day against the body of our humiliation,2825 either
secretly or openly, and against the tide which tosses and whirls us hither and thither, by the
aid of our senses and other sources of the pleasures of this life; and against the miry clay2826
in which we have been fixed; and against the law of sin,2827 which wars against the law of
the spirit, and strives to destroy the royal image in us, and all the divine emanation which
has been bestowed upon us; so that it is difficult for anyone, either by a long course of
philosophic training, and gradual separation of the noble and enlightened part of the soul
from that which is debased and yoked with darkness, or by the mercy of God, or by both
together, and by a constant practice of looking upward, to overcome the depressing power
of matter. And before a man has, as far as possible, gained this superiority, and sufficiently
purified his mind, and far surpassed his fellows in nearness to God, I do not think it safe
for him to be entrusted with the rule over souls, or the office of mediator (for such, I take
it, a priest is) between God and man.

92. What is it that has induced this fear in me, that, instead of supposing me to be
needlessly afraid, you may highly commend my foresight? I hear from Moses himself, when
God spake to him, that, although many were bidden to come to the mount, one of whom
was even Aaron, with his two sons who were priests, and seventy elders of the senate, the
rest were ordered to worship afar off, and Moses alone to draw near, and the people were
not to go up with him.2828 For it is not everyone who may draw near to God, but only one
who, like Moses, can bear the glory of God. Moreover, before this, when the law was first

Jer. iii. 14.

2819 Hos. x. 1.

Jer. ii. 21; x. 16.

Ps. lxv. 10.

Isai. lxii. 3.

Ezek. xxviii. 12.

Ib. xxiii. 42.

Phil. iii. 21.

Ps. xl. 2; lxix. 2.

2827 Rom. vii. 23.

Exod. xxiv. 1, 2.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

given, the trumpet-blasts, and lightnings, and thunders, and darkness, and the smoke of the
whole mountain,2829 and the terrible threats that if even a beast touched the mountain it
should be stoned,2830 and other like alarms, kept back the rest of the people, for whom it
was a great privilege, after careful purification, merely to hear the voice of God. But Moses
actually went up and entered into the cloud,2831 and was charged with the law, and received
the tables, which belong, for the multitude, to the letter, but, for those who are above the
multitude, to the spirit.2832

93. I hear again that Nadab and Abihu, for having merely offered incense with strange
fire, were with strange fire destroyed,2833 the instrument of their impiety being used for
their punishment, and their destruction following at the very time and place of their sacrilege;
and not even their father Aaron, who was next to Moses in the favor of God, could save
them. I know also of Eli the priest, and a little later of Uzzah, the former made to pay the
penalty for his sons' transgression, in daring to violate the sacrifices by an untimely exaction
of the first fruits of the cauldrons, although he did not condone their impiety, but frequently
rebuked them;2834 the other, because he only touched the ark, which was being thrown off
the cart by the ox,2835 and though he saved it, was himself destroyed, in God's jealousy for
the reverence due to the ark.

94. I know also that not even bodily blemishes in either priests2836 or victims2837 passed
without notice, but that it was required by the law that perfect sacrifices must be offered by
perfect men-a symbol, I take it, of integrity of soul. It was not lawful for everyone to touch
the priestly vesture, or any of the holy vessels; nor might the sacrifices themselves be consumed except by the proper persons, and at the proper time and place;2838 nor might the
anointing oil nor the compounded incense2839 be imitated; nor might anyone enter the
temple who was not in the most minute particular pure in both soul and body; so far was
the Holy of holies removed from presumptuous access, that it might be entered by one man

Ib. xix. 16.

2830 Heb. xii. 18.

Exod. xxiv. 15, 18.

2 Cor. iii. 6, 7.

Lev. x. 1.

1 Sam. ii. 12, 15, 23.

2 Sam. vi. 6.

Lev. xxi. 17.

Ib. xxii. 19.

Ib. viii. 31.

Exod. xxx. 33, 38.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

only once a year;2840 so far were the veil, and the mercy-seat, and the ark, and the Cherubim,
from the general gaze and touch.

95. Since then I knew these things, and that no one is worthy of the mightiness of God,
and the sacrifice, and priesthood, who has not first presented himself to God, a living, holy
sacrifice, and set forth the reasonable, well-pleasing service,2841 and sacrificed to God the
sacrifice of praise and the contrite spirit,2842 which is the only sacrifice required of us by
the Giver of all; how could I dare to offer to Him the external sacrifice, the antitype of the
great mysteries,2843 or clothe myself with the garb and name of priest, before my hands had
been consecrated by holy works; before my eyes had been accustomed to gaze safely upon
created things, with wonder only for the Creator, and without injury to the creature; before
my ear had been sufficiently opened to the instruction of the Lord, and He had opened mine
ear to hear2844 without heaviness, and had set a golden earring with precious sardius, that
is, a wise man's word in an obedient ear;2845 before my mouth had been opened to draw in
the Spirit,2846 and opened wide to be filled2847 with the spirit of speaking mysteries and
doctrines;2848 and my lips bound,2849 to use the words of wisdom, by divine knowledge,
and, as I would add, loosed in due season: before my tongue had been filled with exultation,
and become an instrument of Divine melody, awaking with glory, awaking right early,2850
and laboring till it cleave to my jaws:2851 before my feet had been set upon the rock,2852
made like hart's feet, and my footsteps directed in a godly fashion so that they should not
well-nigh slip,2853 nor slip at all; before all my members had become instruments of righteousness,2854 and all mortality had been put off, and swallowed up of life,2855 and had
yielded to the Spirit?

Lev. xvi. 34; Heb. ix. 7.

2841 Rom. xii. 1.

Ps. l. 14.

The great mysteries, i.e., the Sacrificial Death of Christ upon the Cross.

Isai. l. 4; vi. 10.

Prov. xxv. 12.

Ps. cxix. 131.

Ib. lxxxi. 10.

1 Cor. xiv. 2.

Prov. xv. 7 (LXX.).

Ps. lvii. 9.

Ib. cxxxvii. 6.

Ib. xviii. 33; xl. 3.

Ib. lxxiii. 2.

2854 Rom. vi. 13.

2 Cor. v. 4.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

96. Who is the man, whose heart has never been made to burn,2856 as the Scriptures
have been opened to him, with the pure words of God which have been tried in a furnace;2857
who has not, by a triple2858 inscription2859 of them upon the breadth of his heart, attained
the mind of Christ;2860 nor been admitted to the treasures which to most men remain hidden,
secret, and dark, to gaze upon the riches therein?2861 and become able to enrich others,
comparing spiritual things with spiritual.2862

97. Who is the man who has never beheld, as our duty is to behold it, the fair beauty
of the Lord, nor has visited His temple,2863 or rather, become the temple of God,2864 and
the habitation of Christ in the Spirit?2865 Who is the man who has never recognized the
correlation and distinction between figures and the truth, so that by withdrawing from the
former and cleaving to the latter, and by thus escaping from the oldness of the letter and
serving the newness of the spirit,2866 he may clean pass over to grace from the law, which
finds its spiritual fulfilment in the dissolution of the body.2867

98. Who is the man who has never, by experience and contemplation, traversed the
entire series of the titles2868 and powers of Christ, both those more lofty ones which originally
were His, and those more lowly ones which He later assumed for our sake-viz.: God, the
Son, the Image, the Word, the Wisdom, the Truth, the Light, the Life, the Power, the Vapour,
the Emanation, the Effulgence, the Maker, the King, the Head, the Law, the Way, the Door,
the Foundation, the Rock, the Pearl, the Peace, the Righteousness, the Sanctification, the
Redemption, the Man, the Servant, the Shepherd, the Lamb, the High Priest, the Victim,
the Firstborn before creation, the Firstborn from the dead, the Resurrection: who is the
man who hearkens, but pays no heed, to these names so pregnant with reality, and has

S. Luke xxiv. 32.

Ps. xii. 7.

2858 Triple, a quotation from Prov. xxii. 20. The meaning of the Hebrew is doubtful. Clémencet, not noticing

this, suggests that the allusion is to the law being twice inscribed on tables of stone, once on the heart by the

Spirit.

Prov. xxii. 20 (LXX.).

1 Cor. ii. 16.

Isai. xlv. 3.

1 Cor. ii. 13.

Ps. xxvii. 4.

2 Cor. vi. 16.

Eph. ii. 22.

Ib. vii. 6.

2867 Rom. vi. 6.

Titles. These are more fully dealt with Orat. xxx. 17-21.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

never yet held communion with, nor been made partaker of, the Word, in any of the real
relations signified by each of these names which He bears?

99. Who, in fine, is the man who, although he has never applied himself to, nor learnt
to speak, the hidden wisdom of God in a mystery,2869 although he is still a babe, still fed
with milk,2870 still of those who are not numbered in Israel,2871 nor enrolled in the army
of God, although he is not yet able to take up the Cross of Christ like a man, although he is
possibly not yet one of the more honorable members, yet will joyfully and eagerly accept
his appointment as head of the fulness of Christ?2872 No one, if he will listen to my judgment
and accept my advice! This is of all things most to be feared, this is the extremest of dangers
in the eyes of everyone who understands the magnitude of success, the utter ruin of failure.
100. Let others sail for merchandise, I used to say, and cross the wide oceans, and constantly contend with winds and waves, to gain great wealth, if so it should chance, and run
great risks in their eagerness for sailing and merchandise; but, for my part, I greatly prefer
to stay ashore and plough a short but pleasant furrow, saluting at a respectful distance the
sea and its gains, to live as best I can upon a poor and scanty store of barley-bread, and drag
my life along in safety and calm, rather than expose myself to so long and great a risk for
the sake of great gains.

101. For one in high estate, if he fail to make further progress and to disseminate virtue
still more widely, and contents himself with slight results, incurs punishment, as having
spent a great light upon the illumination of a little house, or girt round the limbs of a boy
the full armor of a man. On the contrary, a man of low estate may with safety assume a
light burden, and escape the risk of the ridicule and increased danger which would attend
him if he attempted a task beyond his powers. For, as we have heard, it is not seemly for a
man to build a tower, unless he has sufficient to finish it.2873

102. Such is the defence which I have been able to make, perhaps at immoderate length,
for my flight. Such are the reasons which, to my pain and possibly to yours, carried me
away from you, my friends and brothers; yet, as it seemed to me at the time, with irresistible
force. My longing after you, and the sense of your longing for me, have, more than anything
else, led to my return, for nothing inclines us so strongly to love as mutual affection.

103. In the next place there was my care, my duty, the hoar hairs and weakness of my
holy parents, who were more greatly distressed on my account than by their advanced
age-of this Patriarch Abraham whose person is honored by me, and numbered among the

1 Cor. ii. 17.

Ib. iii. 2.

2871 Numb. i. 3.

Eph. i. 23.

S. Luke xiv. 28.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

angels, and of Sarah, who travailed in my spiritual birth by instructing me in the truth. 
Now, I had specially pledged myself to become the stay of their old age and the support of
their weakness, a pledge which, to the best of my power, I have fulfilled, even at the expense
of philosophy itself, the most precious of possessions and titles to me; or, to speak more
truly, although I made it the first object of my philosophy to appear to be no philosopher,
I could not bear that my labor in consequence of a single purpose should be wasted, nor yet
that blessing should be lost, which one of the saints of old is said to have stolen from his
father, whom he deceived by the food which he offered to him, and the hairy appearance
he assumed, thus attaining a good object by disgraceful trickery.2874 These are the two
causes of my submission and tractability. Nor is it, perchance, unreasonable that my arguments should yield and submit to them both, for there is a time to be conquered, as I also
think there is for every purpose,2875 and it is better to be honorably overcome than to win
a dangerous and lawless victory.

104. There is a third reason of the highest importance which I will further mention,
and then dismiss the rest. I remembered the days of old,2876 and, recurring to one of the
ancient histories, drew counsel for myself therefrom as to my present conduct; for let us
not suppose these events to have been recorded without a purpose, nor that they are a mere
assemblage of words and deeds gathered together for the pastime of those who listen to
them, as a kind of bait for the ears, for the sole purpose of giving pleasure. Let us leave such
jesting to the legends and the Greeks, who think but little of the truth, and enchant ear and
mind by the charm of their fictions and the daintiness of their style.

105. We however, who extend the accuracy of the Spirit to the merest stroke and
tittle,2877 will never admit the impious assertion that even the smallest matters were dealt
with haphazard by those who have recorded them, and have thus been borne in mind down
to the present day: on the contrary, their purpose has been to supply memorials and instructions for our consideration under similar circumstances, should such befall us, and that the
examples of the past might serve as rules and models, for our warning and imitation.

106. What then is the story, and wherein lies its application? For, perhaps, it would
not be amiss to relate it, for the general security. Jonah also was fleeing from the face of
God,2878 or rather, thought that he was fleeing: but he was overtaken by the sea, and the
storm, and the lot, and the whale's belly, and the three days' entombment, the type of a
greater mystery. He fled from having to announce the dread and awful message to the

2874 Gen. xxvii. 21, sq.

Eccles. iii. 1.

Ps. cxliii. 5.

S. Matt. v. 18.

Jonah i. 3.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

Ninevites, and from being subsequently, if the city was saved by repentance, convicted of
falsehood: not that he was displeased at the salvation of the wicked, but he was ashamed of
being made an instrument of falsehood, and exceedingly zealous for the credit of prophecy,
which was in danger of being destroyed in his person, since most men are unable to penetrate
the depth of the Divine dispensation in such cases.

107. But, as I have learned from a man2879 skilled in these subjects, and able to grasp
the depth of the prophet, by means of a reasonable explanation of what seems unreasonable
in the history, it was not this which caused Jonah to flee, and carried him to Joppa and again
from Joppa to Tarshish, when he entrusted his stolen self to the sea:2880 for it was not likely
that such a prophet should be ignorant of the design of God, viz., to bring about, by means
of the threat, the escape of the Ninevites from the threatened doom, according to His great
wisdom, and unsearchable judgments, and according to His ways which are beyond our
tracing and finding out;2881 nor that, if he knew this he would refuse to co-operate with
God in the use of the means which He designed for their salvation. Besides, to imagine that
Jonah hoped to hide himself at sea, and escape by his flight the great eye of God, is surely
utterly absurd and stupid, and unworthy of credit, not only in the case of a prophet, but
even in the case of any sensible man, who has only a slight perception of God, Whose power
is over all.

108. On the contrary, as my instructor said, and as I am myself convinced, Jonah knew
better than any one the purpose of his message to the Ninevites, and that, in planning his
flight, although he changed his place, he did not escape from God. Nor is this possible for
any one else, either by concealing himself in the bosom of the earth, or in the depths of the
sea, or by soaring on wings, if there be any means of doing so, and rising into the air, or by
abiding in the lowest depths of hell,2882 or by enveloping himself in a thick cloud, or by any
other of the many devices for ensuring escape. For God alone of all things cannot be escaped
from or contended with; if He wills to seize and bring them under His hand, He outstrips

2879 A man. A Greek scholiast says that this was Origen (ob. a.d. 235), who gives this interpretation in his

commentary on the prophecy of Jonah. Elias says that he had read it in the commentary of Methodius (fl. a.d.

300), who usually combats Origen's interpretations. We know that Origen did comment on the book of Job,

and that Methodius wrote on one at least of the Minor Prophets: but both these works have been lost, so that

we cannot absolutely decide the question, though the assurance with which both the notes are written makes

us hesitate to consider either of them merely a happy guess. Combefis thinks that S. Greg. alludes to one of his

own instructors: the gen. with ἀκόυω (cf. Plato, Gorg., 503, c.) favours this view, but the interpretation may

well have been derived from one of the earlier writers.

Jonah i. 3.

2881 Rom. xi. 33.

Ps. cxxxix. 8 et seq.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

the swift, He outwits the wise, He overthrows the strong, He abases the lofty, He subdues
rashness, He represses power.

109. Jonah then was not ignorant of the mighty hand of God, with which he threatened
other men, nor did he imagine that he could utterly escape the Divine power; this we are
not to believe: but when he saw the falling away of Israel, and perceived the passing over
of the grace of prophecy to the Gentiles-this was the cause of his retirement from preaching
and of his delay in fulfilling the command; accordingly he left the watchtower of joy, for
this is the meaning of Joppa in Hebrew, I mean his former dignity and reputation, and flung
himself into the deep of sorrow: and hence he is tempest-tossed, and falls asleep, and is
wrecked, and aroused from sleep, and taken by lot, and confesses his flight, and is cast into
sea, and swallowed, but not destroyed, by the whale; but there he calls upon God, and,
marvellous as it is, on the third day he, like Christ, is delivered: but my treatment of this
topic must stand over, and shall shortly, if God permit, be more deliberately worked out.2883
110. Now however, to return to my original point, the thought and question occurred
to me, that although he might possibly meet with some indulgence, if reluctant to prophesy,
for the cause which I mentioned-yet, in my own case, what could be said, what defence
could be made, if I longer remained restive, and rejected the yoke of ministry, which, though
I know not whether to call it light or heavy, had at any rate been laid upon me.

111. For if it be granted, and this alone can be strongly asserted in such matters, that
we are far too low to perform the priest's office before God, and that we can only be worthy
of the sanctuary after we have become worthy of the Church,2884 and worthy of the post of
president, after being worthy of the sanctuary, yet some one else may perhaps refuse to acquit
us on the charge of disobedience. Now terrible are the threatenings against disobedience,
and terrible are the penalties which ensue upon it; as indeed are those on the other side, if,
instead of being reluctant, and shrinking back, and concealing ourselves as Saul did among
his father's stuff2885-although called to rule but for a short time-if, I say, we come forward
readily, as though to a slight and most easy task, whereas it is not safe even to resign it, nor
to amend by second thoughts our first.

Shall be worked out. This promise, as Elias tells us, was fulfilled by S. Gregory in his History of Ezekiel

the Prophet, a work no longer extant.

2884 Of the Church. S. Gregory seems to describe a series of three steps, (1) the Church, of which all should

be worthy members, (2) the Sanctuary, reserved for the Priests, (3) the Throne of the Bishop. Clémencet refers

both 1 and 2 to the ministry. If we suppose S. Gregory's own position to be referred to, the third would be ap-

plicable to his office under his father, which is held by Thomassin to have been that of Vicar-General (Disc.

Eccles., I., ii., 7 §§ 2, 3). A similar post was offered to him by S. Basil (Orat., xliii., 39).

1 Sam. x. 22.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

112. On this account I had much toilsome consideration to discover my duty, being
set in the midst betwixt two fears, of which the one held me back, the other urged me on. 
For a long while I was at a loss between them, and after wavering from side to side, and, like
a current driven by inconstant winds, inclining first in this direction, then in that, I at last
yielded to the stronger, and the fear of disobedience overcame me, and has carried me off. 
Pray, mark how accurately and justly I hold the balance between the fears, neither desiring
an office not given to me, nor rejecting it when given. The one course marks the rash, the
other the disobedient, both the undisciplined. My position lies between those who are too
bold, or too timid; more timid than those who rush at every position, more bold than those
who avoid them all. This is my judgment on the matter.

113. Moreover, to distinguish still more clearly between them, we have, against the fear
of office, a possible help in the law of obedience, inasmuch as God in His goodness rewards
our faith, and makes a perfect ruler of the man who has confidence in Him, and places all
his hopes in Him; but against the danger of disobedience I know of nothing which can help
us, and of no ground to encourage our confidence. For it is to be feared that we shall have
to hear these words concerning those who have been entrusted to us: I will require their
souls at your hands;2886 and, Because ye have rejected me, and not been leaders and rulers
of my people, I also will reject you, that I should not be king over you;2887 and, As ye refused
to hearken to My voice, and turned a stubborn back, and were disobedient, so shall it be
when ye call upon Me, and I will not regard nor give ear to your prayer.2888 God forbid
that these words should come to us from the just Judge, for when we sing of His mercy we
must also by all means sing of His judgment.2889

114. I resort once again to history, and on considering the men of best repute in ancient
days, who were ever preferred by grace to the office of ruler or prophet, I discover that some
readily complied with the call, others deprecated the gift, and that neither those who drew
back were blamed for timidity, nor those who came forward for eagerness. The former
stood in awe of the greatness of the ministry, the latter trustfully obeyed Him Who called
them. Aaron was eager, but Moses resisted,2890 Isaiah readily submitted, but Jeremiah was
afraid of his youth,2891 and did not venture to prophesy until he had received from God a
promise and power beyond his years.2892

Ezek. iii. 18.

1 Sam. xv. 26; cf. Hos. iv. 6.

Zech. vii. 11, 13.

Ps. ci. 1.

Exod. iv. 10, 13, 27.

Isai. vi. 8.

Jer. i. 6.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

115. By these arguments I charmed myself, and by degrees my soul relaxed and became
ductile, like iron, and time came to the aid of my arguments, and the testimonies of God,
to which I had entrusted my whole life, were my counsellors.2893 Therefore I was not rebellious, neither turned away back,2894 saith my Lord, when, instead of being called to rule,
He was led, as a sheep to the slaughter;2895 but I fell down and humbled myself under the
mighty hand of God,2896 and asked pardon for my former idleness and disobedience, if this
is at all laid to my charge. I held my peace,2897 but I will not hold my peace for ever: I
withdrew for a little while,2898 till I had considered myself and consoled my grief: but now
I am commissioned to exalt Him in the congregation of the people, and praise Him in the
seat of the elders.2899 If my former conduct deserved blame, my present action merits pardon.

116. What further need is there of words. Here am I, my pastors and fellow-pastors,
here am I, thou holy flock, worthy of Christ, the Chief Shepherd,2900 here am I, my father,
utterly vanquished, and your subject according to the laws of Christ rather than according
to those of the land:2901 here is my obedience, reward it with your blessing. Lead me with
your prayers, guide me with your words, establish me with your spirit. The blessing of the
father establisheth the houses of children,2902 and would that both I and this spiritual house
may be established, the house which I have longed for, which I pray may be my rest for
ever,2903 when I have been passed on from the church here to the church yonder, the general assembly of the firstborn, who are written in heaven.2904

117. Such is my defence: its reasonableness I have set forth: and may the God of
peace,2905 Who made both one,2906 and has restored us to each other, Who setteth kings
upon thrones, and raiseth up the poor out of the dust and lifteth up the beggar from the

Ps. cxix. 24.

Isai. l. 6.

Ib. liii. 7.

1 Pet. v. 6.

Isai. xlii. 14.

Ib. xxvi. 20.

Ps. cvii. 32.

1 Pet. v. 4.

2901 Of the land, lit., "external," i.e. the Roman laws, which gave absolute power to a father over his children.

Ecclus. iii. 9.

Ps. cxxxii. 13, 14.

2904 Heb. xii. 23.

2905 Heb. xiii. 20.

Eph. ii. 14.

In Defence of His Flight to Pontus, and His Return, After His Ordination...

dunghill,2907 Who chose David His servant and took him away from the sheepfolds,2908
though he was the least and youngest of the sons of Jesse,2909 Who gave the word2910 to
those who preach the gospel with great power for the perfection of the gospel,-may He
Himself hold me by my right hand, and guide me with His counsel, and receive me with
glory,2911 Who is a Shepherd2912 to shepherds and a Guide to guides: that we may feed His
flock with knowledge,2913 not with the instruments of a foolish shepherd,2914 according to
the blessing, and not according to the curse pronounced against the men of former days: 
may He give strength and power unto his people,2915 and Himself present to Himself2916
His flock resplendent and spotless and worthy of the fold on high, in the habitation of them
that rejoice,2917 in the splendour of the saints,2918 so that in His temple everyone, both flock
and shepherds together may say, Glory,2919 in Christ Jesus our Lord, to Whom be all glory
for ever and ever. Amen.

1 Sam. ii. 8; Ps. cxiii. 7.

Ps. lxxviii. 70.

1 Sam. xvii. 14.

Ps. lxviii. 11.

Ps. lxxiii. 23, 24.

Ezek. xxxiv. 12.

Jer. iii. 15.

Zech. xi. 15.

Ps. lxviii. 35.

Eph. v. 27.

Ps. lxxxvii. 7 (LXX.).

Ps. cx. 3 (LXX.).

Ps. xxix. 9.

To Those Who Had Invited Him, and Not Come to Receive Him.

To Those Who Had Invited Him, and Not Come to Receive Him.

Oration III.

To Those Who Had Invited Him, and Not Come to Receive Him.

(About Easter a.d. 362.)

I. How slow you are, my friends and brethren, to come to listen to my words, though
you were so swift in tyrannizing over me, and tearing me from my Citadel Solitude, which
I had embraced in preference to everything else, and as coadjutress and mother of the divine
ascent, and as deifying man,2920 I had especially admired, and had set before me as the guide
of my whole life.2921 How is it that, now you have got it, you thus despise what you so
greatly desired to obtain, and seem to be better able to desire the absent than to enjoy the
present; as though you preferred to possess my teaching rather than to profit by it? Yes, I
may even say this to you: "I became a surfeit unto you before you tasted of me, or gave me
a trial"2922-which is most strange.

II. And neither did you entertain me as a guest, nor, if I may make a remark of a more
compassionate kind, did you allow yourselves to be entertained by me, reverencing this
command if nothing else; nor did you take me by the hand, as beginning a new task; nor
encourage me in my timidity, nor console me for the violence I had suffered; but-I shrink
from saying it, though say it I must-you made my festival no festival, and received me with
no happy introduction; and you mingled the solemn festival with sorrow, because it lacked
that which most of all would have contributed to its happiness, the presence of you my
conquerors, for it would not be true to call you people who love me. So easily is anything
despised which is easily conquered, and the proud receives attention, while he who is humble
before God is slighted.

III. What will ye? Shall I be judged by you, or shall I be your judge? Shall I pass a verdict,
or receive one, for I hope to be acquitted if I be judged, and if I give sentence, to give it
against you justly? The charge against you is that you do not answer my love with equal
measure, nor do you repay my obedience with honour, nor do you pledge the future to me
by your present alacrity-though even if you had, I could hardly have believed it. But each
of you has something which he prefers to both the old and the new Pastor, neither reverencing
the grey hairs of the one, nor calling out the youthful spirit of the other.

S. Gregory very frequently uses this very strong expression to bring out the reality and intimacy of the

Christian's Union with Christ as the result of the sanctifying grace by which all the Baptized are made "partakers

of the Divine Nature" (2 Pet. i. 4).

2921 The passage might also be rendered "had preferred to every other kind of life."

Isa. i. 14.

To Those Who Had Invited Him, and Not Come to Receive Him.

IV. There is a Banquet in the Gospels,2923 and a hospitable Host and friends; and the
Banquet is most pleasant, for it is the marriage of His Son. He calleth them, but they come
not: He is angry, and-I pass over the interval for fear of bad omen-but, to speak gently,
He filleth the Banquet with others. God forbid that this should be your case; but yet you
have treated me (how shall I put it gently?) with as much haughtiness or boldness as they
who after being called to a feast rise up against it, and insult their host; for you, though you
are not of the number of those who are without, or are invited to the marriage, but are
yourselves those who invited me, and bound me to the Holy Table, and shewed me the glory
of the Bridal Chamber, then deserted me (this is the most splendid thing about you)-one
to his field, another to his newly bought yoke of oxen, another to his just-married wife, another to some other trifling matter; you were all scattered and dispersed, caring little for the
Bridechamber and the Bridegroom.2924

V. On this account I was filled with despondency and perplexity-for I will not keep
silence about what I have suffered-and I was very near withholding the discourse which I
was minded to bestow as a Marriage-gift, the most beautiful and precious of all I had; and
I very nearly let it loose upon you, whom, now that the violence had once been done to me,
I greatly longed for: for I thought I could get from this a splendid theme, and because my
love sharpened my tongue-love which is very hot and ready for accusation when it is stirred
to jealousy by grief which it conceives from some unexpected neglect. If any of you has
been pierced with love's sting, and has felt himself neglected, he knows the feeling, and will
pardon one who so suffers, because he himself has been near the same frenzy.

VI. But it is not permitted to me at the present time to say to you anything upbraiding;
and God forbid I ever should. And even now perhaps I have reproached you more than in
due measure, the Sacred Flock, the praise-worthy nurselings of Christ, the Divine inheritance;
by which, O God, Thou art rich, even wert Thou poor in all other respects. To Thee, I think,
are fitting those words, "The lot is fallen unto Thee in a fair ground: yea Thou hast the
goodliest heritage."2925 Nor will I allow that the most populous cities or the broadest flocks
have any advantage over us, the little ones of the smallest of all the tribes of Israel, of the
least of the thousands of Judah,2926 of the little Bethlehem among cities,2927 where Christ

S. Luke xiv. 16.

S. Matt. xxii. 10.

Ps. xvi. 6.

1 Sam. xxiii. 23.

2927 Mic. v. 2.

To Those Who Had Invited Him, and Not Come to Receive Him.

was born and is from the beginning well-known and worshipped; amongst those whom the
Father is exalted, and the Son is held to be equal to Him, and the Holy Ghost is glorified
with Them: we who are of one soul, who mind the same thing, who in nothing injure the
Trinity, neither by preferring One Person above another, nor by cutting off any: as those
bad umpires and measurers of the Godhead do, who by magnifying One Person more than
is fit, diminish and insult the whole.

VII. But do ye also, if you bear me any good will-ye who are my husbandry, my vineyard, my own bowels, or rather His Who is our common Father, for in Christ he hath begotten you through the Gospels2928-shew to us also some respect. It is only fair, since we
have honoured you above all else: ye are my witnesses, ye, and they who have placed in our
hands this-shall I say Authority, or Service? And if to him that loveth most is due, how
shall I measure the love, for which I have made you my debtors by my own love? Rather,
shew respect for yourselves, and the Image committed to your care,2929 and Him Who
committed it, and the Sufferings of Christ, and your hopes therefrom, holding fast the faith
which ye have received, and in which ye were brought up, by which also ye are being saved,
and trust to save others (for not many, be well assured, can boast of what you can), and
reckoning piety to consist, not in often speaking about God, but in silence for the most part,
for the tongue is a dangerous thing to men, if it be not governed by reason. Believe that
listening is always less dangerous than talking, just as learning about God is more pleasant
than teaching. Leave the more accurate search into these questions to those who are the
Stewards of the Word; and for yourselves, worship a little in words, but more by your actions,
and rather by keeping the Law than by admiring the Lawgiver; shew your love for Him by
fleeing from wickedness, pursuing after virtue, living in the Spirit, walking in the Spirit,
drawing your knowledge from Him, building upon the foundation of the faith, not wood
or hay or stubble,2930 weak materials and easily spent when the fire shall try our works or
destroy them; but gold, silver, precious stones, which remain and stand.

VIII. So may ye act, and so may ye honour us, whether present or absent, whether
taking your part in our sermons, or preferring to do something else: and may ye be the
children of God, pure and unblamable, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation:2931 
and may ye never be entangled in the snares of the wicked that go round about, or bound
with the chain of your sins. May the Word in you never be smothered with cares of this life
and so ye become unfruitful: but may ye walk in the King's Highway, turning aside neither
to the right hand nor to the left,2932 but led by the Spirit through the strait gate. Then all

1 Cor. iv. 15. I.e., the Elder Gregory.

2929 Gen. i. 27.

1 Cor. iii. 12.

Phil. ii. 15.

2932 Num. xxi. 22; Isa. xl. 3.

To Those Who Had Invited Him, and Not Come to Receive Him.

our affairs shall prosper, both now and at the inquest There, in Christ Jesus our Lord, to
Whom be the glory for ever. Amen.

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

Oration VII.

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

The date of this Oration is probably the spring of a.d. 369. It is placed by S. Jerome first
among S. Gregory's Orations. Caesarius, the Saint's younger brother, was born probably about
a.d. 330. Educated in his early years at home, he studied later in the schools of Alexandria,
where he attained great proficiency in mathematics, astronomy, and, especially, in medicine. 
On his return from Alexandria, he was offered by the Emperor Constantius, in response to a
public petition, an honourable and lucrative post at Byzantium, but was prevailed upon by
Gregory to return with him to Nazianzus. After a while he went back to Byzantium, and, on
the accession of Julian, was pressed to retain his appointment at court, and did so, in spite of
Gregory's reproaches, until Julian, who had long been trying to win him from Christianity, at
last invited him to a public discussion. Caesarius, in spite of the specious arguments of the
Emperor, gained the day, but, having now distinctly declared himself a Christian, could no
longer remain at court. On the death of Julian, he was esteemed and promoted by successive
Emperors, until he received from Valens the office of treasurer of Bithynia. The exact character
of this office and its rank are still undecided by historical writers, some of whom attribute to
him other offices not mentioned by S. Gregory, which most probably were filled by a namesake. 
On the 11th of October a.d. 368 the city of Nicaea was almost entirely destroyed by an earthquake and Caesarius miraculously escaped with his life. Impressed by his escape, he received
Holy Baptism, and formed plans for retiring from office and (as it seems) devoting himself to
a life of ascetic discipline, which were dissipated by his early and sudden death.

1. It may be, my friends, my brethren, my fathers (ye who are dear to me in reality as
well as in name) that you think that I, who am about to pay the sad tribute of lamentation
to him who has departed, am eager to undertake the task, and shall, as most men delight to
do, speak at great length and in eloquent style. And so some of you, who have had like
sorrows to bear, are prepared to join in my mourning and lamentation, in order to bewail
your own griefs in mine, and learn to feel pain at the afflictions of a friend, while others are
looking to feast their ears in the enjoyment of my words. For they suppose that I must needs
make my misfortune an occasion for display-as was once my wont, when possessed of a
superabundance of earthly things, and ambitious, above all, of oratorical renown-before
I looked up to Him Who is the true and highest Word, and gave all up to God, from Whom
all things come, and took God for all in all. Now pray do not think this of me, if you wish
to think of me aright. For I am neither going to lament for him who is gone more than is
good-as I should not approve of such conduct even in others-nor am I going to praise
him beyond due measure. Albeit that language is a dear and especially proper tribute to
one gifted with it, and eulogy to one who was exceedingly fond of my words-aye, not only

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

a tribute, but a debt, the most just of all debts. But even in my tears and admiration I must
respect the law which regards such matters: nor is this alien to our philosophy; for he says
The memory of the just is accompanied with eulogies,2933 and also, Let tears fall down over
the dead, and begin to lament, as if thou hadst suffered great harm thyself:2934 removing
us equally from insensibility and immoderation. I shall proceed then, not only to exhibit
the weakness of human nature, but also to put you in mind of the dignity of the soul, and,
giving such consolation as is due to those who are in sorrow, transfer our grief, from that
which concerns the flesh and temporal things, to those things which are spiritual and
eternal.

2. The parents of Caesarius, to take first the point which best becomes me, are known
to you all. Their excellence you are eager to notice, and hear of with admiration, and share
in the task of setting it forth to any, if there be such, who know it not: for no single man is
able to do so entirely, and the task is one beyond the powers of a single tongue, however
laborious, however zealous. Among the many and great points for which they are to be
celebrated (I trust I may not seem extravagant in praising my own family) the greatest of
all, which more than any other stamps their character, is piety. By their hoar hairs they lay
claim to reverence, but they are no less venerable for their virtue than for their age; for while
their bodies are bent beneath the burden of their years, their souls renew their youth in God.
3. His father2935 was well grafted out of the wild olive tree into the good one, and so
far partook of its fatness as to be entrusted with the engrafting of others, and charged with
the culture of souls, presiding in a manner becoming his high office over this people, like a
second Aaron or Moses, bidden himself to draw near to God,2936 and to convey the Divine
Voice to the others who stand afar off;2937 gentle, meek, calm in mien,2938 fervent in spirit,
a fine man in external appearance, but richer still in that which is out of sight. But why
should I describe him whom you know? For I could not even by speaking at great length
say as much as he deserves, or as much as each of you knows and expects to be said of him. 
It is then better to leave your own fancy to picture him, than mutilate by my words the object
of your admiration.

4. His mother2939 was consecrated to God by virtue of her descent from a saintly family,
and was possessed of piety as a necessary inheritance, not only for herself, but also for her

Prov. x. 7 (LXX.).

Ecclus. xxxviii. 16.

2935 His father. S. Gregory the elder. Cf. Orat. xviii., 5, 6, 12-29, 32-39. Also viii., 4, 5; xii., 2, 3; xvi., 1-4,

20.

Exod. xxiv. 1, 2.

Exod. xx. 19; Deut. v. 27.

In mien. v. l. "in disposition."

2939 His mother. S. Nonna. Cf. Orat. xviii., 7-12, 30, 31, 42, 43. Also viii. 4, 5.

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

children-being indeed a holy lump from a holy firstfruits.2940 And this she so far increased
and amplified that some, (bold though the statement be, I will utter it,) have both believed
and said that even her husband's perfection has been the work of none other than herself;
and, oh how wonderful! she herself, as the reward of her piety, has received a greater and
more perfect piety. Lovers of their children and of Christ as they both were, what is most
extraordinary, they were far greater lovers of Christ than of their children: yea, even their
one enjoyment of their children was that they should be acknowledged and named by Christ,
and their one measure of their blessedness in their children was their virtue and close association with the Chief Good.2941 Compassionate, sympathetic, snatching many a treasure
from moths and robbers,2942 and from the prince of this world,2943 to transfer it from their
sojourn here to the [true] habitation, laying up in store2944 for their children the heavenly
splendour as their greatest inheritance. Thus have they reached a fair old age, equally reverend both for virtue and for years, and full of days, alike of those which abide and those
which pass away; each one failing to secure the first prize here below only so far as equalled
by the other; yea, they have fulfilled the measure of every happiness with the exception of
this last trial, or discipline, whichever anyone may think we ought to call it; I mean their
having to send before them the child who was, owing to his age, in greater danger of falling,
and so to close their life in safety, and be translated with all their family to the realms above.
5. I have entered into these details, not from a desire to eulogize them, for this, I know
well, it would be difficult worthily to do, if I made their praise the subject of my whole oration,
but to set forth the excellence inherited from his parents by Caesarius, and so prevent you
from being surprised or incredulous, that one sprung from such progenitors, should have
deserved such praises himself; nay, strange indeed would it have been, had he looked to
others and disregarded the examples of his kinsfolk at home. His early life was such as becomes those really well born and destined for a good life. I say little of his qualities evident
to all, his beauty, his stature, his manifold gracefulness, and harmonious disposition, as
shown in the tones of his voice-for it is not my office to laud qualities of this kind, however
important they may seem to others-and proceed with what I have to say of the points
which, even if I wished, I could with difficulty pass by.

6. Bred and reared under such influences, we were fully trained in the education afforded
here,2945 in which none could say how far he excelled most of us from the quickness and

2940 Rom. xi. 16.

The Chief Good. τὸ κρειττον, lit. "that which is better."

S. Matt. vi. 19: S. John x. 1.

S. John xiv. 30.

1 Tim. vi. 19.

2945 Here, at Nazianzus.

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

extent of his abilities-and how can I recall those days without my tears showing that, contrary to my promises, my feelings have overcome my philosophic restraint? The time came
when it was decided that we should leave home, and then for the first time we were separated,
for I studied rhetoric in the then flourishing schools of Palestine; he went to Alexandria,
esteemed both then and now the home of every branch of learning. Which of his qualities
shall I place first and foremost, or which can I omit with least injury to my description? 
Who was more faithful to his teacher than he? Who more kindly to his classmates? Who
more carefully avoided the society and companionship of the depraved? Who attached
himself more closely to that of the most excellent, and among others, of the most esteemed
and illustrious of his countrymen? For he knew that we are strongly influenced to virtue
or vice by our companions. And in consequence of all this, who was more honoured by the
authorities than he, and whom did the whole city (though2946 all individuals are concealed
in it, because of its size), esteem more highly for his discretion, or deem more illustrious for
his intelligence?

7. What branch of learning did he not master, or rather, in what branch of study did
he not surpass those who had made it their sole study? Whom did he allow even to approach
him, not only of his own time and age, but even of his elders, who had devoted many more
years to study? All subjects he studied as one, and each as thoroughly as if he knew no
other. The brilliant in intellect, he surpassed in industry, the devoted students in quickness
of perception; nay, rather he outstripped in rapidity those who were rapid, in application
those who were laborious, and in both respects those who were distinguished in both. From
geometry and astronomy, that science so dangerous2947 to anyone else, he gathered all that
was helpful (I mean that he was led by the harmony and order of the heavenly bodies to
reverence their Maker), and avoided what is injurious; not attributing all things that are or
happen to the influence of the stars, like those who raise their own fellow-servant, the creation, in rebellion against the Creator, but referring, as is reasonable, the motion of these
bodies, and all other things besides, to God. In arithmetic and mathematics, and in the
wonderful art of medicine, in so far as it treats of physiology and temperament, and the
causes of disease, in order to remove the roots and so destroy their offspring with them,
who is there so ignorant or contentious as to think him inferior to himself, and not to be
glad to be reckoned next to him, and carry off the second prize? This indeed is no unsup-

Though, etc. The Ben. ed. translates "Although his teaching was exceedingly sublime and abstruse."

2947 Dangerous, as being so closely connected with astrology.

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

ported assertion, but East and West2948 alike, and every place which he afterward visited,
are as pillars inscribed with the record of his learning.

8. But when, after gathering into his single soul every kind of excellence and knowledge,
as a mighty merchantman gathers every sort of ware, he was voyaging to his own city, in
order to communicate to others the fair cargo of his culture, there befell a wondrous thing,
which I must, as its mention is most cheering to me and may delight you, briefly set forth. 
Our mother,2949 in her motherly love for her children, had offered up a prayer that, as she
had sent us forth together, she might see us together return home. For we seemed, to our
mother at least, if not to others, to form a pair worthy of her prayers and glances, if seen
together, though now, alas, our connection has been severed. And God, Who hears a
righteous prayer, and honours the love of parents for well-disposed children, so ordered
that, without any design or agreement on our part, the one from Alexandria, the other from
Greece, the one by sea, the other by land, we arrived at the same city at the same time. This
city was Byzantium, which now presides over Europe, in which Caesarius, after the lapse of
a short time, gained such a repute, that public honours, an alliance with an illustrious family,
and a seat in the council of state were offered him; and a mission was despatched to the
Emperor by public decision, to beg that the first of cities be adorned and honoured by the
first of scholars (if he cared at all for its being indeed the first, and worthy of its name); and
that to all its other titles to distinction this further one be added, that it was embellished by
having Caesarius as its physician and its inhabitant, although its brilliancy was already assured
by its throngs of great men both in philosophy and other branches of learning. But enough
of this. At this time there happened what seemed to others a chance without reason or
cause, such as frequently occurs of its own accord in our day, but was more than sufficiently
manifest to devout minds as the result of the prayers to god-fearing parents, which were
answered by the united arrival of their sons by land and sea.

9. Well, among the noble traits of Caesarius' character, we must not fail to note one,
which perhaps is in others' eyes slight and unworthy of mention, but seemed to me, both
at the time and since, of the highest import, if indeed brotherly love be a praiseworthy
quality; nor shall I ever cease to place it in the first rank, in relating the story of his life. Although the metropolis strove to retain him by the honours I have mentioned, and declared
that it would under no circumstances let him go, my influence, which he valued most highly
on all occasions, prevailed upon him to listen to the prayer of his parents, to supply his
country's need, and to grant me my own desire. And when he thus returned home in my
company, he preferred me not only to cities and peoples, not only to honours and revenues,

East and West, ἑῶά τε ὅμοῦ λῆξις καὶ ἑσπέριος-λῆξις significat regionem, locum: culmen item, seu

fastigium. Cf. S. Greg. Naz. Orat. xxv. 13. p. 464. S. Chrys. Hom. LVI. in Ioan. p. 786.

2949 Our mother. For further detail cf. Orat. xviii. 31.

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

which had in part already flowed to him in abundance from many sources and in part were
within his reach, but even to the Emperor himself and his imperial commands. From this
time, then, having shaken off all ambition, as a hard master and a painful disorder, I resolved
to practise philosophy and adapt myself to the higher life: or rather the desire was earlier
born, the life came later. But my brother, who had dedicated to his country the firstfruits
of his learning, and gained an admiration worthy of his efforts, was afterwards led by the
desire of fame, and, as he persuaded me, of being the guardian of the city, to betake himself
to court, not indeed according to my own wishes or judgment; for I will confess to you that
I think it a better and grander thing to be in the lowest rank with God than to win the first
place with an earthly king. Nevertheless I cannot blame him, for inasmuch as philosophy
is the greatest, so is it the most difficult, of professions, which can be taken in hand by but
few, and only by those who have been called forth by the Divine magnanimity, which gives
its hand to those who are honoured by its preference. Yet it is no small thing if one, who
has chosen the lower form of life, follows after goodness, and sets greater store on God and
his own salvation than on earthly lustre; using it as a stage, or a manifold ephemeral mask
while playing in the drama of this world, but himself living unto God with that image which
he knows that he has received from Him, and must render to Him Who gave it. That this
was certainly the purpose of Caesarius, we know full well.

10. Among physicians he gained the foremost place with no great trouble, by merely
exhibiting his capacity, or rather some slight specimen of his capacity, and was forthwith
numbered among the friends of the Emperor, and enjoyed the highest honours. But he
placed the humane functions of his art at the disposal of the authorities free of cost, knowing
that nothing leads to further advancement than virtue and renown for honourable deeds;
so that he far surpassed in fame those to whom he was inferior in rank. By his modesty he
so won the love of all that they entrusted their precious charges to his care, without requiring
him to be sworn by Hippocrates, since the simplicity of Crates was nothing to his own: 
winning in general a respect beyond his rank; for besides the present repute he was ever
thought to have justly won, a still greater one was anticipated for him, both by the Emperors2950 themselves and by all who occupied the nearest positions to them. But, most important, neither by his fame, nor by the luxury which surrounded him, was his nobility of soul
corrupted; for amidst his many claims to honour, he himself cared most for being, and being
known to be, a Christian, and, compared with this, all other things were to him but trifling
toys. For they belong to the part we play before others on a stage which is very quickly set
up and taken down again-perhaps indeed more quickly destroyed than put together, as

The Emperors. Constantius II., a.d. 337-361. Julian, a.d. 361-363. Jovian, a.d. 363-4. Valens, a.d.

364-378.

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

we may see from the manifold changes of life, and fluctuations of prosperity; while the only
real and securely abiding good thing is godliness.

11. Such was the philosophy of Caesarius, even at court: these were the ideas amidst
which he lived and died, discovering and presenting to God, in the hidden man, a still
deeper godliness than was publicly visible. And if I must pass by all else, his protection of
his kinsmen in distress, his contempt for arrogance, his freedom from assumption towards
friends, his boldness towards men in power, the numerous contests and arguments in which
he engaged with many on behalf of the truth, not merely for the sake of argument, but with
deep piety and fervour, I must speak of one point at least as especially worthy of note. The
Emperor2951 of unhappy memory was raging against us, whose madness in rejecting Christ,
after making himself its first victim, had now rendered him intolerable to others; though
he did not, like other fighters against Christ, grandly enlist himself on the side of impiety,
but veiled his persecution under the form of equity; and, ruled by the crooked serpent which
possessed his soul, dragged down into his own pit his wretched victims by manifold devices. 
His first artifice and contrivance was, to deprive us of the honour of our conflicts (for, noble
man as he was, he grudged this to Christians), by causing us, who suffered for being Christians, to be punished as evil doers: the second was, to call this process persuasion, and not
tyranny, so that the disgrace of those who chose to side with impiety might be greater than
their danger. Some he won over by money, some by dignities, some by promises, some by
various honours, which he bestowed, not royally but in right servile style, in the sight of all,
while everyone was influenced by the witchery of his words, and his own example. At last
he assailed Caesarius. How utter was the derangement and folly which could hope to take
for his prey a man like Caesarius, my brother, the son of parents like ours!

12. However, that I may dwell awhile upon this point, and luxuriate in my story as men
do who are eyewitnesses in some marvellous event,2952 that noble man, fortified with the
sign of Christ, and defending himself with His Mighty Word, entered the lists against an
adversary experienced in arms and strong in his skill in argument. In no wise abashed at
the sight, nor shrinking at all from his high purpose through flattery, he was an athlete ready,
both in word and deed, to meet a rival of equal power. Such then was the arena, and so
equipped the champion of godliness. The judge on one side was Christ, arming the athlete
with His own sufferings: and on the other a dreadful tyrant,2953 persuasive by his skill in
argument, and overawing him by the weight of his authority; and as spectators, on either
hand, both those who were still left on the side of godliness and those who had been snatched

The Emperor, i.e., Julian the Apostate.

Some edd. read "in the spectacle," which would make better sense, but has not ms. authority.

2953 A dreadful tyrant. The Evil One: with Billius and Clémencet. Julian was antagonist, not Judge-unless

we consider that he combined unfairly the two offices.

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

away by him, watching whether victory inclined to their own side or to the other, and more
anxious as to which would gain the day than the combatants themselves.

13. Didst thou not fear for Caesarius, lest aught unworthy of his zeal should befall him? 
Nay, be ye of good courage. For the victory is with Christ, Who overcame the world.2954 
Now for my part, be well assured, I should be highly interested in setting forth the details
of the arguments and allegations used on that occasion, for indeed the discussion contains
certain feats and elegances, which I dwell on with no slight pleasure; but this would be quite
foreign to an occasion and discourse like the present. And when, after having torn to shreds
all his opponent's sophistries, and thrust aside as mere child's play every assault, veiled or
open, Caesarius in a loud clear voice declared that he was and remained a Christian-not
even thus was he finally dismissed. For indeed, the Emperor was possessed by an eager desire
to enjoy and be distinguished by his culture, and then uttered in the hearing of all his famous
saying-O happy father, O unhappy sons! thus deigning to honour me, whose culture and
godliness2955 he had known at Athens, with a share in the dishonour of Caesarius, who was
remanded for a further trial2956 (since Justice was fitly arming the Emperor against the
Persians),2957 and welcomed by us after his happy escape and bloodless victory, as more illustrious for his dishonour than for his celebrity.

14. This victory I esteem far more sublime and honourable than the Emperor's mighty
power and splendid purple and costly diadem. I am more elated in describing it than if he
had won from him the half of his Empire. During the evil days he lived in retirement,
obedient herein to our Christian law,2958 which bids us, when occasion offers, to make
ventures on behalf of the truth, and not be traitors to our religion from cowardice; yet refrain,
as long as may be, from rushing into danger, either in fear for our own souls, or to spare
those who bring the danger upon us. But when the gloom had been dispersed, and the
righteous sentence had been pronounced in a foreign land, and the glittering sword had
struck down the ungodly, and power had returned to the hands of Christians, what boots
it to say with what glory and honour, with how many and great testimonies, as if bestowing
rather than receiving a favour, he was welcomed again at the Court; his new honour succeeding to that of former days; while time changed its Emperors, the repute and commanding
influence of Caesarius with them was undisturbed, nay, they vied with each other in striving

S. John xvi. 33.

2955 Godliness, εὐσέβειαν: here, as often, used in the sense of "orthodoxy."

2956 A further trial. Which Julian did not survive to carry out. S. Greg. may allude to Caesarius' later return

to Court.

Persians. The expedition in which he met his death. Ammian, Marcellin. xxv. 3, 7. Soz. vi. 2. Socr. iii.

21.

2958 Matt. x. 23.

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

to attach him most closely to themselves, and be known as his special friends and acquaintances. Such was the godliness of Caesarius, such its results. Let all men, young and old, give
ear, and press on through the same virtue to the same distinction, for glorious is the fruit
of good labours,2959 if they suppose this to be worth striving after, and a part of true happiness.

15. Again another wonder concerning him is a strong argument for his parents' piety
and his own. He was living in Bithynia, holding an office of no small importance from the
Emperor, viz., the stewardship of his revenue, and care of the exchequer: for this had been
assigned to him by the Emperor as a prelude to the highest offices. And when, a short time
ago, the earthquake2960 in Nicaea occurred, which is said to have been the most serious
within the memory of man, overwhelming in a common destruction almost all the inhabitants
and the beauty of the city, he alone, or with very few of the men of rank, survived the danger,
being shielded by the very falling ruins in his incredible escape, and bearing slight traces of
the peril; yet he allowed fear to lead him to a more important salvation, for he dedicated
himself entirely to the Supreme Providence; he renounced the service of transitory things,
and attached himself to another court. This he both purposed himself, and made the object
of the united earnest prayers to which he invited me by letter, when I seized this opportunity
to give him warning,2961 as I never ceased to do when pained that his great nature should
be occupied in affairs beneath it, and that a soul so fitted for philosophy should, like the sun
behind a cloud, be obscured amid the whirl of public life. Unscathed though he had been
by the earthquake, he was not proof against disease, since he was but human. His escape
was peculiar to himself; his death common to all mankind; the one the token of his piety,
the other the result of his nature. The former, for our consolation, preceded his fate, so that,
though shaken by his death, we might exult in the extraordinary character of his preservation. 
And now our illustrious Caesarius has been restored to us, when his honoured dust and
celebrated corse, after being escorted home amidst a succession of hymns and public orations,
has been honoured by the holy hands of his parents; while his mother, substituting the
festal garments of religion for the trappings of woe, has overcome her tears by her philosophy,
and lulled to sleep lamentations by psalmody, as her son enjoys honours worthy of his newly
regenerate soul, which has been, through water, transformed by the Spirit.

16. This, Caesarius, is my funeral offering to thee, this the firstfruits of my words, which
thou hast often blamed me for withholding, yet wouldst have stripped off, had they been
bestowed on thee; with this ornament I adorn thee, an ornament, I know well, far dearer to
thee than all others, though it be not of the soft flowing tissues of silk, in which while living,

2959 Wisd. iii. 15.

The earthquake, described by Theodoret, H.E. ii. 26.

S. Greg. Epist. xx.

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

with virtue for thy sole adorning, thou didst not, like the many, rejoice; nor texture of
transparent linen, nor outpouring of costly unguents, which thou hadst long resigned to
the boudoirs of the fair, with their sweet savours lasting but a single day; nor any other small
thing valued by small minds, which would have all been hidden to-day with thy fair form
by this bitter stone. Far hence be games and stories of the Greeks, the honours of ill-fated
youths, with their petty prizes for petty contests; and all the libations and firstfruits or garlands and newly plucked flowers, wherewith men honour the departed, in obedience to
ancient custom and unreasoning grief, rather than reason. My gift is an oration, which
perhaps succeeding time will receive at my hand and ever keep in motion, that it may not
suffer him who has left us to be utterly lost to earth, but may ever keep him whom we honour
in men's ears and minds, as it sets before them, more clearly than a portrait, the image of
him for whom we mourn.

17. Such is my offering; if it be slight and inferior to his merit, God loveth that which
is according to our power.2962 Part of our gift is now complete, the remainder we will now
pay by offering (those of us who still survive) every year our honours and memorials. And
now for thee, sacred and holy soul, we pray for an entrance into heaven; mayest thou enjoy
such repose as the bosom of Abraham affords, mayest thou behold the choir of Angels, and
the glories and splendours of sainted men; aye, mayest thou be united to that choir and
share in their joy, looking down from on high on all things here, on what men call wealth,
and despicable dignities, and deceitful honours, and the errors of our senses, and the tangle
of this life, and its confusion and ignorance, as if we were fighting in the dark; whilst thou
art in attendance upon the Great King and filled with the light which streams forth from
Him: and may it be ours hereafter, receiving therefrom no such slender rivulet, as is the
object of our fancy in this day of mirrors and enigmas, to attain to the fount of good itself,
gazing with pure mind upon the truth in its purity, and finding a reward for our eager toil
here below on behalf of the good, in our more perfect possession and vision of the good on
high: the end to which our sacred books and teachers foretell that our course of divine
mysteries shall lead us.

18. What now remains? To bring the healing of the Word to those in sorrow. And a
powerful remedy for mourners is sympathy, for sufferers are best consoled by those who
have to bear a like suffering. To such, then, I specially address myself, of whom I should be
ashamed, if, with all other virtues, they do not show the elements of patience. For even if
they surpass all others in love of their children, let them equally surpass them in love of
wisdom and love of Christ, and in the special practice of meditation on our departure hence,
impressing it likewise on their children, making even their whole life a preparation for
death. But if your misfortune still clouds your reason and, like the moisture which dims

2 Cor. viii. 3; ix. 7.

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

our eyes, hides from you the clear view of your duty, come, ye elders, receive the consolation
of a young man, ye fathers, that of a child, who ought to be admonished by men as old as
you, who have admonished many and gathered experience from your many years. Yet
wonder not, if in my youth I admonish the aged; and if in aught I can see better than the
hoary, I offer it to you. How much longer have we to live, ye men of honoured eld, so near
to God? How long are we to suffer here? Not even man's whole life is long, compared with
the Eternity of the Divine Nature, still less the remains of life, and what I may call the parting
of our human breath, the close of our frail existence. How much has Caesarius outstripped
us? How long shall we be left to mourn his departure? Are we not hastening to the same
abode? Shall we not soon be covered by the same stone? Shall we not shortly be reduced
to the same dust? And what in these short days will be our gain, save that after it has been
ours to see, or suffer, or perchance even to do, more ill, we must discharge the common and
inexorable tribute to the law of nature, by following some, preceding others, to the tomb,
mourning these, being lamented by those, and receiving from some that meed of tears which
we ourselves had paid to others?

19. Such, my brethren, is our existence, who live this transient life, such our pastime
upon earth: we come into existence out of non-existence, and after existing are dissolved. 
We are unsubstantial dreams, impalpable visions,2963 like the flight of a passing bird, like
a ship leaving no track upon the sea,2964 a speck of dust, a vapour, an early dew, a flower
that quickly blooms, and quickly fades. As for man his days are as grass, as a flower of the
field, so he flourisheth.2965 Well hath inspired David discoursed of our frailty, and again
in these words, "Let me know the shortness of my days;" and he defines the days of man as
"of a span long."2966 And what wouldst thou say to Jeremiah, who complains of his mother
in sorrow for his birth,2967 and that on account of others' faults? I have seen all things,2968
says the preacher, I have reviewed in thought all human things, wealth, pleasure, power,
unstable glory, wisdom which evades us rather than is won; then pleasure again, wisdom
again, often revolving the same objects, the pleasures of appetite, orchards, numbers of
slaves, store of wealth, serving men and serving maids, singing men and singing women,
arms, spearmen, subject nations, collected tributes, the pride of kings, all the necessaries
and superfluities of life, in which I surpassed all the kings that were before me. And what
does he say after all these things? Vanity of vanities,2969 all is vanity and vexation of spirit,

Job xx. 8.

2964 Wisd. v. 10 et seq.

Ps. ciii. 15.

Ps. xxxix. 4, 5.

Jer. xv. 10.

Eccles. i. 14.

Ib. xii. 8.

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

possibly meaning some unreasoning longing of the soul, and distraction of man condemned
to this from the original fall: but hear, he says, the conclusion of the whole matter, Fear
God.2970 This is his stay in his perplexity, and this is thy only gain from life here below, to
be guided through the disorder of the things which are seen2971 and shaken, to the things
which stand firm and are not moved.2972

20. Let us not then mourn Caesarius but ourselves, knowing what evils he has escaped
to which we are left behind, and what treasure we shall lay up, unless, earnestly cleaving
unto God and outstripping transitory things, we press towards the life above, deserting the
earth while we are still upon the earth, and earnestly following the spirit which bears us
upward. Painful as this is to the faint-hearted, it is as nothing to men of brave mind. And
let us consider it thus. Caesarius will not reign, but rather will he be reigned over by others. 
He will strike terror into no one, but he will be free from fear of any harsh master, often
himself unworthy even of a subject's position. He will not amass wealth, but neither will
he be liable to envy, or be pained at lack of success, or be ever seeking to add to his gains as
much again. For such is the disease of wealth, which knows no limit to its desire of more,
and continues to make drinking the medicine for thirst. He will make no display of his
power of speaking, yet for his speaking will he be admired. He will not discourse upon the
dicta of Hippocrates and Galen, and their adversaries, but neither will he be troubled by
diseases, and suffer pain at the misfortunes of others. He will not set forth the principles of
Eucleides, Ptolemaeus, and Heron, but neither will he be pained by the tumid vaunts of uncultured men. He will make no display of the doctrines of Plato, and Aristotle, and Pyrrho,
and the names of any Democritus, and Heracleitus, Anaxagoras, Cleanthes and Epicurus,
and all the members of the venerable Porch and Academy: but neither will he trouble
himself with the solution of their cunning syllogisms. What need of further details? Yet
here are some which all men honour or desire. Nor wife nor child will he have beside him,
but he will escape mourning for, or being mourned by them, or leaving them to others, or
being left behind himself as a memorial of misfortune. He will inherit no property: but he
will have such heirs2973 as are of the greatest service, such as he himself wished, so that he
departed hence a rich man, bearing with him all that was his. What an ambition! What a
new consolation! What magnanimity in his executors! A proclamation has been heard,
worthy of the ears of all, and a mother's grief has been made void by a fair and holy promise,

Ib. xii. 13.

2 Cor. iv. 18.

2972 Heb. xii. 27.

2973 Heirs, Cf. S. Basil Ep. 26 (32). Caesarius left all his property to the poor. This passage shows that his

own family welcomed and approved the bequest, which S. Gregory was at much pains to carry out, but was

greatly embarrassed by the rapacity of his brother's servants.

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

to give entirely to her son his wealth as a funeral offering on his behalf, leaving nothing to
those who expected it.

21. Is this inadequate for our consolation? I will add a more potent remedy. I believe
the words of the wise, that every fair and God-beloved soul, when, set free from the bonds
of the body, it departs hence, at once enjoys a sense and perception of the blessings which
await it, inasmuch as that which darkened it has been purged away, or laid aside-I know
not how else to term it-and feels a wondrous pleasure and exultation, and goes rejoicing
to meet its Lord, having escaped as it were from the grievous poison of life here, and shaken
off the fetters which bound it and held down the wings of the mind, and so enters on the
enjoyment of the bliss laid up for it, of which it has even now some conception. Then, a
little later, it receives its kindred flesh, which once shared in its pursuits of things above,
from the earth which both gave and had been entrusted with it, and in some way known to
God, who knit them together and dissolved them, enters with it upon the inheritance of the
glory there. And, as it shared, through their close union, in its hardships, so also it bestows
upon it a portion of its joys, gathering it up entirely into itself, and becoming with it one in
spirit and in mind and in God, the mortal and mutable being swallowed up of life. Hear at
least how the inspired Ezekiel discourses of the knitting together of bones and sinews,2974
how after him Saint Paul speaks of the earthly tabernacle, and the house not made with
hands, the one to be dissolved, the other laid up in heaven, alleging absence from the body
to be presence with the Lord,2975 and bewailing his life in it as an exile, and therefore longing
for and hastening to his release. Why am I faint-hearted in my hopes? Why behave like a
mere creature of a day? I await the voice of the Archangel,2976 the last trumpet,2977 the
transformation of the heavens, the transfiguration of the earth, the liberation of the elements,
the renovation of the universe.2978 Then shall I see Caesarius himself, no longer in exile,
no longer laid upon a bier, no longer the object of mourning and pity, but brilliant, glorious,
heavenly, such as in my dreams I have often beheld thee, dearest and most loving of brothers,
pictured thus by my desire, if not by the very truth.

22. But now, laying aside lamentation, I will look at myself, and examine my feelings,
that I may not unconsciously have in myself anything to be lamented. O ye sons of men,
for the words apply to you, how long will ye be hard-hearted and gross in mind? Why do
ye love vanity and seek after leasing,2979 supposing life here to be a great thing and these

Ezek. xxxvii. 3 et seq.

2 Cor. v. 1, 6; Phil. i. 23.

1 Thess. iv. 16.

1 Cor. xv. 52.

2 Pet. iii. 10.

Ps. iv. 3.

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

few days many, and shrinking from this separation, welcome and pleasant as it is, as if it
were really grievous and awful? Are we not to know ourselves? Are we not to cast away
visible things? Are we not to look to the things unseen? Are we not, even if we are somewhat
grieved, to be on the contrary distressed at our lengthened sojourn,2980 like holy David,
who calls things here the tents of darkness, and the place of affliction, and the deep mire,2981
and the shadow of death;2982 because we linger in the tombs we bear about with us, because,
though we are gods, we die like men2983 the death of sin? This is my fear, this day and night
accompanies me, and will not let me breathe, on one side the glory, on the other the place
of correction: the former I long for till I can say, "My soul fainteth for Thy salvation;"2984
from the latter I shrink back shuddering; yet I am not afraid that this body of mine should
utterly perish in dissolution and corruption; but that the glorious creature of God (for
glorious it is if upright, just as it is dishonourable if sinful) in which is reason, morality, and
hope, should be condemned to the same dishonour as the brutes, and be no better after
death; a fate to be desired for the wicked, who are worthy of the fire yonder.

23. Would that I might mortify my members that are upon the earth,2985 would that I
might spend my all upon the spirit, walking in the way that is narrow and trodden by few,
not that which is broad and easy.2986 For glorious and great are its consequences, and our
hope is greater than our desert. What is man, that Thou art mindful of him?2987 What is
this new mystery which concerns me? I am small and great, lowly and exalted, mortal and
immortal, earthly and heavenly. I share one condition with the lower world, the other with
God; one with the flesh, the other with the spirit. I must be buried with Christ, arise with
Christ, be joint heir with Christ, become the son of God, yea, God Himself. See whither
our argument has carried us in its progress. I almost own myself indebted to the disaster
which has inspired me with such thoughts, and made me more enamoured of my departure
hence. This is the purpose of the great mystery for us. This is the purpose for us of God,
Who for us was made man and became poor,2988 to raise our flesh,2989 and recover His

Ib. cxx. 4.

Ib. xliv. 19 (LXX.); lxix. 2.

Ib. xliv. 20.

Ib. lxxii. 6, 7.

Ib. cxix. 81.

2985 Col. iii. 5.

S. Matt. vii. 13.

Ps. viii. 5.

2 Cor. viii. 9.

2989 Rom. viii. 11.

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

image,2990 and remodel man,2991 that we might all be made one in Christ,2992 who was
perfectly made in all of us all that He Himself is,2993 that we might no longer be male and
female, barbarian, Scythian, bond or free2994 (which are badges of the flesh), but might bear
in ourselves only the stamp of God, by Whom and for Whom we were made,2995 and have
so far received our form and model from Him, that we are recognized by it alone.

24. Yea, would that what we hope for might be, according to the great kindness of our
bountiful God, Who asks for little and bestows great things, both in the present and in the
future, upon those who truly love Him;2996 bearing all things, enduring all things2997 for
their love and hope of Him, giving thanks for all things2998 favourable and unfavourable
alike: I mean pleasant and painful, for reason knows that even these are often instruments
of salvation; commending to Him our own souls2999 and the souls of those fellow wayfarers
who, being more ready, have gained their rest before us. And, now that we have done this,
let us cease from our discourse, and you too from your tears, hastening, as you now are, to
your tomb, which as a sad abiding gift you have given to Caesarius, seasonably prepared as
it was for his parents in their old age, and now unexpectedly bestowed on their son in his
youth, though not without reason in His eyes Who disposes our affairs. O Lord and Maker
of all things, and specially of this our frame! O God and Father and Pilot of men who are
Thine! O Lord of life and death! O Judge and Benefactor of our souls! O Maker and
Transformer in due time of all things3000 by Thy designing Word,3001 according to the
knowledge of the depth of Thy wisdom and providence! do Thou now receive Caesarius,
the firstfruits of our pilgrimage; and if he who was last is first, we bow before Thy Word, by
which the universe is ruled; yet do Thou receive us also afterwards, in a time when Thou
mayest be found,3002 having ordered us in the flesh as long as is for our profit; yea, receive
us, prepared and not troubled3003 by Thy fear, not departing from Thee in our last day, nor

S. Luke xv. 9; 1 Cor. xv. 49.

2991 Col. iii. 10.

2992 Gal. iii. 28.

1 Cor. xv. 28.

2994 Col. iii. 11.

2995 Rom. xi. 36.

1 Cor. ii. 9.

Ib. xiii. 7.

1 Thess. v. 18.

1 Pet. iv. 19.

3000 Amos v. 8 (LXX.).

Ps. xxxiii. 6.

Ib. xxxii. 6.

Ib. cxix. 60 (LXX.).

Panegyric on His Brother S. Caesarius.

violently borne away from things here, like souls fond of the world and the flesh, but filled
with eagerness for that blessed and enduring life which is in Christ Jesus, our Lord, to whom
be glory, world without end. Amen.

On his Sister Gorgonia.

On his Sister Gorgonia.

Oration VIII.

On his Sister Gorgonia.

The exact date of this Oration is uncertain. It is certainly (§23) later than the death of
Caesarius, a.d. 369, and previous to the death of their father, a.d. 374. So much we gather
from the Oration itself, and the references made by some authors to a poem of S. Gregory do
not add anything certain to our knowledge (Poem. Hist. I. 1. v.v. 108, 227). The place in which
it was delivered is, almost without doubt, the city in which her married life had been spent. 
The public details of that life are familiar to the audience. Gorgonia's parents, and the
speaker himself, although known to them, are not spoken of in terms implying intimacy such
as we find in Orations known to have been delivered at Nazianzus. The spiritual father and
confidant of Gorgonia is present, certainly in a position of authority, probably seated in the
Episcopal throne. The husband of Gorgonia (Epitaph. 24) was named Alypius. His home, as
Clémencet and Benoît agree, on the authority of Elias, was at Iconium, of which city, at the
time, Faustinus was bishop. The names of Gorgonia's two sons are unknown. Elias states
that they both became bishops. S. Gregory mentions her three daughters, Alypiana, Eugenia,
and Nonna, in his will. The oration is marked by an eloquence, piety, and tender feeling which
make it a worthy companion of that on Caesarius.

Funeral Oration on his Sister Gorgonia.

1. In praising my sister, I shall pay honour to one of my own family; yet my praise will
not be false, because it is given to a relation, but, because it is true, will be worthy of commendation, and its truth is based not only upon its justice, but upon well-known facts. For,
even if I wished, I should not be permitted to be partial; since everyone who hears me stands,
like a skilful critic, between my oration and the truth, to discountenance exaggeration, yet,
if he be a man of justice, demanding what is really due. So that my fear is not of outrunning
the truth, but, on the contrary, of falling short of it, and lessening her just repute by the extreme inadequacy of my panegyric; for it is a hard task to match her excellences with suitable
action and words. Let us not then be so unjust as to praise every characteristic of other folk,
and disparage really valuable qualities because they are our own, so as to make some men
gain by their absence of kindred with us, while others suffer for their relationship. For
justice would be violated alike by the praise of the one and the neglect of the other, whereas
if we make the truth our standard and rule, and look to her alone, disregarding all the objects
of the vulgar and the mean, we shall praise or pass over everything according to its merits.
2. Yet it would be most unreasonable of all, if, while we refuse to regard it as a righteous
thing to defraud, insult, accuse, or treat unjustly in any way, great or small, those who are
our kindred, and consider wrong done to those nearest to us the worst of all; we were yet

On his Sister Gorgonia.

to imagine that it would be an act of justice to deprive them of such an oration as is due
most of all to the good, and spend more words upon those who are evil, and beg for indulgent
treatment, than on those who are excellent and merely claim their due. For if we are not
prevented, as would be far more just, from praising men who have lived outside our own
circle, because we do not know and cannot personally testify to their merits, shall we be
prevented from praising those whom we do know, because of our friendship, or the envy
of the multitude, and especially those who have departed hence, whom it is too late to ingratiate ourselves with, since they have escaped, amongst all other things, from the reach of
praise or blame.

3. Having now made a sufficient defence on these points, and shown how necessary it
is for me to be the speaker, come, let me proceed with my eulogy, rejecting all daintiness
and elegance of style (for she whom we are praising was unadorned and the absence of ornament was to her, beauty), and yet performing, as a most indispensable debt, all those funeral rites which are her due, and further instructing everyone in a zealous imitation of the
same virtue, since it is my object in every word and action to promote the perfection of
those committed to my charge. The task of praising the country and family of our departed
one I leave to another, more scrupulous in adhering to the rules of eulogy; nor will he lack
many fair topics, if he wish to deck her with external ornaments, as men deck a splendid
and beautiful form with gold and precious stones, and the artistic devices of the craftsman;
which, while they accentuate ugliness by their contrast, can add no attractiveness to the
beauty which surpasses them. For my part, I will only conform to such rules so far as to
allude to our common parents, for it would not be reverent to pass unnoticed the great
blessing of having such parents and teachers, and then speedily direct my attention to herself,
without further taxing the patience of those who are eager to learn what manner of woman
she was.

4. Who is there who knows not the Abraham and Sarah of these our latter days, Gregory
and Nonna his wife? For it is not well to omit the incitement to virtue of mentioning their
names. He has been justified by faith, she has dwelt with him who is faithful; he beyond all
hope has been the father of many nations,3004 she has spiritually travailed in their birth; he
escaped from the bondage of his father's gods,3005 she is the daughter as well as the mother

3004 Rom. iv. 18.

3005 His father's gods. These words, together with the reference to idols and idolators in § 5 and the lines

(Poem, Hist. I. i. 123-4, tome 2. p. 636) ὑπ ̓ εἰδώλοις πάρος ἦεν ζώων have led some writers (esp. Ullmann and

Clericus) to attribute the worship of idols to the Hypsistarii, and Clémencet points out that ζώων is only the

Ep. and Ion. partic. of ζάω, and does not mean "of animals." The weakness of a reliance on a poetical expression

is shown in Dict. Christ. Biog. Here the words are the mystical application of the actual experience of Abraham,

and ἐίδωλον does not necessarily connote material idols. It is applied by S. Greg. Nyssen, Orat. funebr. de Placilla,

p. 965. B (ed. 1615) to the worship of Jesus Christ by the Arians. Cf. Introd. to Orat. xviii.

On his Sister Gorgonia.

of the free; he went out from kindred and home for the sake of the land of promise,3006 she
was the occasion of his exile; for on this head alone I venture to claim for her an honour
higher than that of Sarah; he set forth on so noble a pilgrimage, she readily shared with him
in its toils; he gave himself to the Lord, she both called her husband lord and regarded him
as such, and in part was thereby justified; whose was the promise, from whom, as far as in
them lay, was born Isaac, and whose was the gift.

5. This good shepherd was the result of his wife's prayers and guidance, and it was from
her that he learned his ideal of a good shepherd's life. He generously fled from his idols,
and afterwards even put demons to flight; he never consented to eat salt with idolators: 
united together with a bond of one honour, of one mind, of one soul, concerned as much
with virtue and fellowship with God as with the flesh; equal in length of life and hoary hairs,
equal in prudence and brilliancy, rivals of each other, soaring beyond all the rest, possessed
in few respects by the flesh, and translated in spirit, even before dissolution: possessing not
the world, and yet possessing it, by at once despising and rightly valuing it: forsaking riches
and yet being rich through their noble pursuits; rejecting things here, and purchasing instead
the things yonder: possessed of a scanty remnant of this life, left over from their piety, but
of an abundant and long life for which they have laboured. I will say but one word more
about them: they have been rightly and fairly assigned, each to either sex; he is the ornament
of men, she of women, and not only the ornament but the pattern of virtue.

6. From them Gorgonia derived both her existence and her reputation; they sowed in
her the seeds of piety, they were the source of her fair life, and of her happy departure with
better hopes. Fair privileges these, and such as are not easily attained by many of those who
plume themselves highly upon their noble birth, and are proud of their ancestry. But, if I
must treat of her case in a more philosophic and lofty strain, Gorgonia's native land was
Jerusalem above,3007 the object, not of sight but of contemplation, wherein is our commonwealth, and whereto we are pressing on: whose citizen Christ is, and whose fellow-citizens
are the assembly and church of the first born who are written in heaven, and feast around
its great Founder in contemplation of His glory, and take part in the endless festival; her
nobility consisted in the preservation of the Image, and the perfect likeness to the Archetype,
which is produced by reason and virtue and pure desire, ever more and more conforming,
in things pertaining to God, to those truly initiated into the heavenly mysteries; and in
knowing whence, and of what character, and for what end we came into being.

7. This is what I know upon these points: and therefore it is that I both am aware and
assert that her soul was more noble than those of the East,3008 according to a better than

3006 Gen. xii. 1; Heb. xi. 8.

3007 Heb. xii. 22, 23.

Job i. 3.

On his Sister Gorgonia.

the ordinary rule of noble or ignoble birth, whose distinctions depend not on blood but on
character; nor does it classify those whom it praises or blames according to their families,
but as individuals. But speaking as I do of her excellences among those who know her, let
each one join in contributing some particular and aid me in my speech: for it is impossible
for one man to take in every point, however gifted with observation and intelligence.

8. In modesty she so greatly excelled, and so far surpassed, those of her own day, to say
nothing of those of old time who have been illustrious for modesty, that, in regard to the
two divisions of the life of all, that is, the married and the unmarried state, the latter being
higher and more divine, though more difficult and dangerous, while the former is more
humble and more safe, she was able to avoid the disadvantages of each, and to select and
combine all that is best in both, namely, the elevation of the one and the security of the
other, thus becoming modest without pride, blending the excellence of the married with
that of the unmarried state, and proving that neither of them absolutely binds us to, or
separates us from, God or the world (so that the one from its own nature must be utterly
avoided, and the other altogether praised): but that it is mind which nobly presides over
wedlock and maidenhood, and arranges and works upon them as the raw material of virtue
under the master-hand of reason. For though she had entered upon a carnal union, she was
not therefore separated from the spirit, nor, because her husband was her head, did she ignore
her first Head: but, performing those few ministrations due to the world and nature, according to the will of the law of the flesh, or rather of Him who gave to the flesh these laws, she
consecrated herself entirely to God. But what is most excellent and honourable, she also
won over her husband to her side, and made of him a good fellow-servant, instead of an
unreasonable master. And not only so, but she further made the fruit of her body, her
children and her children's children, to be the fruit of her spirit, dedicating to God not her
single soul, but the whole family and household, and making wedlock illustrious through
her own acceptability in wedlock, and the fair harvest she had reaped thereby; presenting
herself, as long as she lived, as an example to her offspring of all that was good, and when
summoned hence, leaving her will behind her, as a silent exhortation to her house.

9. The divine Solomon, in his instructive wisdom, I mean his Proverbs, praises the
woman3009 who looks to her household and loves her husband, contrasting her with one
who roams abroad, and is uncontrolled and dishonourable, and hunts for precious souls
with wanton words and ways, while she manages well at home and bravely sets about her
woman's duties, as her hands hold the distaff, and she prepares two coats for her husband,
buying a field in due season, and makes good provision for the food of her servants, and
welcomes her friends at a liberal table; with all the other details in which he sings the praises
of the modest and industrious woman. Now, to praise my sister in these points would be

Prov. xxxi. 10.

On his Sister Gorgonia.

to praise a statue for its shadow, or a lion for its claws, without allusion to its greatest perfections. Who was more deserving of renown, and yet who avoided it so much and made
herself inaccessible to the eyes of man? Who knew better the due proportions of sobriety
and cheerfulness, so that her sobriety should not seem inhuman, nor her tenderness immodest, but prudent in one, gentle in the other, her discretion was marked by a combination of
sympathy and dignity? Listen, ye women addicted to ease and display, who despise the veil
of shamefastness. Who ever so kept her eyes under control? Who so derided laughter, that
the ripple of a smile seemed a great thing to her? Who more steadfastly closed her ears? 
And who opened them more to the Divine words, or rather, who installed the mind as ruler
of the tongue in uttering the judgments of God? Who, as she, regulated her lips?

10. Here, if you will, is another point of her excellence: one of which neither she nor
any truly modest and decorous woman thinks anything: but which we have been made to
think much of, by those who are too fond of ornament and display, and refuse to listen to
instruction on such matters. She was never adorned with gold wrought into artistic forms
of surpassing beauty, nor flaxen tresses, fully or partially displayed, nor spiral curls, nor
dishonouring designs of men who construct erections on the honourable head, nor costly
folds of flowing and transparent robes, nor graces of brilliant stones, which color the
neighbouring air, and cast a glow upon the form; nor the arts and witcheries of the painter,
nor that cheap beauty of the infernal creator who works against the Divine, hiding with his
treacherous pigments the creation of God, and putting it to shame with his honour, and
setting before eager eyes the imitation of an harlot instead of the form of God, so that this
bastard beauty may steal away that image which should be kept for God and for the world
to come. But though she was aware of the many and various external ornaments of women,
yet none of them was more precious to her than her own character, and the brilliancy stored
up within. One red tint was dear to her, the blush of modesty; one white one, the sign of
temperance: but pigments and pencillings, and living pictures, and flowing lines of beauty,
she left to women of the stage and of the streets, and to all who think it a shame and a reproach to be ashamed.

11. Enough of such topics. Of her prudence and piety no adequate account can be
given, nor many examples found besides those of her natural and spiritual parents, who
were her only models, and of whose virtue she in no wise fell short, with this single exception
most readily admitted, that they, as she both knew and acknowledged, were the source of
her goodness, and the root of her own illumination. What could be keener than the intellect
of her who was recognized as a common adviser not only by those of her family, those of
the same people and of the one fold, but even by all men round about, who treated her
counsels and advice as a law not to be broken? What more sagacious than her words? What
more prudent than her silence? Having mentioned silence, I will proceed to that which was
most characteristic of her, most becoming to women, and most serviceable to these times. 

On his Sister Gorgonia.

Who had a fuller knowledge of the things of God, both from the Divine oracles, and from
her own understanding? But who was less ready to speak, confining herself within the due
limits of women? Moreover, as was the bounden duty of a woman who has learned true
piety, and that which is the only honourable object of insatiate desire, who, as she, adorned
temples with offerings, both others and this one, which will hardly, now she is gone, be so
adorned again? Or rather, who so presented herself to God as a living temple? Who again
paid such honor to Priests, especially to him who was her fellow soldier and teacher of piety,
whose are the good seeds, and the pair of children consecrated to God.

12. Who opened her house to those who live according to God with a more graceful
and bountiful welcome? And, which is greater than this, who bade them welcome with such
modesty and godly greetings? Further, who showed a mind more unmoved in sufferings? 
Whose soul was more sympathetic to those in trouble? Whose hand more liberal to those
in want? I should not hesitate to honour her with the words of Job: Her door was opened
to all comers; the stranger did not lodge in the street. She was eyes to the blind, feet to the
lame, a mother to the orphan.3010 Why should I say more of her compassion to widows,
than that its fruit which she obtained was, never to be called a widow herself? Her house
was a common abode to all the needy of her family; and her goods no less common to all
in need than their own belonged to each. She hath dispersed abroad and given to the
poor,3011 and according to the infallible truth of the Gospel, she laid up much store in the
wine-presses above, and oftentimes entertained Christ in the person of those whose benefactress she was. And, best of all, there was in her no unreal profession, but in secret she
cultivated piety before Him who seeth secret things. Everything she rescued from the ruler
of this world, everything she transferred to the safe garners. Nothing did she leave behind
to earth, save her body. She bartered everything for the hopes above: the sole wealth she
left to her children was the imitation of her example, and emulation of her merits.

13. But amid these tokens of incredible magnanimity, she did not surrender her body
to luxury, and unrestrained pleasures of the appetite, that raging and tearing dog, as though
presuming upon her acts of benevolence, as most men do, who redeem their luxury by
compassion to the poor, and instead of healing evil with good, receive evil as a recompense
for their good deeds. Nor did she, while subduing her dust3012 by fasting, leave to another
the medicine of hard lying; nor, while she found this of spiritual service, was she less restrained in sleep than anyone else; nor, while regulating her life on this point as if freed from
the body, did she lie upon the ground, when others were passing the night erect, as the most
mortified men struggle to do. Nay in this respect she was seen to surpass not only women,

Job xxix. 15; xxxi. 32.

Ps. cxii. 9.

3012 Her dust, i.e. her body.

On his Sister Gorgonia.

but the most devoted of men, by her intelligent chanting of the psalter, her converse with,
and unfolding and apposite recollection of, the Divine oracles, her bending of her knees
which had grown hard and almost taken root in the ground, her tears to cleanse her stains
with contrite heart and spirit of lowliness, her prayer rising heavenward, her mind freed
from wandering in rapture; in all these, or in any one of them, is there man or woman who
can boast of having surpassed her? Besides, it is a great thing to say, but it is true, that while
she was zealous in her endeavour after some points of excellence, of others she was the
paragon: of some she was the discoverer, in others she excelled. And if in some single
particular she was rivalled, her superiority consists in her complete grasp of all. Such was
her success in all points, as none else attained even in a moderate degree in one: to such
perfection did she attain in each particular, that any one might of itself have supplied the
place of all.

14. O untended body, and squalid garments, whose only flower is virtue! O soul,
clinging to the body, when reduced almost to an immaterial state through lack of food; or
rather, when the body had been mortified by force, even before dissolution, that the soul
might attain to freedom, and escape the entanglements of the senses! O nights of vigil, and
psalmody, and standing which lasts from one day to another! O David, whose strains never
seem tedious to faithful souls! O tender limbs, flung upon the earth and, contrary to nature,
growing hard! O fountains of tears, sowing in affliction that they might reap in joy.3013 O
cry in the night, piercing the clouds and reaching unto Him that dwelleth in the heavens! 
O fervour of spirit, waxing bold in prayerful longings against the dogs of night, and frosts
and rain, and thunders, and hail, and darkness! O nature of woman overcoming that of
man in the common struggle for salvation, and demonstrating that the distinction between
male and female is one of body not of soul! O Baptismal purity, O soul, in the pure chamber
of thy body, the bride of Christ! O bitter eating! O Eve mother of our race and of our sin! 
O subtle serpent, and death, overcome by her self-discipline! O self-emptying of Christ,
and form of a servant, and sufferings, honoured by her mortification!

15. Oh! how am I to count up all her traits, or pass over most of them without injury
to those who know them not? Here however it is right to subjoin the rewards of her piety,
for indeed I take it that you, who knew her life well, have long been eager and desirous to
find in my speech not only things present, or her joys yonder, beyond the conception and
hearing and sight of man, but also those which the righteous Rewarder bestowed upon her
here: a matter which often tends to the edification of unbelievers, who from small things
attain to faith in those which are great, and from things which are seen to those which are
not seen. I will mention then some facts which are generally notorious, others which have
been from most men kept secret; and that because her Christian principle made a point of

Ps. cxxvi. 5.

On his Sister Gorgonia.

not making a display of her [Divine] favours. You know how her maddened mules ran
away with her carriage, and unfortunately overturned it, how horribly she was dragged
along, and seriously injured, to the scandal of unbelievers at the permission of such accidents
to the righteous, and how quickly their unbelief was corrected: for, all crushed and bruised
as she was, in bones and limbs, alike in those exposed and in those out of sight, she would
have none of any physician, except Him Who had permitted it; both because she shrunk
from the inspection and the hands of men, preserving, even in suffering, her modesty, and
also awaiting her justification from Him Who allowed this to happen, so that she owed her
preservation to none other than to Him: with the result that men were no less struck by her
unhoped-for recovery than by her misfortune, and concluded that the tragedy had happened
for her glorification through sufferings, the suffering being human, the recovery superhuman,
and giving a lesson to those who come after, exhibiting in a high degree faith in the midst
of suffering, and patience under calamity, but in a still higher degree the kindness of God
to them that are such as she. For to the beautiful promise to the righteous "though he fall,
he shall not be utterly broken,"3014 has been added one more recent, "though he be utterly
broken, he shall speedily be raised up and glorified."3015 For if her misfortune was unreasonable, her recovery was extraordinary, so that health soon stole away the injury, and the
cure became more celebrated than the blow.

16. O remarkable and wonderful disaster! O injury more noble than security! O
prophecy, "He hath smitten, and He will bind us up, and revive us, and after three days He
will raise us up,"3016 portending indeed, as it did, a greater and more sublime event, yet no
less applicable to Gorgonia's sufferings! This then, notorious to all, even to those afar off,
for the wonder spread to all, and the lesson was stored up in the tongues and ears of all, with
the other wonderful works and powers of God. But the following incident, hitherto unknown
and concealed from most men by the Christian principle I spoke of, and her pious shrinking
from vanity and display, dost thou bid me tell, O best3017 and most perfect of shepherds,
pastor of this holy sheep, and dost thou further give thy assent to it, since to us alone has
this secret been entrusted, and we were mutual witnesses of the marvel, or are we still to
keep our faith to her who is gone? Yet I do think, that as that was the time to be silent, this
is the time to manifest it, not only for the glory of God, but also for the consolation of those
in affliction.

Ps. xxxvii. 24.

Ib. cxlvi. 8 (LXX.).

3016 Hos. vi. 1, 2.

3017 O best, &c. Faustinus, bishop of Iconium, must have been present, and S. Gregory, having asked his

permission to relate the incident, looks towards him awaiting some sign of his assent.

On his Sister Gorgonia.

17. She was sick in body, and dangerously ill of an extraordinary and malignant disease,
her whole frame was incessantly fevered, her blood at one time agitated and boiling, then
curdling with coma, incredible pallor, and paralysis of mind and limbs: and this not at long
intervals, but sometimes very frequently. Its virulence seemed beyond human aid; the skill
of physicians, who carefully examined the case, both singly and in consultation, was of no
avail; nor the tears of her parents, which often have great power, nor public supplications
and intercessions, in which all the people joined as earnestly as if for their own preservation: 
for her safety was the safety of all, as, on the contrary, her suffering and sickness was a
common misfortune.

18. What then did this great soul, worthy offspring of the greatest, and what was the
medicine for her disorder, for we have now come to the great secret? Despairing of all
other aid, she betook herself to the Physician of all, and awaiting the silent hours of night,
during a slight intermission of the disease, she approached the altar with faith, and, calling
upon Him Who is honoured thereon, with a mighty cry, and every kind of invocation,
calling to mind all His former works of power, and well she knew those both of ancient and
of later days, at last she ventured on an act of pious and splendid effrontery: she imitated
the woman whose fountain of blood was dried up by the hem of Christ's garment.3018 What
did she do? Resting her head with another cry upon the altar, and with a wealth of tears, as
she who once bedewed the feet of Christ,3019 and declaring that she would not loose her
hold until she was made whole, she then applied her medicine to her whole body, viz., such
a portion of the antitypes3020 of the Precious Body and Blood as she treasured in her hand,
mingling therewith her tears, and, O the wonder, she went away feeling at once that she was
saved, and with the lightness of health in body, soul, and mind, having received, as the reward
of her hope, that which she hoped for, and having gained bodily by means of spiritual
strength. Great though these things be, they are not untrue. Believe them all of you,
whether sick or sound, that ye may either keep or regain your health. And that my story is
no mere boastfulness is plain from the silence in which she kept, while alive, what I have
revealed. Nor should I now have published it, be well assured, had I not feared that so great
a marvel would have been utterly hidden from the faithful and unbelieving of these and
later days.

19. Such was her life. Most of its details I have left untold, lest my speech should grow
to undue proportions, and lest I should seem to be too greedy for her fair fame: but perhaps
we should be wronging her holy and illustrious death, did we not mention some of its excellences; especially as she so longed for and desired it. I will do so therefore, as concisely as

S. Matt. ix. 20.

S. Luke vii. 38.

3020 Antitypes, i.e. the reserved Sacrament.

On his Sister Gorgonia.

I can. She longed for her dissolution, for indeed she had great boldness towards Him who
called her, and preferred to be with Christ, beyond all things on earth.3021 And there is
none of the most amorous and unrestrained, who has such love for his body, as she had to
fling away these fetters, and escape from the mire in which we spend our lives, and to associate in purity with Him Who is Fair, and entirely to hold her Beloved, Who is I will even
say it, her Lover, by Whose rays, feeble though they now are, we are enlightened, and Whom,
though separated from Him, we are able to know. Nor did she fail even of this desire, divine
and sublime though it was, and, what is still greater, she had a foretaste of His Beauty through
her forecast and constant watching. Her only sleep transferred her to exceeding joys, and
her one vision embraced her departure at the foreappointed time, having been made aware
of this day, so that according to the decision of God she might be prepared and yet not disturbed.

20. She had recently obtained the blessing of cleansing and perfection, which we have
all received from God as a common gift and foundation of our new3022 life. Or rather all
her life was a cleansing and perfecting: and while she received regeneration from the Holy
Spirit, its security was hers by virtue of her former life. And in her case almost alone, I will
venture to say, the mystery was a seal rather than a gift of grace. And when her husband's
perfection was her one remaining desire (and if you wish me briefly to describe the man, I
do not know what more to say of him than that he was her husband) in order that she might
be consecrated to God in her whole body, and not depart half-perfected, or leave behind
her imperfect anything that was hers; she did not even fail of this petition, from Him Who
fulfils the desire of them that fear Him,3023 and accomplishes their requests.

21. And now when she had all things to her mind, and nothing was lacking of her desires,
and the appointed time drew nigh, being thus prepared for death and departure, she fulfilled
the law which prevails in such matters, and took to her bed. After many injunctions to her
husband, her children, and her friends, as was to be expected from one who was full of
conjugal, maternal, and brotherly love, and after making her last day a day of solemn festival
with brilliant discourse upon the things above, she fell asleep, full not of the days of man,
for which she had no desire, knowing them to be evil for her, and mainly occupied with our
dust and wanderings, but more exceedingly full of the days of God, than I imagine any one
even of those who have departed in a wealth of hoary hairs, and have numbered many terms
of years. Thus she was set free, or, it is better to say, taken to God, or flew away, or changed
her abode, or anticipated by a little the departure of her body.

Phil. i. 23.

δευτέρον, lit. "second."

Ps. cxlv. 19.

On his Sister Gorgonia.

22. Yet what was I on the point of omitting? But perhaps thou, who art her spiritual
father, wouldst not have allowed me, and hast carefully concealed the wonder, and made it
known to me. It is a great point for her distinction, and in our memory of her virtue, and
regret for her departure. But trembling and tears have seized upon me, at the recollection
of the wonder. She was just passing away, and at her last breath, surrounded by a group of
relatives and friends performing the last offices of kindness, while her aged mother bent
over her, with her soul convulsed with envy of her departure, anguish and affection being
blended in the minds of all. Some longed to hear some burning word to be branded in their
recollection; others were eager to speak, yet no one dared; for tears were mute and the pangs
of grief unconsoled, since it seemed sacrilegious, to think that mourning could be an honour
to one who was thus passing away. So there was solemn silence, as if her death had been a
religious ceremony. There she lay, to all appearance, breathless, motionless, speechless; the
stillness of her body seemed paralysis, as though the organs of speech were dead, after that
which could move them was gone. But as her pastor, who in this wonderful scene, was
carefully watching her, perceived that her lips were gently moving, and placed his ear to
them, which his disposition and sympathy emboldened him to do,-but do you expound
the meaning of this mysterious calm, for no one can disbelieve it on your word! Under her
breath she was repeating a psalm-the last words of a psalm-to say the truth, a testimony
to the boldness with which she was departing, and blessed is he who can fall asleep with
these words, "I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest."3024 Thus wert thou singing,
fairest of women, and thus it fell out unto thee; and the song became a reality, and attended
on thy departure as a memorial of thee, who hast entered upon sweet peace after suffering,
and received (over and above the rest which comes to all), that sleep which is due to the
beloved,3025 as befitted one who lived and died amid the words of piety.

23. Better, I know well, and far more precious than eye can see, is thy present lot, the
song of them that keep holy-day,3026 the throng of angels, the heavenly host, the vision of
glory, and that splendour, pure and perfect beyond all other, of the Trinity Most High, no
longer beyond the ken of the captive mind, dissipated by the senses, but entirely contemplated
and possessed by the undivided mind, and flashing upon our souls with the whole light of
Godhead: Mayest thou enjoy to the full all those things whose crumbs thou didst, while
still upon earth, possess through the reality of thine inclination towards them. And if thou
takest any account of our affairs, and holy souls receive from God this privilege, do thou
accept these words of mine, in place of, and in preference to many panegyrics, which I have
bestowed upon Caesarius before thee, and upon thee after him-since I have been preserved

Ps. iv. 8.

Ib. cxxvii. 2.

Ib. xlii. 4.

On his Sister Gorgonia.

to pronounce panegyrics upon my brethren. If any one will, after you, pay me the like
honour, I cannot say. Yet may my only honour be that which is in God, and may my pilgrimage and my home be in Christ Jesus our Lord, to Whom, with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be glory for ever. Amen.

To His Father, When He Had Entrusted to Him the Care of the Church of Nazianzus.

To His Father, When He Had Entrusted to Him the Care of the Church of N...

Oration XII.

To His Father, When He Had Entrusted to Him the Care of the Church of

Nazianzus.

ThisOration was delivered a.d. 372. Two years earlier Valens had divided Cappadocia
into two provinces. Anthimus, Bishop of Tyana, asserting that the ecclesiastical provinces
were regulated by those of the empire, claimed metropolitical rights over the churches of
Cappadocia Secunda, in opposition to S. Basil, who had hitherto been metropolitan of the
undivided province. S. Basil, with the intention of vindicating the permanence of his former
rights, created a new see at Sasima, on the borders of the two provinces, and with great difficulty
prevailed upon S. Gregory to receive consecration as its first Bishop. S. Gregory, who had
"bent his neck, but not his will,"3027 was for a long time reluctant to enter upon his Episcopal
duties, and at last was prevailed upon by S. Gregory of Nyssa, S. Basil's brother, to make an
attempt to do so. When, however, he found that Anthimus was prepared to bar his entrance
by force of arms, he returned home, definitely resigned his see, and once more betook himself
to the life of solitude which he so dearly loved. Recalled hence, he consented,3028 at his father's
earnest entreaty, to undertake provisionally the duties of Bishop-coadjutor of Nazianzus: and
pronounced this short discourse on the occasion of his installation.

1. I opened my mouth, and drew in the Spirit,3029 and I give myself and my all to the
Spirit, my action and speech, my inaction and silence, only let Him hold me and guide me,
and move both hand and mind and tongue whither it is right, and He wills: and restrain
them as it is right and expedient. I am an instrument of God, a rational instrument, an instrument tuned and struck by that skilful artist, the Spirit. Yesterday His work in me was
silence. I mused on abstinence from speech. Does He strike upon my mind today? My
speech shall be heard, and I will muse on utterance. I am neither so talkative, as to desire
to speak, when He is bent on silence; nor so reserved and ignorant as to set a watch before
my lips3030 when it is the time to speak: but I open and close my door at the will of that
Mind and Word and Spirit, Who is One kindred Deity.

2. I will speak then, since I am so bidden. And I will speak both to the good shepherd
here, and to you, his holy flock, as I think is best both for me to speak, and for you to hear
to-day. Why is it that you have begged for one to share your shepherd's toil? For my speech
shall begin with you, O dear and honoured head, worthy of that of Aaron, down which runs

3027 Carmina Hist., xi., 487.

Ib., 492-525.

Ps. cxix. 131.

Ps. cxli. 3.

To His Father, When He Had Entrusted to Him the Care of the Church of N...

that spiritual and priestly ointment upon his beard and clothing.3031 Why is it that, while
yet able to stablish and guide many, and actually guiding them in the power of the Spirit,
you support yourself with a staff and prop in your spiritual works? Is it because you have
heard and know that even with the illustrious Aaron were anointed Eleazar and Ithamar,
the sons of Aaron?3032 For I pass over Nadab and Abihu,3033 lest the allusion be ill-omened: 
and Moses during his lifetime appoints Joshua in his stead, as lawgiver and general over
those who were pressing on to the land of promise? The office of Aaron and Hur, supporting
the hands of Moses on the mount where Amalek was warred down3034 by the Cross,3035
prefigured and typified long before, I feel willing to pass by, as not very suitable or applicable
to us: for Moses did not choose them to share his work as lawgiver, but as helpers in his
prayer and supports for the weariness of his hands.

3. What is it then that ails you? What is your weakness? Is it physical? I am ready to
sustain you, yea I have sustained, and been sustained, like Jacob of old, by your fatherly
blessings.3036 Is it spiritual? Who is stronger, and more fervent, especially now, when the
powers of the flesh are ebbing and fading, like so many barriers which interfere with, and
dim the brilliancy of a light? For these powers are wont, for the most part, to wage war upon
and oppose one another, while the body's health is purchased by the sickness of the soul,
and the soul flourishes and looks upward when pleasures are stilled and fade away along
with the body. But, wonderful as your simplicity and nobility have seemed to me before,
how is it that you have no fear, especially in times like these, that your spirit will be considered
a pretext, and that most men will suppose, in spite of our spiritual professions, that we are
undertaking this from carnal motives. For most men have made3037 the office to be looked
upon as great and princely, and accompanied with considerable enjoyment, even though a
man have the charge and rule over a more slender flock than this, and one which affords
more troubles than pleasures. Thus far of your simplicity, or parental preference, if it be
so, which makes you neither admit yourself, nor readily suspect in others anything disgraceful; for a mind hardly roused to evil, is slow to suspect evil. My second duty is briefly to
address this people of yours, or now even of mine.

Ib. cxxxiii. 2.

Lev. viii. 2.

Ib. x. 1.

Exod. xvii. 12.

The Cross. The stretching out of Moses' hands was a type of the outstretched hands of our Lord Jesus,

and His "intercession for the transgressors," upon the Cross.

3036 Gen. xxvii. 28.

3037 Made, by the manner in which they have sought for and exercised it.

To His Father, When He Had Entrusted to Him the Care of the Church of N...

4. I have been overpowered, my friends and brethren, for I will now, though I did not
at the time, ask for your aid. I have been overpowered by the old age of my father, and, to
use moderate terms, the kindliness of my friend. So, help me, each of you who can, and
stretch out a hand to me who am pressed down and torn asunder by regret and enthusiasm. 
The one suggests flights, mountains and deserts, and calm of soul and body, and that the
mind should retire into itself, and recall its powers from sensible things, in order to hold
pure communion with God, and be clearly illumined by the flashing rays of the Spirit, with
no admixture or disturbance of the divine light by anything earthly or clouded, until we
come to the source of the effulgence which we enjoy here, and regret and desire are alike
stayed, when our mirrors3038 pass away in the light of truth. The other wills that I should
come forward, and bear fruit for the common good, and be helped by helping others; and
publish the Divine light, and bring to God a people for His own possession, a holy nation,
a royal priesthood,3039 and His image cleansed in many souls. And this, because, as a park
is better than and preferable to a tree, the whole heaven with its ornaments to a single star,
and the body to a limb, so also, in the sight of God, is the reformation of a whole church
preferable to the progress of a single soul: and therefore, I ought not to look only on my
own interest, but also on that of others.3040 For Christ also likewise, when it was possible
for him to abide in His own honour and deity, not only so far emptied Himself as to take
the form of a slave,3041 but also endured the cross, despising the shame,3042 that he might
by His own sufferings destroy sin, and by death slay death.3043 The former are the imaginings
of desire, the latter the teachings of the Spirit. And I, standing midway between the desire
and the Spirit, and not knowing to which of the two I should rather yield, will impart to you
what seems to me the best and safest course, that you may test it with me and take part in
my design.

5. It seemed to me to be best and least dangerous to take a middle course between desire
and fear, and to yield in part to desire, in part to the Spirit: and that this would be the case,
if I neither altogether evaded the office, and so refused the grace, which would be dangerous,
nor yet assumed a burden beyond my powers, for it is a heavy one. The former indeed is
suited to the person of another, the latter to another's power, or rather to undertake both
would be madness. But piety and safety would alike advise me to proportion the office to
my power, and as is the case with food, to accept that which is within my power and refuse

1 Cor. xiii. 12.

1 Pet. ii. 9.

Phil. ii. 4.

Ib. ii. 7.

3042 Heb. xii. 2.

Ib. ii. 14.

To His Father, When He Had Entrusted to Him the Care of the Church of N...

what is beyond it, for health is gained for the body, and tranquillity for the soul, by such a
course of moderation. Therefore I now consent to share in the cares of my excellent father,
like an eaglet, not quite vainly flying close to a mighty and high soaring eagle. But hereafter
I will offer my wing to the Spirit to be borne whither, and as, He wills: no one shall force
or drag me in any direction, contrary to His counsel. For sweet it is to inherit a father's
toils, and this flock is more familiar than a strange and foreign one; I would even add, more
precious in the sight of God, unless the spell of affection deceives me, and the force of habit
robs me of perception: nor is there any more useful or safer course than that willing rulers
should rule willing subjects: since it is our practice not to lead by force, or by compulsion,
but by good will. For this would not hold together even another form of government, since
that which is held in by force is wont, when opportunity offers, to strike for freedom: but
freedom of will more than anything else it is, which holds together our-I will not call it
rule, but-tutorship. For the mystery of godliness3044 belongs to those who are willing, not
to those who are overpowered.

6. This is my speech to you, my good men, uttered in simplicity and with all good will,
and this is the secret of my mind. And may the victory rest with that which will be for the
profit of both you and me, under the Spirit's guidance of our affairs, (for our discourse
comes back again to the same point,)3045 to Whom we have given ourselves, and the head
anointed with the oil of perfection, in the Almighty Father, and the Only-begotten Son, and
the Holy Spirit, Who is God. For how long shall we hide3046 the lamp under the bushel,3047
and withhold from others the full knowledge of the Godhead, when it ought to be now put
upon the lampstand and give light to all churches and souls and to the whole fulness of the
world, no longer by means of metaphors, or intellectual sketches, but by distinct declaration? 
And this indeed is a most perfect setting forth of Theology to those Who have been deemed
worthy of this grace in Christ Jesus Himself, our Lord, to Whom be glory, honour, and
power for ever. Amen.

1 Tim. iii. 16.

The same point, i.e. from which it started, § 1.

3046 Hide, etc. S. Gregory here alludes to the "economy" which refrained from distinctly declaring the Divinity

of the Holy Ghost. Cf. Or. xliii., 68. This declaration of his was afterwards commented on by his audience and

others, cf. Epist. 58, in which his mode of teaching is contrasted with that of S. Basil.

S. Matt. v. 15.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

Oration XVI.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

ThisOration belongs to the year a.d. 373. A series of disasters had befallen the people of
Nazianzus. A deadly cattle plague, which had devastated their herds, had been followed by
a prolonged drought, and now their just ripened crops had been ruined by a storm of rain and
hail. The people flocked to the church, and finding S. Gregory the elder so overwhelmed by
his sense of these terrible misfortunes that he was unable to address them, implored his coadjutor to enter the pulpit. The occasion gave no time for preparation, so S. Gregory poured out
his feelings in a discourse which was in the fullest sense of the words ex tempore. Its present
form, however, as Benoît suggests, may be due to a later polishing of notes taken down at the
time of delivery.

1. Why do you infringe upon the approved order of things? Why would you do violence
to a tongue which is under obligation to the law? Why do you challenge a speech which is
in subjection to the Spirit? Why, when you have excused the head, have you hastened to
the feet? Why do you pass by Aaron3048 and urge forward Eleazar? I cannot allow the
fountain to be dammed up, while the rivulet runs its course; the sun to be hidden, while the
star shines forth; hoar hairs to be in retirement, while youth lays down the law; wisdom to
be silent, while inexperience speaks with assurance. A heavy rain is not always more useful
than a gentle shower. Nay, indeed, if it be too violent, it sweeps away the earth, and increases
the proportion of the farmer's loss: while a gentle fall, which sinks deep, enriches the soil,
benefits the tiller and makes the corn grow to a fine crop. So the fluent speech is not more
profitable than the wise. For the one, though it perhaps gave a slight pleasure, passes away,
and is dispersed as soon, and with as little effect, as the air on which it struck, though it
charms with its eloquence the greedy ear. But the other sinks into the mind, and opening
wide its mouth, fills it3049 with the Spirit, and, showing itself nobler than its origin, produces
a rich harvest by a few syllables.

2. I have not yet alluded to the true and first wisdom, for which our wonderful husbandman and shepherd is conspicuous. The first wisdom is a life worthy of praise, and kept pure
for God, or being purified for Him Who is all-pure and all-luminous, Who demands of us,
us His only sacrifice, purification-that is, a contrite heart and the sacrifice of praise,3050
and a new creation in Christ,3051 and the new man,3052 and the like, as the Scripture loves

3048 Aaron, S. Gregory the elder. Eleazar, S. Gregory Nazianzen.

Ps. lxxxi. 11.

Ib. l. 23; li. 19.

2 Cor. v. 17.

Eph. iv. 24.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

to call it. The first wisdom is to despise that wisdom which consists of language and figures
of speech, and spurious and unnecessary embellishments. Be it mine to speak five words
with my understanding in the church, rather than ten thousand words in a tongue,3053 and
with the unmeaning voice of a trumpet,3054 which does not rouse my soldier to the spiritual
combat. This is the wisdom which I praise, which I welcome. By this the ignoble have won
renown, and the despised have attained the highest honours. By this a crew of fishermen
have taken the whole world in the meshes of the Gospel-net, and overcome by a word finished
and cut short3055 the wisdom that comes to naught.3056 I count not wise the man who is
clever in words, nor him who is of a ready tongue, but unstable and undisciplined in soul,
like the tombs which, fair and beautiful as they are outwardly, are fetid with corpses within,3057 and full of manifold ill-savours; but him who speaks but little of virtue, yet gives
many examples of it in his practice, and proves the trustworthiness of his language by his
life.

3. Fairer in my eyes, is the beauty which we can gaze upon than that which is painted
in words: of more value the wealth which our hands can hold, than that which is imagined
in our dreams; and more real the wisdom of which we are convinced by deeds, than that
which is set forth in splendid language. For "a good understanding," he saith, "have all they
that do thereafter,"3058 not they who proclaim it. Time is the best touchstone of this wisdom,
and "the hoary head is a crown of glory."3059 For if, as it seems to me as well as to Solomon,
we must "judge none blessed before his death,"3060 and it is uncertain "what a day may
bring forth,"3061 since our life here below has many turnings, and the body of our humiliation3062 is ever rising, falling and changing; surely he, who without fault has almost drained
the cup of life, and nearly reached the haven of the common sea of existence is more secure,
and therefore more enviable, than one who has yet a long voyage before him.

4. Do not thou, therefore, restrain a tongue whose noble utterances and fruits have
been many, which has begotten many children of righteousness-yea, lift up thine eyes
round about and see,3063 how many are its sons, and what are its treasures; even this whole

1 Cor. xiv. 19.

Ib. xiv. 8.

Isai. x. 22, 23 (LXX.); Rom. ix. 28.

1 Cor. ii. 6.

S. Matt. xxiii. 27.

Ps. cxi. 10.

Prov. xvi. 31.

Eccles. xi. 28.

Prov. xxvii. 1.

Phil. iii. 21.

Isai. xlix. 18.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

people, whom thou hast begotten in Christ through the Gospel.3064 Grudge not to us those
words which are excellent rather than many, and do not yet give us a foretaste of our impending loss.3065 Speak in words which, if few, are dear and most sweet to me, which, if
scarcely audible, are perceived from their spiritual cry, as God heard the silence of Moses,
and said to him when interceding mentally, "Why criest thou unto Me?"3066 Comfort this
people, I pray thee, I, who was thy nursling, and have since been made Pastor, and now even
Chief Pastor. Give a lesson, to me in the Pastor's art, to this people of obedience. Discourse
awhile on our present heavy blow, about the just judgments of God, whether we grasp their
meaning, or are ignorant of their great deep.3067 How again "mercy is put in the balance,"3068
as holy Isaiah declares, for goodness is not without discernment, as the first labourers in
the vineyard3069 fancied, because they could not perceive any distinction between those
who were paid alike: and how anger, which is called "the cup in the hand of the Lord,"3070
and "the cup of falling which is drained,"3071 is in proportion to transgressions, even though
He abates to all somewhat of what is their due, and dilutes with compassion the unmixed
draught of His wrath. For He inclines from severity to indulgence towards those who accept
chastisement with fear, and who after a slight affliction conceive and are in pain with conversion, and bring forth3072 the perfect spirit of salvation; but nevertheless he reserves the
dregs,3073 the last drop of His anger, that He may pour it out entire upon those who, instead
of being healed by His kindness, grow obdurate, like the hard-hearted Pharaoh,3074 that
bitter taskmaster, who is set forth as an example of the power3075 of God over the ungodly.
5. Tell us whence come such blows and scourges, and what account we can give of
them. Is it some disordered and irregular motion or some unguided current, some unreason
of the universe, as though there were no Ruler of the world, which is therefore borne along
by chance, as is the doctrine of the foolishly wise, who are themselves borne along at random
by the disorderly spirit of darkness? Or are the disturbances and changes of the universe,

1 Cor. iv. 15.

Loss, i.e., the death of his father, which, from his age, could not be long delayed.

Exod. xiv. 15.

Ps. xxxvi. 6.

Is. xxviii. 17. (LXX.).

S. Matt. xx. 12.

Ps. lxxv. 9.

Isai. li. 17 (LXX.).

Ib. xxvi. 18.

Ps. lxxv. 10.

Exod. v. 6; vii. 22.

3075 Rom. ix. 17.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

(which was originally constituted, blended, bound together, and set in motion in a harmony
known only to Him Who gave it motion,) directed by reason and order under the guidance
of the reins of Providence? Whence come famines and tornadoes and hailstorms, our present
warning blow? Whence pestilences, diseases, earthquakes, tidal waves, and fearful things
in the heavens? And how is the creation, once ordered for the enjoyment of men, their
common and equal delight, changed for the punishment of the ungodly, in order that we
may be chastised through that for which, when honoured with it, we did not give thanks,
and recognise in our sufferings that power which we did not recognise in our benefits? How
is it that some receive at the Lord's hand double for their sins,3076 and the measure of their
wickedness is doubly filled up, as in the correction of Israel, while the sins of others are done
away by a sevenfold recompense into their bosom?3077 What is the measure of the Amorites
that is not yet full?3078 And how is the sinner either let go, or chastised again, let go perhaps,
because reserved for the other world, chastised, because healed thereby in this? Under what
circumstances again is the righteous, when unfortunate, possibly being put to the test, or,
when prosperous, being observed, to see if he be poor in mind or not very far superior to
visible things, as indeed conscience, our interior and unerring tribunal, tells us. What is
our calamity, and what its cause? Is it a test of virtue, or a touchstone of wickedness? And
is it better to bow beneath it as a chastisement, even though it be not so, and humble ourselves
under the mighty hand of God,3079 or, considering it as a trial, to rise superior to it? On
these points give us instruction and warning, lest we be too much discouraged by our present
calamity, or fall into the gulf of evil and despise it; for some such feeling is very general; but
rather that we may bear our admonition quietly, and not provoke one more severe by our
insensibility to this.

6. Terrible is an unfruitful season, and the loss of the crops. It could not be otherwise,
when men are already rejoicing in their hopes, and counting on their all but harvested stores. 
Terrible again is an unseasonable harvest, when the farmers labour with heavy hearts, sitting
as it were beside the grave of their crops, which the gentle rain nourished, but the wild storm
has rooted up, whereof the mower filleth not his hand, neither he that bindeth up the sheaves
his bosom,3080 nor have they obtained the blessing which passers-by bestow upon the
farmers. Wretched indeed is the sight of the ground devastated, cleared, and shorn of its
ornaments, over which the blessed Joel wails in his most tragic picture of the desolation of

Isai. xl. 2.

Ps. lxxix. 12.

3078 Gen. xv. 16.

1 Pet. v. 6.

Ps. cxxix. 7.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

the land, and the scourge of famine;3081 while another3082 prophet wails, as he contrasts
with its former beauty its final disorder, and thus discourses on the anger of the Lord when
He smites the land: before him is the garden of Eden, behind Him a desolate wilderness.3083 
Terrible indeed these things are, and more than terrible, when we are grieved only at what
is present, and are not yet distressed by the feeling of a severer blow: since, as in sickness,
the suffering which pains us from time to time is more distressing than that which is not
present. But more terrible still are those which the treasures3084 of God's wrath contain, of
which God forbid that you should make trial; nor will you, if you fly for refuge to the mercies
of God, and win over by your tears Him Who will have mercy,3085 and avert by your conversion what remains of His wrath. As yet, this is gentleness and loving-kindness and gentle
reproof, and the first elements of a scourge to train our tender years: as yet, the smoke3086
of His anger, the prelude of His torments; not yet has fallen the flaming fire,3087 the climax
of His being moved; not yet the kindled coals,3088 the final scourge, part of which He
threatened, when He lifted up the other over us, part He held back by force, when He brought
the other upon us; using the threat and the blow alike for our instruction, and making a way
for His indignation, in the excess of His goodness; beginning with what is slight, so that the
more severe may not be needed; but ready to instruct us by what is greater, if He be forced
so to do.

7. I know the glittering sword,3089 and the blade made drunk in heaven, bidden to slay,
to bring to naught, to make childless, and to spare neither flesh, nor marrow, nor bones. I
know Him, Who, though free from passion, meets us like a bear robbed of her whelps, like
a leopard in the way of the Assyrians,3090 not only those of that day, but if anyone now is
an Assyrian in wickedness: nor is it possible to escape the might and speed of His wrath
when He watches over our impieties, and His jealousy,3091 which knoweth to devour His
adversaries, pursues His enemies to the death.3092 I know the emptying, the making void,

Joel i. 10.

3082 Another. Either this is a wrong reading, or S. Gregory's memory fails him. The second quotation is also

from Joel.

Joel ii. 3.

3084 Deut. xxxii. 34; Jer. l. 25.

3085 Hos. vi. 6.

Ps. xviii. 8.

Ib. cv. 32.

Ib. lxxviii. 50.

Ezek. xxi. 9.

3090 Hos. xiii. 7, 8.

Isai. xxvi. 11 (LXX.).

3092 Hos. viii. 3.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

the making waste, the melting of the heart, and knocking of the knees together,3093 such
are the punishments of the ungodly. I do not dwell on the judgments to come, to which
indulgence in this world delivers us, as it is better to be punished and cleansed now than to
be transmitted to the torment to come, when it is the time of chastisement, not of cleansing. 
For as he who remembers God here is conqueror of death (as David3094 has most excellently
sung) so the departed have not in the grave confession and restoration; for God has confined
life and action to this world, and to the future the scrutiny of what has been done.

8. What shall we do in the day of visitation,3095 with which one of the Prophets terrifies
me, whether that of the righteous sentence of God against us, or that upon the mountains
and hills, of which we have heard, or whatever and whenever it may be, when He will reason
with us, and oppose us, and set before us3096 those bitter accusers, our sins, comparing our
wrongdoings with our benefits, and striking thought with thought, and scrutinising action
with action, and calling us to account for the image3097 which has been blurred and spoilt
by wickedness, till at last He leads us away self-convicted and self-condemned, no longer
able to say that we are being unjustly treated-a thought which is able even here sometimes
to console in their condemnation those who are suffering.

9. But then what advocate shall we have? What pretext? What false excuse? What
plausible artifice? What device contrary to the truth will impose upon the court, and rob
it of its right judgment, which places in the balance for us all, our entire life, action, word,
and thought, and weighs against the evil that which is better, until that which preponderates
wins the day, and the decision is given in favour of the main tendency; after which there is
no appeal, no higher court, no defence on the ground of subsequent conduct, no oil obtained
from the wise virgins, or from them that sell, for the lamps going out,3098 no repentance of
the rich man wasting away in the flame,3099 and begging for repentance for his friends, no
statute of limitations; but only that final and fearful judgment-seat, more just even than
fearful; or rather more fearful because it is also just; when the thrones are set and the Ancient
of days takes His seat,3100 and the books are opened, and the fiery stream comes forth, and
the light before Him, and the darkness prepared; and they that have done good shall go into

3093 Nahum ii. 10.

Ps. vi. 5 (LXX.).

Isai. x. 3.

Ps. l. 21.

3097 Gen. i. 26.

S. Matt. xxv. 8.

S. Luke xvi. 24.

3100 Dan. vii. 9.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

the resurrection of life,3101 now hid in Christ3102 and to be manifested hereafter with Him,
and they that have done evil, into the resurrection of judgment,3103 to which they who have
not believed have been condemned already by the word which judges them.3104 Some will
be welcomed by the unspeakable light and the vision of the holy and royal Trinity, Which
now shines upon them with greater brilliancy and purity and unites Itself wholly to the
whole soul, in which solely and beyond all else I take it that the kingdom of heaven consists. 
The others among other torments, but above and before them all must endure the being
outcast from God, and the shame of conscience which has no limit. But of these anon.

10. What are we to do now, my brethren, when crushed, cast down, and drunken but
not with strong drink nor with wine,3105 which excites and obfuscates but for a while, but
with the blow which the Lord has inflicted upon us, Who says, And thou, O heart, be stirred
and shaken,3106 and gives to the despisers the spirit of sorrow and deep sleep to drink:3107 
to whom He also says, See, ye despisers, behold, and wonder and perish?3108 How shall we
bear His convictions; or what reply shall we make, when He reproaches us not only with
the multitude of the benefits for which we have continued ungrateful, but also with His
chastisements, and reckons up the remedies with which we have refused to be healed? 
Calling us His children3109 indeed, but unworthy children, and His sons, but strange sons3110
who have stumbled from lameness out of their paths, in the trackless and rough ground. 
How and by what means could I have instructed you, and I have not done so? By gentler
measures? I have applied them. I passed by the blood drunk in Egypt from the wells and
rivers and all reservoirs of water3111 in the first plague: I passed over the next scourges, the
frogs, lice, and flies. I began with the flocks and the cattle and the sheep, the fifth plague,
and, sparing as yet the rational creatures, I struck the animals. You made light of the stroke,
and treated me with less reason and attention than the beasts who were struck. I withheld
from you the rain; one piece was rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not

S. John v. 29.

3102 Col. iii. 3.

S. John v. 29.

S. John iii. 18; xii. 48.

Isai. xxix. 9.

3106 Hab. ii. 16.

Ps. lx. 2, 3; Isai. xxix. 10.

3108 Hab. i. 5; Acts xiii. 41.

3109 Deut. xxxii. 5.

Ps. xviii. 46.

Exod. vii. 19.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

withered,3112 and ye said "We will brave it."3113 I brought the hail upon you, chastising
you with the opposite kind of blow, I uprooted your vineyards and shrubberies, and crops,
but I failed to shatter your wickedness.

11. Perchance He will say to me, who am not reformed even by blows, I know that thou
art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew,3114 the heedless is heedless and the lawless man
acts lawlessly,3115 naught is the heavenly correction, naught the scourges. The bellows are
burnt, the lead is consumed,3116 as I once reproached you by the mouth of Jeremiah, the
founder melted the silver in vain, your wickednesses are not melted away. Can ye abide my
wrath, saith the Lord. Has not My hand the power to inflict upon you other plagues also? 
There are still at My command the blains breaking forth from the ashes of the furnace,3117
by sprinkling which toward heaven, Moses, or any other minister of God's action, may
chastise Egypt with disease. There remain also the locusts, the darkness that may be felt,
and the plague which, last in order, was first in suffering and power, the destruction and
death of the firstborn, and, to escape this, and to turn aside the destroyer, it were better to
sprinkle the doorposts of our mind, contemplation and action, with the great and saving
token, with the blood of the new covenant, by being crucified and dying with Christ, that
we may both rise and be glorified and reign with Him both now and at His final appearing,
and not be broken and crushed, and made to lament, when the grievous destroyer smites
us all too late in this life of darkness, and destroys our firstborn, the offspring and results
of our life which we had dedicated to God.

12. Far be it from me that I should ever, among other chastisements, be thus reproached
by Him Who is good, but walks contrary to me in fury3118 because of my own contrariness: 
I have smitten you with blasting and mildew, and blight;3119 without result. The sword
from without3120 made you childless, yet have ye not returned unto Me, saith the Lord. 
May I not become the vine of the beloved, which after being planted and entrenched, and
made sure with a fence and tower and every means which was possible, when it ran wild
and bore thorns, was consequently despised, and had its tower broken down and its fence
taken away, and was not pruned nor digged, but was devoured and laid waste and trodden

3112 Amos iv. 7.

Jer. xviii. 12 (LXX.).

Isai. xlviii. 4.

Ib. xxi. 2 (LXX.).

Jer. vi. 29.

Exod. ix. 10.

Lev. xxvi. 27, 28.

Lev. xxvi. 1 (LXX.); Amos iv. 9.

3120 Deut. xxxii. 25.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

down by all!3121 This is what I feel I must say as to my fears, thus have I been pained by
this blow, and this, I will further tell you, is my prayer. We have sinned, we have done amiss,
and have dealt wickedly,3122 for we have forgotten Thy commandments and walked after
our own evil thought,3123 for we have behaved ourselves unworthily of the calling and gospel
of Thy Christ, and of His holy sufferings and humiliation for us; we have become a reproach
to Thy beloved, priest and people, we have erred together, we have all gone out of the way,
we have together become unprofitable, there is none that doeth judgment and justice, no
not one.3124 We have cut short Thy mercies and kindness and the bowels and compassion
of our God, by our wickedness and the perversity of our doings, in which we have turned
away. Thou art good, but we have done amiss; Thou art long-suffering, but we are worthy
of stripes; we acknowledge Thy goodness, though we are without understanding, we have
been scourged for but few of our faults; Thou art terrible, and who will resist Thee?3125 the
mountains will tremble before Thee; and who will strive against the might of Thine arm? 
If Thou shut the heaven, who will open it? And if Thou let loose Thy torrents, who will restrain them? It is a light thing in Thine eyes to make poor and to make rich, to make alive
and to kill, to strike and to heal, and Thy will is perfect action. Thou art angry, and we have
sinned,3126 says one of old, making confession; and it is now time for me to say the opposite,
"We have sinned, and Thou art angry:" therefore have we become a reproach to our
neighbours.3127 Thou didst turn Thy face from us, and we were filled with dishonour. But
stay, Lord, cease, Lord, forgive, Lord, deliver us not up for ever because of our iniquities,
and let not our chastisements be a warning for others, when we might learn wisdom from
the trials of others. Of whom? Of the nations which know Thee not, and kingdoms which
have not been subject to Thy power. But we are Thy people,3128 O Lord, the rod of Thine
inheritance; therefore correct us, but in goodness and not in Thine anger, lest Thou bring
us to nothingness3129 and contempt among all that dwell on the earth.

13. With these words I invoke mercy: and if it were possible to propitiate His wrath
with whole burnt offerings or sacrifices, I would not even have spared these. Do you also
yourselves imitate your trembling priest, you, my beloved children, sharers with me alike

Isai. v. 1.

3122 Dan. ix. 5.

Isai. lxv. 2.

Ps. xiv. 3.

Ib. lxxvi. 7.

Isai. lxiv. 5.

Ps. lxxix. 4.

Ib. 6, 13.

Jer. x. 24.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

of the Divine correction and loving-kindness. Possess your souls in tears, and stay His wrath
by amending your way of life. Sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly,3130 as blessed Joel
with us charges you: gather the elders, and the babes that suck the breasts, whose tender
age wins our pity, and is specially worthy of the loving-kindness of God. I know also what
he enjoins both upon me, the minister of God, and upon you, who have been thought worthy
of the same honour, that we should enter His house in sackcloth and lament night and day
between the porch and the altar, in piteous array, and with more piteous voices, crying aloud
without ceasing on behalf of ourselves and the people, sparing nothing, either toil or word,
which may propitiate God: saying "Spare, O Lord, Thy people, and give not Thine heritage
to reproach,"3131 and the rest of the prayer; surpassing the people in our sense of the affliction
as much as in our rank, instructing them in our own persons in compunction and correction
of wickedness, and in the consequent long-suffering of God, and cessation of the scourge.
14. Come then, all of you, my brethren, let us worship and fall down, and weep before
the Lord our Maker;3132 let us appoint a public mourning, in our various ages and families,
let us raise the voice of supplication; and let this, instead of the cry which He hates, enter
into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth. Let us anticipate His anger by confession;3133 let us
desire to see Him appeased, after He was wroth. Who knoweth, he says, if He will turn and
repent, and leave a blessing behind Him?3134 This I know certainly, I the sponsor of the
loving-kindness of God. And when He has laid aside that which is unnatural to Him, His
anger, He will betake Himself to that which is natural, His mercy. To the one He is forced
by us, to the other He is inclined. And if He is forced to strike, surely He will refrain, according to His Nature. Only let us have mercy on ourselves, and open a road for our Father's
righteous affections. Let us sow in tears, that we may reap in joy,3135 let us show ourselves
men of Nineveh, not of Sodom.3136 Let us amend our wickedness, lest we be consumed
with it; let us listen to the preaching of Jonah, lest we be overwhelmed by fire and brimstone,
and if we have departed from Sodom let us escape to the mountain, let us flee to Zoar, let
us enter it as the sun rises; let us not stay in all the plain, let us not look around us, lest we
be frozen into a pillar of salt, a really immortal pillar, to accuse the soul which returns to
wickedness.

Joel ii. 15.

Joel ii. 17.

Ps. xcv. 6.

Ib. xcv. 2 (LXX.).

Joel ii. 14.

Ps. cxxvi. 5.

3136 Gen. xix. 17, 23; Jonah iii. 5.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

15. Let us be assured that to do no wrong3137 is really superhuman, and belongs to God
alone. I say nothing about the Angels, that we may give no room for wrong feelings, nor
opportunity for harmful altercations. Our unhealed condition arises from our evil and unsubdued nature, and from the exercise of its powers. Our repentance when we sin, is a human
action, but an action which bespeaks a good man, belonging to that portion which is in the
way of salvation. For if even our dust contracts somewhat of wickedness, and the earthly
tabernacle presseth down the upward flight of the soul,3138 which at least was created to fly
upward, yet let the image be cleansed from filth, and raise aloft the flesh, its yoke-fellow,
lifting it on the wings of reason; and, what is better, let us neither need this cleansing, nor
have to be cleansed, by preserving our original dignity, to which we are hastening through
our training here, and let us not by the bitter taste of sin be banished from the tree of life: 
though it is better to turn again when we err, than to be free from correction when we
stumble. For whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth,3139 and a rebuke is a fatherly action;
while every soul which is unchastised, is unhealed. Is not then freedom from chastisement
a hard thing? But to fail to be corrected by the chastisement is still harder. One of the
prophets, speaking of Israel, whose heart was hard and uncircumcised, says, Lord, Thou
hast stricken them, but they have not grieved, Thou hast consumed them but they have refused to receive correction;3140 and again, The people turned not to Him that smiteth
them;3141 and Why is my people slidden back by a perpetual backsliding,3142 because of
which it will be utterly crushed and destroyed?

16. It is a fearful thing, my brethren, to fall into the hands of a living God,3143 and
fearful is the face of the Lord against them that do evil,3144 and abolishing wickedness with
utter destruction. Fearful is the ear of God, listening even to the voice of Abel speaking
through his silent blood. Fearful His feet, which overtake evildoing. Fearful also His filling
of the universe, so that it is impossible anywhere to escape the action of God,3145 not even
by flying up to heaven, or entering Hades, or by escaping to the far East, or concealing
ourselves in the depths and ends of the sea.3146 Nahum the Elkoshite was afraid before me,

To do no wrong. etc. Clémencet quotes this as an aphorism from Demosth. de Cor.

3138 Wisd. ix. 15.

Prov. iii. 12.

Jer. v. 3.

Isai. ix. 13.

Jer. viii. 5.

3143 Heb. x. 31.

Ps. xxxiv. 16.

Jer. xxiii. 24.

Ps. cxxxix. 7, 8.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

when he proclaimed the burden of Nineveh, God is jealous, and the Lord takes vengeance
in wrath upon His adversaries,3147 and uses such abundance of severity that no room is left
for further vengeance upon the wicked. For whenever I hear Isaiah threaten the people of
Sodom and rulers of Gomorrah,3148 and say Why will ye be smitten any more, adding sin
to sin?3149 I am almost filled with horror, and melted to tears. It is impossible, he says, to
find any blow to add to those which are past, because of your newly added sins; so completely
have you run through the whole, and exhausted every form of chastisement, ever calling
upon yourselves some new one by your wickedness. There is not a wound, nor bruise, nor
putrefying sore;3150 the plague affects the whole body and is incurable: for it is impossible
to apply a plaster, or ointment or bandages. I pass over the rest of the threatenings, that I
may not press upon you more heavily than your present plague.

17. Only let us recognise the purpose of the evil. Why have the crops withered, our
storehouses been emptied, the pastures of our flocks failed, the fruits of the earth been
withheld, and the plains been filled with shame instead of with fatness: why have valleys
lamented and not abounded in corn, the mountains not dropped sweetness, as they shall
do hereafter to the righteous, but been stript and dishonoured, and received on the contrary
the curse of Gilboa?3151 The whole earth has become as it was in the beginning, before it
was adorned with its beauties. Thou visitedst the earth, and madest it to drink3152-but
the visitation has been for evil, and the draught destructive. Alas! what a spectacle! Our
prolific crops reduced to stubble, the seed we sowed is recognised by scanty remains, and
our harvest, the approach of which we reckon from the number of the months, instead of
from the ripening corn, scarcely bears the firstfruits for the Lord. Such is the wealth of the
ungodly, such the harvest of the careless sower; as the ancient curse runs, to look for much,
and bring in little,3153 to sow and not reap, to plant and not press,3154 ten acres of vineyard
to yield one bath:3155 and to hear of fertile harvests in other lands, and be ourselves pressed
by famine. Why is this, and what is the cause of the breach? Let us not wait to be convicted
by others, let us be our own examiners. An important medicine for evil is confession, and
care to avoid stumbling. I will be first to do so, as I have made my report to my people from

3147 Nahum i. 1, 2.

Isai. i. 10.

Isai. i. 5 (LXX.).

Ib. i. 6.

2 Sam. i. 21.

Ps. lxv. 9.

3153 Hag. i. 9.

3154 Deut. xxviii. 39.

Isai. v. 10.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

on high, and performed the duty of a watcher.3156 For I did not conceal the coming of the
sword that I might save my own soul3157 and those of my hearers. So will I now announce
the disobedience of my people, making what is theirs my own, if I may perchance thus obtain
some tenderness and relief.

18. One of us has oppressed the poor, and wrested from him his portion of land, and
wrongly encroached upon his landmark by fraud or violence, and joined house to house,
and field to field, to rob his neighbour of something, and been eager to have no neighbour,
so as to dwell alone on the earth.3158 Another has defiled the land with usury and interest,
both gathering where he had not sowed and reaping where he had not strawed,3159 farming,
not the land, but the necessity of the needy. Another has robbed God,3160 the giver of all,
of the firstfruits of the barnfloor and winepress, showing himself at once thankless and
senseless, in neither giving thanks for what he has had, nor prudently providing, at least,
for the future. Another has had no pity on the widow and orphan, and not imparted his
bread and meagre nourishment to the needy, or rather to Christ, Who is nourished in the
persons of those who are nourished even in a slight degree; a man perhaps of much property
unexpectedly gained, for this is the most unjust of all, who finds his many barns too narrow
for him, filling some and emptying others, to build greater3161 ones for future crops, not
knowing that he is being snatched away with hopes unrealised, to give an account of his
riches and fancies, and proved to have been a bad steward of another's goods. Another has
turned aside the way of the meek,3162 and turned aside the just among the unjust; another
has hated him that reproveth in the gates,3163 and abhorred him that speaketh uprightly;3164
another has sacrificed to his net which catches much,3165 and keeping the spoil of the poor
in his house,3166 has either remembered not God, or remembered Him ill-by saying "Blessed
be the Lord, for we are rich,"3167 and wickedly supposed that he received these things from
Him by Whom he will be punished. For because of these things cometh the wrath of God

Ib. xxi. 6; lxii. 6; Habak. ii. 1.

Ezek. xxxiii. 3.

Isai. v. 8.

S. Matt. xxv. 26.

3160 Mal. iii. 8.

S. Luke xii. 18.

3162 Amos ii. 7.

Isai. xxix. 21.

3164 Amos v. 10.

3165 Habak. i. 16.

Isai. iii. 14.

Zech. xi. 5.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

upon the children of disobedience.3168 Because of these things the heaven is shut, or opened
for our punishment; and much more, if we do not repent, even when smitten, and draw
near to Him, Who approaches us through the powers of nature.

19. What shall be said to this by those of us who are buyers and sellers of corn, and
watch the hardships of the seasons, in order to grow prosperous, and luxuriate in the misfor
tunes of others, and acquire, not, like Joseph, the property of the Egyptians,3169 as a part of
a wide policy, (for he could both collect and supply corn duly, as he also could foresee the
famine, and provide against it afar off,) but the property of their fellow countrymen in an
illegal manner, for they say, "When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell, and the
sabbaths, that we may open our stores?"3170 And they corrupt justice with divers measures
and balances,3171 and draw upon themselves the ephah of lead.3172 What shall we say to
these things who know no limit to our getting, who worship gold and silver, as those of old
worshipped Baal, and Astarte and the abomination Chemosh?3173 Who give heed to the
brilliance of costly stones, and soft flowing garments, the prey of moths, and the plunder of
robbers and tyrants and thieves; who are proud of their multitude of slaves and animals,
and spread themselves over plains and mountains, with their possessions and gains and
schemes, like Solomon's horseleach3174 which cannot be satisfied, any more than the grave,
and the earth, and fire, and water; who seek for another world for their possession, and find
fault with the bounds of God, as too small for their insatiable cupidity? What of those who
sit on lofty thrones and raise the stage of government, with a brow loftier than that of the
theatre, taking no account of the God over all, and the height of the true kingdom that none
can approach unto, so as to rule their subjects as fellow-servants, as needing themselves no
less loving-kindness? Look also, I pray you, at those who stretch themselves upon beds of
ivory, whom the divine Amos fitly upbraids, who anoint themselves with the chief ointments,
and chant to the sound of instruments of music, and attach themselves to transitory things
as though they were stable, but have not grieved nor had compassion for the affliction of
Joseph;3175 though they ought to have been kind to those who had met with disaster before
them, and by mercy have obtained mercy; as the fir-tree should howl, because the cedar had
fallen,3176 and be instructed by their neighbours' chastisement, and be led by others' ills to

Eph. v. 6.

3169 Gen. xli. 39.

3170 Amos viii. 5.

Prov. xx. 10.

Zech. v. 8.

1 Kings xi. 33.

Prov. xxx. 15.

3175 Amos vi. 4-6.

Zech. xi. 2.

On His Father's Silence, Because of the Plague of Hail.

regulate their own lives, having the advantage of being saved by their predecessors' fate,
instead of being themselves a warning to others.

20. Join with us, thou divine and sacred person, in considering these questions, with
the store of experience, that source of wisdom, which thou hast gathered in thy long life. 
Herewith instruct thy people. Teach them to break their bread to the hungry, to gather together the poor that have no shelter, to cover their nakedness and not neglect those of the
same blood,3177 and now especially that we may gain a benefit from our need instead of
from abundance, a result which pleases God more than plentiful offerings and large gifts. 
After this, nay before it, show thyself, I pray, a Moses,3178 or Phinehas3179 to-day. Stand
on our behalf and make atonement, and let the plague be stayed, either by the spiritual sacrifice,3180 or by prayer and reasonable intercession.3181 Restrain the anger of the Lord by
thy mediation: avert any succeeding blows of the scourge. He knoweth to respect the hoar
hairs of a father interceding for his children. Intreat for our past wickedness: be our surety
for the future. Present a people purified by suffering and fear. Beg for bodily sustenance,
but beg rather for the angels' food that cometh down from heaven. So doing, thou wilt make
God to be our God, wilt conciliate heaven, wilt restore the former and latter rain:3182 the
Lord shall show loving-kindness3183 and our land shall yield her fruit;3184 our earthly land
its fruit which lasts for the day, and our frame, which is but dust, the fruit which is eternal,
which we shall store up in the heavenly winepresses by thy hands, who presentest both us
and ours in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be glory for evermore. Amen.

Isai. lviii. 7.

Exod. xxxii. 11.

Ps. cvi. 23, 30.

1 Pet. ii. 5.

3181 Rom. xii. 1.

Joel ii. 23.

Ps. lxxxv. 13.

Ib. lxvii. 6.

On the Death of His Father.

On the Death of His Father.

Oration XVIII.

On the Death of his Father.

ThisOration was delivered a.d. 374. S. Gregory the elder died early in that year, according
to the Greek Menaea on the 1st of January, though Clémencet and some others place his death
a few months later. His wife, S. Nonna, survived him, and was present to hear the Oration,
as was also S. Basil, who desired to honour one who had consecrated him to the Episcopate. 
The aged Saint, who died in his hundredth year, had originally belonged to a sect called
Hypsistarii. Our knowledge of the existence and tenets of this sect is due to this Oration3185
and to a few sentences in that of S. Greg. Nyssen. (c. Eunom. I. ed. 1615, p. 12), by whom they
are called Hypsistians. He was converted by the prayers, influence and example of his wife,
S. Nonna, and, soon after his baptism, consecrated Bishop of Nazianzus. He was eminent as
an able administrator, a devout Christian, an orthodox teacher, a steadfast Confessor of the
faith, a sympathetic Pastor, an affectionate father. In his life and work he was seconded by
his wife, and followed by his three children, Gregory, Gorgonia, and Caesarius, whose names
are all to be found upon the roll of the Saints.

Funeral Oration on His Father, in the Presence of S. Basil.

1. O man of God,3186 and faithful servant,3187 and steward of the mysteries of God,3188
and man of desires3189 of the Spirit:3190 for thus Scripture speaks of men advanced and
lofty, superior to visible things. I will call you also a God to Pharaoh3191 and all the Egyptian
and hostile power, and pillar and ground of the Church3192 and will of God3193 and light
in the world, holding forth the word of life,3194 and prop of the faith and resting place of
the Spirit. But why should I enumerate all the titles which your virtue, in its varied forms,
has won for and applied to you as your own?

3185 Cf. Orat. viii. § 4, note.

Josh. xiv. 6.

3187 Numb. xii. 7.

1 Cor. iv. 1.

3189 Dan. ix. 23 (LXX.).

3190 The first words are addressed to S. Basil, who was present.

Exod. vii. 1.

1 Tim. vii. 15.

Isai. lxii. 4. (LXX.).

Phil. ii. 16.

On the Death of His Father.

2. Tell me, however, whence do you come, what is your business, and what favour do
you bring us? Since I know that you are entirely moved with and by God, and for the benefit
of those who receive you. Are you come to inspect us, or to seek for the pastor, or to take
the oversight of the flock? You find us no longer in existence, but for the most part having
passed away with him, unable to bear with the place of our affliction, especially now that
we have lost our skilful steersman, our light of life, to whom we looked to direct our course
as the blazing beacon of salvation above us: he has departed with all his excellence, and all
the power of pastoral organization, which he had gathered in a long time, full of days and
wisdom, and crowned, to use the words of Solomon, with the hoary head of glory.3195 His
flock is desolate and downcast, filled, as you see, with despondency and dejection, no longer
reposing in the green pasture,3196 and reared up by the water of comfort, but seeking precipices, deserts and pits, in which it will be scattered and perish;3197 in despair of ever obtaining another wise pastor, absolutely persuaded that it cannot find such an one as he,
content if it be one who will not be far inferior.

3. There are, as I said, three causes to necessitate your presence, all of equal weight,
ourselves, the pastor, and the flock: come then, and according to the spirit of ministry which
is in you, assign to each its due, and guide your words in judgment, so that we may more
than ever marvel at your wisdom. And how will you guide them? First by bestowing seemly
praise upon his virtue, not only as a pure sepulchral tribute of speech to him who was pure,
but also to set forth to others his conduct and example as a mark of true piety. Then bestow
upon us some brief counsels concerning life and death, and the union and severance of body
and soul, and the two worlds, the one present but transitory, the other spiritually perceived
and abiding; and persuade us to despise that which is deceitful and disordered and uneven,
carrying us and being carried, like the waves, now up, now down; but to cling to that which
is firm and stable and divine and constant, free from all disturbance and confusion. For
this would lessen our pain because of friends departed before us, nay we should rejoice if
your words should carry us hence and set us on high, and hide distress of the present in the
future, and persuade us that we also are pressing on to a good Master, and that our home
is better than our pilgrimage; and that translation and removal thither is to us who are
tempest-tost here like a calm haven to men at sea; or as ease and relief from toil come to
men who, at the close of a long journey, escape the troubles of the wayfarer, so to those who
attain to the hostel yonder comes a better and more tolerable existence than that of those
who still tread the crooked and precipitous path of this life.

Prov. xvi. 31.

Ps. xxiii. 2.

Ezek. xxxiv. 14.

On the Death of His Father.

4. Thus might you console us; but what of the flock? Would you first promise the
oversight and leadership of yourself, a man under whose wings we all would gladly repose,
and for whose words we thirst more eagerly than men suffering from thirst for the purest
fountain? Secondly, persuade us that the good shepherd who laid down his life for the
sheep3198 has not even now left us; but is present, and tends and guides, and knows his own,
and is known of his own, and, though bodily invisible, is spiritually recognized, and defends
his flock against the wolves, and allows no one to climb over into the fold as a robber and
traitor; to pervert and steal away, by the voice of strangers, souls under the fair guidance of
the truth. Aye, I am well assured that his intercession is of more avail now than was his instruction in former days, since he is closer to God, now that he has shaken off his bodily
fetters, and freed his mind from the clay which obscured it, and holds intercourse naked
with the nakedness of the prime and purest Mind; being promoted, if it be not rash to say
so, to the rank and confidence of an angel. This, with your power of speech and spirit, you
will set forth and discuss better than I can sketch it. But in order that, through ignorance
of his excellences, your language may not fall very far short of his deserts, I will, from my
own knowledge of the departed, briefly draw an outline, and preliminary plan of an eulogy
to be handed to you, the illustrious artist of such subjects, for the details of the beauty of his
virtue to be filled in and transmitted to the ears and minds of all.

5. Leaving to the laws of panegyric the description of his country, his family, his nobility
of figure, his external magnificence, and the other subjects of human pride, I begin with
what is of most consequence and comes closest to ourselves. He sprang from a stock unrenowned, and not well suited for piety, for I am not ashamed of his origin, in my confidence
in the close of his life, one that was not planted in the house of God,3199 but far removed
and estranged, the combined product of two of the greatest opposites-Greek error and
legal imposture, some parts of each of which it escaped, of others it was compounded. For,
on the one side, they reject idols and sacrifices, but reverence fire and lights; on the other,
they observe the Sabbath and petty regulations as to certain meats, but despise circumcision. 
These lowly men call themselves Hypsistarii, and the Almighty is, so they say, the only object
of their worship. What was the result of this double tendency to impiety? I know not
whether to praise more highly the grace which called him, or his own purpose. However,
he so purged the eye of his mind from the humours3200 which obscured it, and ran towards
the truth with such speed that he endured the loss of his mother and his property for a while,
for the sake of his heavenly Father and the true inheritance: and submitted more readily to
this dishonour, than others to the greatest honours, and, most wonderful as this is, I wonder

S. John x. 11.

Ps. xcii. 13.

3200 Humours. This word is used Aristoph. Plut. 581, of the obscuring effect of old prejudices.

On the Death of His Father.

at it but little. Why? Because this glory is common to him with many others, and all must
come into the great net of God, and be caught by the words of the fishers, although some
are earlier, some later, enclosed by the Gospel. But what does especially in his life move my
wonder, it is needful for me to mention.

6. Even before he was of our fold, he was ours. His character made him one of us. For,
as many of our own are not with us, whose life alienates them from the common body, so,
many of those without are on our side, whose character anticipates their faith, and need
only the name of that which indeed they possess. My father was one of these, an alien shoot,
but inclined by his life towards us. He was so far advanced in self control, that he became
at once most beloved and most modest, two qualities difficult to combine. What greater
and more splendid testimony can there be to his justice than his exercise of a position second
to none in the state, without enriching himself by a single farthing, although he saw everyone
else casting the hands of Briareus upon the public funds, and swollen with ill-gotten gain? 
For thus do I term unrighteous wealth. Of his prudence this also is no slight proof, but in
the course of my speech further details will be given. It was as a reward3201 for such conduct,
I think, that he attained to the faith. How this came about, a matter too important to be
passed over, I would now set forth.

7. I have heard the Scripture say: Who can find a valiant woman?3202 and declare that
she is a divine gift, and that a good marriage is brought about by the Lord. Even those
without are of the same mind; if they say that a man can win no fairer prize than a good
wife, nor a worse one than her opposite.3203 But we can mention none who has been in
this respect more fortunate than he. For I think that, had anyone from the ends of the earth
and from every race of men attempted to bring about the best of marriages, he could not
have found a better or more harmonious one than this. For the most excellent of men and
of women were so united that their marriage was a union of virtue rather than of bodies: 
since, while they excelled all others, they could not excel each other, because in virtue they
were quite equally matched.

8. She indeed who was given to Adam as a help meet for him, because it was not good
for man to be alone,3204 instead of an assistant became an enemy, and instead of a yokefellow, an opponent, and beguiling the man by means of pleasure, estranged him through
the tree of knowledge from the tree of life. But she who was given by God to my father became not only, as is less wonderful, his assistant, but even his leader, drawing him on by
her influence in deed and word to the highest excellence; judging it best in all other respects

Reward. Faith is, as Clémencet remarks, "the gift of God"-but cf. S. John vii. 17.

Prov. xxxi. 10, 7.

3203 Hesiod: Works and Days, 700.

3204 Gen. ii. 18.

On the Death of His Father.

to be overruled by her husband according to the law of marriage, but not being ashamed,
in regard of piety, even to offer herself as his teacher. Admirable indeed as was this conduct
of hers, it was still more admirable that he should readily acquiesce in it. She is a woman
who while others have been honoured and extolled for natural and artificial beauty, has acknowledged but one kind of beauty, that of the soul, and the preservation, or the restoration
as far as possible, of the Divine image. Pigments and devices for adornment she has rejected
as worthy of women on the stage. The only genuine form of noble birth she recognized is
piety, and the knowledge of whence we are sprung and whither we are tending. The only
safe and inviolable form of wealth is, she considered, to strip oneself of wealth for God and
the poor, and especially for those of our own kin who are unfortunate; and such help only
as is necessary, she held to be rather a reminder, than a relief of their distress, while a more
liberal beneficence brings stable honour and most perfect consolation. Some women have
excelled in thrifty management, others in piety, while she, difficult as it is to unite the two
virtues, has surpassed all in both of them, both by her eminence in each, and by the fact that
she alone has combined them together. To as great a degree has she, by her care and skill,
secured the prosperity of her household, according to the injunctions and laws of Solomon
as to the valiant woman, as if she had had no knowledge of piety; and she applied herself to
God and Divine things as closely as if absolutely released from household cares, allowing
neither branch of her duty to interfere with the other, but rather making each of them support
the other.

9. What time or place for prayer ever escaped her? To this she was drawn before all
other things in the day; or rather, who had such hope of receiving an immediate answer to
her requests? Who paid such reverence to the hand and countenance of the priests? Or
honoured all kinds of philosophy? Who reduced the flesh by more constant fast and vigil? 
Or stood like a pillar at the night long and daily psalmody? Who had a greater love for virginity, though patient of the marriage bond herself? Who was a better patron of the orphan
and the widow? Who aided as much in the alleviation of the misfortunes of the mourner? 
These things, small as they are, and perhaps contemptible in the eyes of some, because not
easily attainable by most people (for that which is unattainable comes, through envy, to be
thought not even credible), are in my eyes most honourable, since they were the discoveries
of her faith and the undertakings of her spiritual fervour. So also in the holy assemblies, or
places, her voice was never to be heard except3205 in the necessary responses of the service.
10. And if it was a great thing for the altar never to have had an iron tool lifted upon
it,3206 and that no chisel should be seen or heard, with greater reason, since everything
dedicated to God ought to be natural and free from artificiality, it was also surely a great

Except, etc. Lit., "except the necessary and mystical (i.e., liturgical) [words]."

3206 Deut. xxvii. 5.

On the Death of His Father.

thing that she reverenced the sanctuary by her silence; that she never turned her back to the
venerable table, nor spat upon the divine pavement; that she never grasped the hand or
kissed the lips of any heathen woman, however honourable in other respects, or closely related
she might be; nor would she ever share the salt, I say not willingly but even under compulsion,
of those who came from the profane and unholy table; nor could she bear, against the law
of conscience, to pass by or look upon a polluted house; nor to have her ears or tongue,
which had received and uttered divine things, defiled by Grecian tales or theatrical songs,
on the ground that what is unholy is unbecoming to holy things; and what is still more
wonderful, she never so far yielded to the external signs of grief, although greatly moved
even by the misfortunes of strangers, as to allow a sound of woe to burst forth before the
Eucharist, or a tear to fall from the eye mystically sealed, or any trace of mourning to be left
on the occasion of a festival, however frequent her own sorrows might be; inasmuch as the
God-loving soul should subject every human experience to the things of God.

11. I pass by in silence what is still more ineffable, of which God is witness, and those
of the faithful handmaidens to whom she has confided such things. That which concerns
myself is perhaps undeserving of mention, since I have proved unworthy of the hope cherished in regard to me: yet it was on her part a great undertaking to promise me to God before
my birth, with no fear of the future, and to dedicate me immediately after I was born. 
Through God's goodness has it been that she has not utterly failed in her prayer, and that
the auspicious sacrifice was not rejected. Some of these things were already in existence,
others were in the future, growing up by means of gradual additions. And as the sun which
most pleasantly casts its morning rays, becomes at midday hotter and more brilliant, so also
did she, who from the first gave no slight evidence of piety, shine forth at last with fuller
light. Then indeed he, who had established her in his house, had at home no slight spur to
piety, possessed, by her origin and descent, of the love of God and Christ, and having received
virtue as her patrimony; not, as he had been, cut out of the wild olive and grafted into the
good olive, yet unable to bear, in the excess of her faith, to be unequally yoked; for, though
surpassing all others in endurance and fortitude, she could not brook this, the being but
half united to God, because of the estrangement of him who was a part of herself, and the
failure to add to the bodily union, a close connexion in the spirit: on this account, she fell
before God night and day, entreating for the salvation of her head with many fastings and
tears, and assiduously devoting herself to her husband, and influencing him in many ways,
by means of reproaches, admonitions, attentions, estrangements, and above all by her own
character with its fervour for piety, by which the soul is specially prevailed upon and softened,
and willingly submits to virtuous pressure. The drop3207 of water constantly striking the
rock was destined to hollow it, and at length attain its longing, as the sequel shows.

The drop. A familiar proverb. Choerilus, 9.

On the Death of His Father.

12. These were the objects of her prayers and hopes, in the fervour of faith rather than
of youth. Indeed, none was as confident of things present as she of things hoped for, from
her experience of the generosity of God. For the salvation of my father there was a concurrence of the gradual conviction3208 of his reason, and the vision of dreams which God often
bestows upon a soul worthy of salvation. What was the vision? This is to me the most
pleasing part of the story. He thought that he was singing, as he had never done before,
though his wife was frequent in her supplications and prayers, this verse from the psalms
of holy David: I was glad when they said unto me, we will go into the house of the Lord.3209 
The psalm was a strange one to him, and along with its words the desire came to him. As
soon as she heard it, having thus obtained her prayer, she seized the opportunity, replying
that the vision would bring the greatest pleasure, if accompanied by its fulfilment, and,
manifesting by her joy the greatness of the benefit, she urged forward his salvation, before
anything could intervene to hinder the call, and dissipate the object of her longing. At that
very time it happened that a number of Bishops were hastening to Nicaea, to oppose the
madness of Arius, since the wickedness of dividing the Godhead had just arisen; so my
father yielded himself to God and to the heralds of the truth, and confessed his desire, and
requested from them the common salvation, one of them being the celebrated Leontius, at
that time our own metropolitan. It would be a great wrong to grace, were I to pass by in
silence the wonder which then was bestowed upon him by grace. The witnesses of the
wonder3210 are not few. The teachers of accuracy were spiritually at fault, and the grace
was a forecast of the future, and the formula of the priesthood was mingled with the admission of the catechumen. O involuntary initiation! bending his knee, he received the form
of admission to the state of a catechumen in such wise, that many, not only of the highest,
but even of the lowest, intellect, prophesied the future, being assured by no indistinct signs
of what was to be.

13. After a short interval, wonder succeeded wonder. I will commend the account of
it to the ears of the faithful, for to profane minds nothing that is good is trustworthy. He
was approaching that regeneration by water and the Spirit, by which we confess to God the
formation and completion of the Christlike man, and the transformation and reformation
from the earthy to the Spirit. He was approaching the laver with warm desire and bright
hope, after all the purgation possible, and a far greater purification of soul and body than
that of the men who were to receive the tables from Moses. Their purification extended

3208 Conviction. Lit., "healing."

Ps. cxxii. 1.

3210 The wonder. S. Gregory the elder ought, according to the rite of admission to the ranks of the Catechu-

mens, to have remained standing, and in that position have had his ears anointed. He fell upon his knees and

the Bishop, in forgetfulness, pronounced over him the form of ordination to the Priesthood.

On the Death of His Father.

only to their dress, and a slight restriction of the belly, and a temporary continence.3211 
The whole of his past life had been a preparation for the enlightenment, and a preliminary
purification making sure the gift, in order that perfection might be entrusted to purity, and
that the blessing might incur no risk in a soul which was confident in its possession of the
grace. And as he was ascending out of the water, there flashed around him a light and a
glory worthy of the disposition with which he approached the gift of faith;3212 this was
manifest even to some others, who for the time concealed the wonder, from fear of speaking
of a sight which each one thought had been only his own, but shortly afterwards communicated it to one another. To the baptiser3213 and initiator, however, it was so clear and visible,
that he could not even hold back the mystery, but publicly cried out that he was anointing
with the Spirit his own successor.

14. Nor indeed would anyone disbelieve this who has heard and knows that Moses,
when little in the eyes of men, and not yet of any account, was called from the bush which
burned but was not consumed, or rather by Him who appeared in the bush,3214 and was
encouraged by that first wonder: Moses, I say, for whom the sea was divided,3215 and manna
rained down,3216 and the rock poured out a fountain,3217 and the pillar of fire and cloud
led the way in turn, and the stretching out of his hands gained a victory, and the representation of the cross overcame tens of thousands. Isaiah, again, who beheld the glory of the
Seraphim,3218 and after him Jeremiah, who was entrusted with great power against nations
and kings;3219 the one heard the divine voice and was cleansed by a live coal for his prophetic office, and the other was known before his formation and sanctified before his birth. 
Paul, also, while yet a persecutor, who became the great herald of the truth and teacher of
the Gentiles in faith,3220 was surrounded by a light3221 and acknowledged Him whom he

Exod. xix. 10, 15.

The gift of faith. One of the questions in some ancient rites of administering Holy Baptism was, "What

seekest thou of the Church?" to which the answer was "Faith."

The baptiser. The Bishop of Nazianzus-not Leontius of Caesarea, who had much to do with Gregory's

instruction and had, possibly, admitted him to the order of Catechumens.

Exod. iii. 4.

Ib. xiv. 22.

Ib. xvi. 4.

Ib. xvii. 6.

Isai. vi. 1 et seq.

Jer. i. 10.

1 Tim. ii. 7; 2 Tim. i. 11.

3221 Acts ix. 3.

On the Death of His Father.

was persecuting, and was entrusted with his great ministry, and filled every ear and mind
with the gospel.

15. Why need I count up all those who have been called to Himself by God and associated with such wonders as confirmed him in his piety? Nor was it the case that after such
and so incredible and startling beginnings, any of the former things was put to shame by
his subsequent conduct, as happens with those who very soon acquire a distaste for what is
good, and so neglect all further progress, if they do not utterly relapse into vice. This cannot
be said of him, for he was most consistent with himself and his early days, and kept in harmony his life before the priesthood with its excellence, and his life after it with what had
gone before, since it would have been unbecoming to begin in one way and end in another,
or to advance to a different end from that which he had in view at first. He was next entrusted
with the priesthood, not with the facility and disorder of the present day, but after a brief
interval, in order to add to his own cleansing the skill and power to cleanse others; for this
is the law of spiritual sequence. And when he had been entrusted with it, the grace was the
more glorified, being really the grace of God, and not of men, and not, as the preacher3222
says, an independent impulse and purpose3223 of spirit.

16. He received a woodland and rustic church, the pastoral care and oversight of which
had not been bestowed from a distance, but it had been cared for by one of his predecessors
of admirable and angelic disposition, and a more simple man than our present rulers of the
people; but, after he had been speedily taken to God, it had, in consequence of the loss of
its leader, for the most part grown careless and run wild; accordingly, he at first strove
without harshness to soften the habits of the people, both by words of pastoral knowledge,
and by setting himself before them as an example, like a spiritual statue, polished into the
beauty of all excellent conduct. He next, by constant meditation on the divine words, though
a late student of such matters, gathered together so much wisdom within a short time that
he was in no wise excelled by those who had spent the greatest toil upon them, and received
this special grace from God, that he became the father and teacher of orthodoxy-not, like
our modern wise men, yielding to the spirit of the age, nor defending our faith by indefinite
and sophistical language, as if they had no fixity of faith, or were adulterating the truth; but,
he was more pious than those who possessed rhetorical power, more skilled in rhetoric than
those who were upright in mind; or rather, while he took the second place as an orator, he
surpassed all in piety. He acknowledged One God worshipped in Trinity, and Three, Who

Eccles. i. 17; LXX.

Purpose, etc. A.V. "Vexation of Spirit." R.V. "Striving after wind."

On the Death of His Father.

are united in One Godhead; neither Sabellianising3224 as to the One, nor Arianising as to
the Three; either by contracting and so atheistically annihilating the Godhead, or by tearing
It asunder by distinctions of unequal greatness or nature. For, seeing that Its every quality
is incomprehensible and beyond the power of our intellect, how can we either perceive or
express by definition on such a subject, that which is beyond our ken? How can the immeasurable be measured, and the Godhead be reduced to the condition of finite things, and
measured by degrees3225 of greater or less?

17. What else must we say of this great man of God, the true Divine, under the influence,
in regard to these subjects, of the Holy Ghost, but that through his perception of these points,
he, like the great Noah, the father of this second world, made this church to be called the
new Jerusalem, and a second ark borne up upon the waters; since it both surmounted the
deluge of souls, and the insults of the heretics, and excelled all others in reputation no less
than it fell behind them in numbers; and has had the same fortune as the sacred Bethlehem,
which can without contradiction be at once said to be a little city and the metropolis of the
world, since it is the nurse and mother of Christ, Who both made and overcame the world.
18. To give a proof of what I say. When a tumult of the over-zealous part of the Church
was raised against us, and we had been decoyed by a document3226 and artful terms into
association with evil, he alone was believed to have an unwounded mind, and a soul unstained
by ink, even when he had been imposed upon in his simplicity, and failed from his guilelessness of soul to be on his guard against guile. He it was alone, or rather first of all, who by
his zeal for piety reconciled to himself and the rest of the church the faction opposed to us,
which was the last to leave us, the first to return, owing to both their reverence for the man
and the purity of his doctrine, so that the serious storm in the churches was allayed, and the
hurricane reduced to a breeze under the influence of his prayers and admonitions; while, if
I may make a boastful remark, I was his partner3227 in piety and activity, aiding him in every
effort on behalf of what is good, accompanying and running beside him, and being permitted
on this occasion to contribute a very great share of the toil. Here my account of these matters,
which is a little premature, must come to an end.

Sabellianising, etc. Cf. II. 36, 37 (notes).

3225 Degrees. The heretics asserted that the Father, Son and Holy Ghost were arranged in this order according

to a real difference in rank.

3226 A document. Benoît (I. p. 179) gives reasons for believing that this was the creed of the council of Antioch,

a.d. 363-which accepted the Creed of Nicaea, but explained it in terms capable of a semiarian construction. 

The "over zealous part" were the monks.

Partner. S. Gregory had a considerable share in the explanations which made clear his father's real or-

thodoxy, and re-established peace. Orat. vi. was pronounced by him on the occasion.

On the Death of His Father.

19. Who could enumerate the full tale of his excellences, or, if he wished to pass by
most of them, discover without difficulty what can be omitted? For each trait, as it occurs
to the mind, seems superior to what has gone before; it takes possession of me, and I feel
more at a loss to know what I ought to pass by, than other panegyrists are as to what they
ought to say. So that the abundance of material is to some extent a hindrance to me, and
my mind is itself put to the test in its efforts to test his qualities, and its inability, where all
are equal, to find one which surpasses the rest. So that, just as when we see a pebble falling
into still water, it becomes the centre and starting-point of circle after circle, each by its
continuous agitation breaking up that which lies outside of it; this is exactly the case with
myself. For as soon as one thing enters my mind, another follows and displaces it; and I am
wearied out in making a choice, as what I have already grasped is ever retiring in favour of
that which follows in its train.

20. Who was more anxious than he for the common weal? Who more wise in domestic
affairs, since God, who orders all things in due variation, assigned to him a house and suitable
fortune? Who was more sympathetic in mind, more bounteous in hand, towards the poor,
that most dishonoured portion of the nature to which equal honour is due? For he actually
treated his own property as if it were another's, of which he was but the steward, relieving
poverty as far as he could, and expending not only his superfluities but his necessities-a
manifest proof of love for the poor, giving a portion, not only to seven, according to the
injunction of Solomon,3228 but if an eighth came forward, not even in his case being niggardly, but more pleased to dispose of his wealth than we know others are to acquire it;
taking away the yoke and election (which means, as I think, all meanness in testing as to
whether the recipient is worthy or not) and word of murmuring3229 in benevolence. This
is what most men do: they give indeed, but without that readiness, which is a greater and
more perfect thing than the mere offering. For he thought it much better3230 to be generous
even to the undeserving for the sake of the deserving, than from fear of the undeserving to
deprive those who were deserving. And this seems to be the duty of casting our bread upon
the waters,3231 since it will not be swept away or perish in the eyes of the just Investigator,
but will arrive yonder where all that is ours is laid up, and will meet with us in due time,
even though we think it not.

21. But what is best and greatest of all, his magnanimity was accompanied by freedom
from ambition. Its extent and character I will proceed to show. In considering their wealth
to be common to all, and in liberality in bestowing it, he and his consort rivalled each other

Eccles. xi. 2.

Isai. lviii. 9. (LXX.).

Better. Clémencet compares Dem. De Corona.

Eccles. xi. 1.

On the Death of His Father.

in their struggles after excellence; but he intrusted the greater part of this bounty to her
hand, as being a most excellent and trusty steward of such matters. What a woman she is? 
Not even the Atlantic Ocean, or if there be a greater one, could meet her drafts upon it. So
great and so boundless is her love of liberality. In the contrary sense she has rivalled the
horse-leech3232 of Solomon, by her insatiable longing for progress, overcoming the tendency
to backsliding, and unable to satisfy her zeal for benevolence. She not only considered all
the property which they originally possessed, and what accrued to them later, as unable to
suffice her own longing, but she would, as I have often heard her say, have gladly sold herself
and her children into slavery, had there been any means of doing so, to expend the proceeds
upon the poor. Thus entirely did she give the rein to her generosity. This is, I imagine, far
more convincing than any instance of it could be. Magnanimity in regard to money may
be found without difficulty in the case of others, whether it be dissipated in the public
rivalries of the state, or lent to God through the poor, the only mode of treasuring it up for
those who spend it: but it is not easy to discover a man who has renounced the consequent
reputation. For it is desire for reputation which supplies to most men their readiness to
spend. And where the bounty must be secret, there the disposition to it is less keen.

22. So bounteous was his hand-further details I leave to those who knew him, so that
if anything of the kind is borne witness to in regard to myself, it proceeds from that fountain,
and is a portion of that stream. Who was more under the Divine guidance in admitting
men to the sanctuary,3233 or in resenting dishonour done to it, or in cleansing the holy table
with awe from the unholy? Who with such unbiassed judgment, and with the scales of
justice, either decided a suit, or hated vice, or honoured virtue, or promoted the most excellent? Who was so compassionate for the sinner, or sympathetic towards those who were
running well? Who better knew the right time for using the rod and the staff,3234 yet relied
most upon the staff? Whose eyes were more upon the faithful in the land,3235 especially
upon those who, in the monastic and unwedded life, have despised the earth and the things
of earth?

23. Who did more to rebuke pride and foster lowliness? And that in no assumed or
external way, as most of those who now make profession of virtue, and are in appearance
as elegant as the most mindless women, who, for lack of beauty of their own, take refuge in
pigments, and are, if I may say so, splendidly made up, uncomely in their comeliness, and
more ugly than they originally were. For his lowliness was no matter of dress, but of spiritual disposition: nor was it expressed by a bent neck, or lowered voice, or downcast look,

Prov. xxx. 15.

To the Sanctuary, i.e., To the Priesthood.

Ps. xxiii. 5. Rod and Staff, i.e., Punishment and support.

Ps. ci. 6.

On the Death of His Father.

or length of beard, or close-shaven head, or measured gait, which can be adopted for a while,
but are very quickly exposed, for nothing which is affected can be permanent. No! he was
ever most lofty in life, most lowly in mind; inaccessible in virtue, most accessible in intercourse. His dress had in it nothing remarkable, avoiding equally magnificence and sordidness, while his internal brilliancy was supereminent. The disease and insatiability of the
belly, he, if anyone, held in check, but without ostentation; so that he might be kept down
without being puffed up, from having encouraged a new vice by his pursuit of reputation. 
For he held that doing and saying everything by which fame among externs might be won,
is the characteristic of the politician, whose chief happiness is found in the present life: but
that the spiritual and Christian man should look to one object alone, his salvation, and think
much of what may contribute to this, but detest as of no value what does not; and accordingly
despise what is visible, but be occupied with interior perfection alone, and estimate most
highly whatever promotes his own improvement, and attracts others through himself to
that which is supremely good.

24. But what was most excellent and most characteristic, though least generally recognized, was his simplicity, and freedom from guile and resentment. For among men of ancient
and modern days, each is supposed to have had some special success, as each chanced to
have received from God some particular virtue: Job unconquered patience in misfortune,3236
Moses3237 and David3238 meekness, Samuel prophecy, seeing into the future,3239 Phineas
zeal,3240 for which he has a name, Peter and Paul eagerness in preaching,3241 the sons of
Zebedee magniloquence, whence also they were entitled Sons of thunder.3242 But why
should I enumerate them all, speaking as I do among those who know this? Now the specially
distinguishing mark of Stephen and of my father was the absence of malice. For not even
when in peril did Stephen hate his assailants, but was stoned while praying for those who
were stoning him3243 as a disciple of Christ, on Whose behalf he was allowed to suffer, and
so, in his long-suffering, bearing for God a nobler fruit than his death: my father, in allowing
no interval between assault and forgiveness, so that he was almost robbed of pain itself by
the speed of pardon.

Job i. 21.

3237 Numb. xii. 3.

Ps. cxxxii. 1 (LXX.).

1 Sam. ix. 9.

3240 Numb. xxxv. 7.

3241 Gal. ii. 7.

S. Mark iii. 17.

3243 Acts vii. 59.

On the Death of His Father.

25. We both believe in and hear of the dregs3244 of the anger of God, the residuum of
His dealings with those who deserve it: For the Lord is a God of vengeance.3245 For although
He is disposed by His kindness to gentleness rather than severity, yet He does not absolutely
pardon sinners, lest they should be made worse by His goodness. Yet my father kept no
grudge against those who provoked him, indeed he was absolutely uninfluenced by anger,
although in spiritual things exceedingly overcome by zeal: except when he had been prepared
and armed and set in hostile array against that which was advancing to injure him. So that
this sweet disposition of his would not, as the saying goes, have been stirred by tens of
thousands. For the wrath which he had was not like that of the serpent,3246 smouldering
within, ready to defend itself, eager to burst forth, and longing to strike back at once on
being disturbed; but like the sting of the bee, which does not bring death with its stroke;
while his kindness was superhuman. The wheel and scourge were often threatened, and
those who could apply them stood near; and the danger ended in being pinched on the ear,
patted on the face, or buffeted on the temple: thus he mitigated the threat. His dress and
sandals were dragged off, and the scoundrel was felled to the ground: then his anger was
directed not against his assailant, but against his eager succourer, as a minister of evil. How
could anyone be more conclusively proved to be good, and worthy to offer the gifts to God? 
For often, instead of being himself roused, he made excuses for the man who assailed him,
blushing for his faults as if they had been his own.

26. The dew would more easily resist the morning rays of the sun, than any remains of
anger continue in him; but as soon as he had spoken, his indignation departed with his
words, leaving behind only his love for what is good, and never outlasting the sun; nor did
he cherish anger which destroys even the prudent, or show any bodily trace of vice within,
nay, even when roused, he preserved calmness. The result of this was most unusual, not
that he was the only one to give rebuke, but the only one to be both loved and admired by
those whom he reproved, from the victory which his goodness gained over warmth of feeling;
and it was felt to be more serviceable to be punished by a just man than besmeared by a bad
one, for in one case the severity becomes pleasant for its utility, in the other the kindliness
is suspected because of the evil of the man's character. But though his soul and character
were so simple and divine, his piety nevertheless inspired the insolent with awe: or rather,
the cause of their respect was the simplicity which they despised. For it was impossible to
him to utter either prayer or curse without the immediate bestowal of permanent blessing
or transient pain. The one proceeded from his inmost soul, the other merely rested upon
his lips as a paternal reproof. Many indeed of those who had injured him incurred neither

3244 Dregs. Cf. Orat. xvi. 4.

Ps. lxxv. 8; xciv. 1.

Ib. lviii. 4. (LXX.).

On the Death of His Father.

lingering requital nor, as the poet3247 says, "vengeance which dogs men's steps;" but at the
very moment of their passion they were struck and converted, came forward, knelt before
him, and were pardoned, going away gloriously vanquished, and amended both by the
chastisement and the forgiveness. Indeed, a forgiving spirit often has great saving power,
checking the wrongdoer by the sense of shame, and bringing him back from fear to love, a
far more secure state of mind. In chastisement some were tossed by oxen oppressed by the
yoke, which suddenly attacked them, though they had never done anything of the kind before;
others were thrown and trampled upon by most obedient and quiet horses; others seized
by intolerable fevers, and apparitions of their daring deeds; others being punished in different
ways, and learning obedience from the things which they suffered.

27. Such and so remarkable being his gentleness, did he yield the palm to others in industry and practical virtue? By no means. Gentle as he was, he possessed, if any one did,
an energy corresponding to his gentleness. For although, for the most part, the two virtues
of benevolence and severity are at variance and opposed to each other, the one being gentle
but without practical qualities, the other practical but unsympathetic, in his case there was
a wonderful combination of the two, his action being as energetic as that of a severe man,
but combined with gentleness; while his readiness to yield seemed unpractical but was accompanied with energy, in his patronage, his freedom of speech, and every kind of official
duty. He united the wisdom of the serpent, in regard to evil, with the harmlessness of the
dove, in regard to good, neither allowing the wisdom to degenerate into knavery, nor the
simplicity into silliness, but as far as in him lay, he combined the two in one perfect form
of virtue. Such being his birth, such his exercise of the priestly office, such the reputation
which he won at the hands of all, what wonder if he was thought worthy of the miracles by
which God establishes true religion?

28. One of the wonders which concern him was that he suffered from sickness and
bodily pain. But what wonder is it for even holy men to be distressed, either for the
cleansing of their clay, slight though it may be, or a touchstone of virtue and test of philosophy, or for the education of the weaker, who learn from their example to be patient instead
of giving way under their misfortunes? Well, he was sick, the time was the holy and illustrious
Easter, the queen of days, the brilliant night which dissipates the darkness of sin, upon which
with abundant light we keep the feast of our salvation, putting ourselves to death along with
the Light once put to death for us, and rising again with Him who rose. This was the time
of his sufferings. Of what kind they were, I will briefly explain. His whole frame was on
fire with an excessive, burning fever, his strength had failed, he was unable to take food, his
sleep had departed from him, he was in the greatest distress, and agitated by palpitations. 
Within his mouth, the palate and the whole of the upper surface was so completely and

The poet. Pindar.

On the Death of His Father.

painfully ulcerated, that it was difficult and dangerous to swallow even water. The skill of
physicians, the prayers, most earnest though they were, of his friends, and every possible
attention were alike of no avail. He himself in this desperate condition, while his breath
came short and fast, had no perception of present things, but was entirely absent, immersed
in the objects he had long desired, now made ready for him. We were in the temple, mingling
supplications with the sacred rites, for, in despair of all others, we had betaken ourselves to
the Great Physician, to the power of that night, and to the last succour, with the intention,
shall I say, of keeping a feast, or of mourning; of holding festival, or paying funeral honours
to one no longer here? O those tears! which were shed at that time by all the people. O
voices, and cries, and hymns blended with the psalmody! From the temple they sought the
priest, from the sacred rite the celebrant, from God their worthy ruler, with my Miriam3248
to lead them and strike the timbrel3249 not of triumph, but of supplication; learning then
for the first time to be put to shame by misfortune, and calling at once upon the people and
upon God; upon the former to sympathize with her distress, and to be lavish of their tears,
upon the latter, to listen to her petitions, as, with the inventive genius of suffering, she rehearsed before Him all His wonders of old time.

29. What then was the response of Him who was the God of that night and of the sick
man? A shudder comes over me as I proceed with my story. And though you, my hearers,
may shudder, do not disbelieve: for that would be impious, when I am the speaker, and in
reference to him. The time of the mystery was come, and the reverend station and order,
when silence is kept for the solemn rites; and then he was raised up by Him who quickeneth
the dead, and by the holy night. At first he moved slightly, then more decidedly; then in a
feeble and indistinct voice he called by name one of the servants who was in attendance
upon him, and bade him come, and bring his clothes, and support him with his hand. He
came in alarm, and gladly waited upon him, while he, leaning upon his hand as upon a staff,
imitates Moses upon the mount, arranges his feeble hands in prayer, and in union with, or
on behalf of,3250 his people eagerly celebrates the mysteries, in such few words as his strength
allowed, but, as it seems to me, with a most perfect intention. What a miracle! In the
sanctuary without a sanctuary, sacrificing without an altar, a priest far from the sacred rites: 
yet all these were present to him in the power of the spirit, recognised by him, though unseen

3248 My Miriam. S. Nonna.

Exod. xv. 20.

3250 On behalf of, or perhaps "at the head of." The passage does not mean that he actually celebrated the

Holy Mysteries, but that he used some of the prayers of the service, and united himself in intention with the

service being at the time performed in the church, and invoked the Divine blessing upon his people in his absence.

On the Death of His Father.

by those who were there. Then, after adding the customary words of thanksgiving, and after
blessing the people, he retired again to his bed, and after taking a little food, and enjoying
a sleep, he recalled his spirit, and, his health being gradually recovered, on the new day3251
of the feast, as we call the first Sunday after the festival of the Resurrection, he entered the
temple and inaugurated his life which had been preserved, with the full complement of
clergy, and offered the sacrifice of thanksgiving. To me this seems no less remarkable than
the miracle in the case of Hezekiah,3252 who was glorified by God in his sickness and prayers
with an extension of life, and this was signified by the return of the shadow of the degrees,3253
according to the request of the king who was restored, whom God honoured at once by the
favour and the sign, assuring him of the extension of his days by the extension of the day.
30. The same miracle occurred in the case of my mother not long afterwards. I do not
think it would be proper to pass by this either: for we shall both pay the meed of honour
which is due to her, if to anyone at all, and gratify him, by her being associated with him in
our recital. She, who had always been strong and vigorous and free from disease all her life,
was herself attacked by sickness. In consequence of much distress, not to prolong my story,
caused above all by inability to eat, her life was for many days in danger, and no remedy for
the disease could be found. How did God sustain her? Not by raining down manna, as for
Israel of old3254 or opening the rock, in order to give drink to His thirsting people,3255 or
feasting her by means of ravens, as Elijah,3256 or feeding her by a prophet carried through
the air, as He did to Daniel when a-hungered in the den.3257 But how? She thought she
saw me, who was her favourite, for not even in her dreams did she prefer any other of us,
coming up to her suddenly at night, with a basket of pure white loaves, which I blessed and
crossed as I was wont to do, and then fed and strengthened her, and she became stronger. 
The nocturnal vision was a real action. For, in consequence, she became more herself and
of better hope, as is manifest by a clear and evident token. Next morning, when I paid her
an early visit, I saw at once that she was brighter, and when I asked, as usual, what kind of
a night she had passed, and if she wished for anything, she replied, "My child, you most
readily and kindly fed me, and then you ask how I am. I am very well and at ease." Her
maids too made signs to me to offer no resistance, and to accept her answer at once, lest she

The new day. On this feast (in another year) Orat. xliv. was preached.

2 Kings xx. 1 et seq.

Isai. xxxviii. 8.

Exod. xvi. 14; xvii. 6.

Ps. lxxviii. 24, 15.

1 Kings xvii. 6.

3257 Dan. xiv. 33 (sc. Hist. of Bel. v. 33).

On the Death of His Father.

should be thrown back into despondency, if the truth were laid bare. I will add one more
instance common to them both.

31. I was on a voyage from Alexandria to Greece over the Parthenian Sea. The voyage
was quite unseasonable, undertaken in an Aeginetan vessel, under the impulse of eager desire;
for what specially induced me was that I had fallen in with a crew who were well known to
me. After making some way on the voyage, a terrible storm came upon us, and such an one
as my shipmates said they had but seldom seen before. While we were all in fear of a common
death, spiritual death was what I was most afraid of; for I was in danger of departing in
misery, being unbaptised, and I longed for the spiritual water among the waters of death. 
On this account I cried and begged and besought a slight respite. My shipmates, even in
their common danger, joined in my cries, as not even my own relatives would have done,
kindly souls as they were, having learned sympathy from their dangers. In this my condition,
my parents felt for me, my danger having been communicated to them by a nightly vision,
and they aided me from the land, soothing the waves by prayer, as I afterwards learned by
calculating the time, after I had landed. This was also shown me in a wholesome sleep, of
which I had experience during a slight lull of the tempest. I seemed to be holding a Fury,
of fearful aspect, boding danger; for the night presented her clearly to my eyes. Another of
my shipmates, a boy most kindly disposed and dear to me, and exceedingly anxious on my
behalf, in my then present condition, thought he saw my mother walk upon the sea, and
seize and drag the ship to land with no great exertion. We had confidence in the vision, for
the sea began to grow calm, and we soon reached Rhodes after the intervention of no great
discomfort. We ourselves became an offering in consequence of that peril; for we promised
ourselves if we were saved, to God, and, when we had been saved, gave ourselves to Him.

32. Such were their common experiences. But I imagine that some of those who have
had an accurate knowledge of his life must have been for a long while wondering why we
have dwelt upon these points, as if we thought them his only title to renown, and postponed
the mention of the difficulties of his times, against which he conspicuously arrayed himself,
as though we were either ignorant of them, or thought them to be of no great consequence. 
Come, then, we will proceed to speak upon this topic. The first, and I think the last, evil of
our day, was the Emperor who apostatised from God and from reason, and thought it a
small matter to conquer the Persians, but a great one to subject to himself the Christians;
and so, together with the demons who led and prevailed upon him, he failed in no form of
impiety, but by means of persuasions, threats, and sophistries, strove to draw men to him,
and even added to his various artifices the use of force. His design, however, was exposed,
whether he strove to conceal persecution under sophistical devices, or manifestly made use
of his authority-namely by one means or the other-either by cozening or by violence, to
get us into his power. Who can be found who more utterly despised or defeated him? One
sign, among many others, of his contempt, is the mission to our sacred buildings of the

On the Death of His Father.

police and their commissary, with the intention of taking either voluntary or forcible possession of them: he had attacked many others, and came hither with like intent, demanding
the surrender of the temple according to the Imperial decree, but was so far from succeeding
in any of his wishes that, had he not speedily given way before my father, either from his
own good sense or according to some advice given to him, he would have had to retire with
his feet mangled, with such wrath and zeal did the priest boil against him in defence of his
shrine. And who had a manifestly greater share in bringing about his end, both in public,
by the prayers and united supplications which he directed against the accursed one, without
regard to the [dangers of] the time; and in private, arraying against him his nightly armoury,
of sleeping on the ground, by which he wore away his aged and tender frame, and of tears,
with whose fountains he watered the ground for almost a whole year, directing these practices
to the Searcher of hearts alone, while he tried to escape our notice, in his retiring piety of
which I have spoken. And he would have been utterly unobserved, had I not once suddenly
rushed into his room, and noticing the tokens of his lying upon the ground, inquired of his
attendants what they meant, and so learned the mystery of the night.

33. A further story of the same period and the same courage. The city of Caesarea was
in an uproar about the election of a bishop; for one3258 had just departed, and another must
be found, amidst heated partisanship not easily to be soothed. For the city was naturally
exposed to party spirit, owing to the fervour of its faith, and the rivalry was increased by the
illustrious position of the see. Such was the state of affairs; several Bishops had arrived to
consecrate the Bishop; the populace was divided into several parties, each with its own
candidate, as is usual in such cases, owing to the influences of private friendship or devotion
to God; but at last the whole people came to an agreement, and, with the aid of a band of
soldiers at that time quartered there, seized one of3259 their leading citizens, a man of excellent life, but not yet sealed with the divine baptism, brought him against his will to the
sanctuary, and setting him before the Bishops, begged, with entreaties mingled with violence,
that he might be consecrated and proclaimed, not in the best of order, but with all sincerity
and ardour. Nor is it possible to say whom time pointed out as more illustrious and religious
than he was. What then took place, as the result of the uproar? Their3260 resistance was
overcome, they purified him, they proclaimed him, they enthroned him, by external action,
rather than by spiritual judgment and disposition, as the sequel shows. They were glad to
retire and regain freedom of judgment, and agreed upon a plan-I do not know that it was
inspired by the Spirit-to hold nothing which had been done to be valid, and the institution
to have been void, pleading violence on the part of him who had had no less violence done

3258 One, i.e. Dianius.

3259 One of, etc., Eusebius.

Their, i.e., of the Bishops.

On the Death of His Father.

to himself, and laying hold of certain words which had been uttered on the occasion with
greater vigour than wisdom. But the great high-priest and just examiner of actions was not
carried away by this plan of theirs, and did not approve of their judgment, but remained as
uninfluenced and unmoved as if no pressure at all had been put upon him. For he saw that,
the violence having been common, if they brought any charge against him, they were
themselves liable to a counter-charge, or, if they acquitted him, they themselves might be
acquitted, or rather with still more justice, they were unable to secure their own acquittal,
even by acquitting him: for if they were deserving of excuse, so assuredly was he, and if he
was not, much less were they: for it would have been far better to have at the time run the
risk of resistance to the last extremity, than afterwards to enter into designs against him,
especially at such a juncture, when it was better to put an end to existing enmities than to
devise new ones. For the state of affairs was as follows.

34. The Emperor3261 had come, raging against the Christians; he was angry at the
election and threatened the elect, and the city stood in imminent peril3262 as to whether,
after that day it should cease to exist, or escape and be treated with some degree of mercy. 
The innovation in regard to the election was a new ground of exasperation, in addition to
the destruction of the temple of Fortune in a time of prosperity, and was looked upon as an
invasion of his rights. The governor of the province also was eager to turn the opportunity
to his own account, and was ill disposed to the new bishop, with whom he had never had
friendly relations, in consequence of their different political views. Accordingly he sent
letters to summon the consecrators to invalidate the election, and in no gentle terms, for
they were threatened as if by command of the Emperor. Hereupon, when the letter reached
him, without fear or delay, he replied-consider the courage and spirit of his answer-"Most
excellent governor, we have one Censor of all our actions, and one Emperor, against whom
his enemies are in arms. He will review the present consecration, which we have legitimately
performed according to His will. In regard to any other matter, you may, if you will, use
violence with the greatest ease against us. But no one can prevent us from vindicating the
legitimacy and justice of our action in this case; unless you should make a law on this point,
you, who have no right to interfere in our affairs." This letter excited the admiration of its
recipient, although he was for a while annoyed at it, as we have been told by many who
know the facts well. It also stayed the action of the Emperor, and delivered the city from
peril, and ourselves, it is not amiss to add, from disgrace. This was the work of the occupant
of an unimportant and suffragan see. Is not a presidency of this kind far preferable to a title
derived from a superior see, and a power which is based upon action rather than upon a
name.

The Emperor, Julian.

In imminent peril, lit. "on a razor's edge." Homer Il. x. 173.

On the Death of His Father.

35. Who is so distant from this world of ours, as to be ignorant of what is last in order,
but the first and greatest proof of his power? The same city was again in an uproar for the
same reason, in consequence of the sudden removal of the Bishop chosen with such honourable violence, who had now departed to God, on Whose behalf he had nobly and bravely
contended in the persecutions. The heat of the disturbance was in proportion to its unreasonableness. The man of eminence was not unknown, but was more conspicuous than the
sun amidst the stars, in the eyes not only of all others, but especially of that select and most
pure portion of the people, whose business is in the sanctuary, and the Nazarites3263 amongst
us, to whom such appointments should, if not entirely, as much as possible belong, and so
the church would be free from harm, instead of to the most opulent and powerful, or the
violent and unreasonable portion of the people, and especially the most corrupt of them. 
Indeed, I am almost inclined to believe that the civil government is more orderly than ours,
to which divine grace is attributed, and that such matters are better regulated by fear than
by reason. For what man in his senses could ever have approached another, to the neglect
of your divine3264 and sacred person, who have been beautified by the hands of the Lord,
the unwedded, the destitute of property and almost of flesh and blood, who in your words
come next to the Word Himself, who are wise among philosophers, superior to the world
among worldlings, my companion and workfellow, and to speak more daringly, the sharer
with me of a common soul, the partaker of my life and education. Would that I could speak
at liberty and describe you before others without being obliged by your presence, in dwelling
upon such topics, to pass over the greater part of them, lest I should incur the suspicion of
flattery. But, as I began by saying, the Spirit must needs have known him as His own; yet
he was the mark of envy, at the hands of those whom I am ashamed to mention, and would
that it were not possible to hear their names from others who studiously ridicule our affairs. 
Let us pass this by like a rock in the midstream of a river, and treat with respectful silence
a subject which ought to be forgotten, as we pass on to the remainder of our subject.

36. The things of the Spirit were exactly known to the man of the Spirit, and he felt that
he must take up no submissive position, nor side with factions and prejudices which depend
upon favour rather than upon God, but must make the advantage of the Church and the
common salvation his sole object. Accordingly he wrote, gave advice, strove to unite the
people and the clergy, whether ministering in the sanctuary or not, gave his testimony, his
decision and his vote, even in his absence, and assumed, in virtue of his gray hairs, the exercise
of authority among strangers no less than among his own flock. At last, since it was necessary
that the consecration should be canonical, and there was3265 lacking one of the proper

3263 Nazarites, i.e., "the monks."

Your divine, etc., addressed to S. Basil.

There was lacking. The Council of Nicaea ordered that a Bishop should be consecrated by at least three

Bishops.

On the Death of His Father.

number of Bishops for the proclamation, he tore himself from his couch, exhausted as he
was by age and disease, and manfully went to the city, or rather was borne, with his body
dead though just breathing, persuaded that, if anything were to happen to him, this devotion
would be a noble winding-sheet. Hereupon once more there was a prodigy, not unworthy
of credit. He received strength from his toil, new life from his zeal, presided at the function,
took his place in the conflict, enthroned the Bishop, and was conducted home, no longer
borne upon a bier, but in a divine ark. His long-suffering, over whose praises I have already
lingered, was in this case further exhibited. For his colleagues were annoyed at the shame
of being overcome, and at the public influence of the old man, and allowed their annoyance
to show itself in abuse of him; but such was the strength of his endurance that he was superior even to this, finding in modesty a most powerful ally, and refusing to bandy abuse with
them. For he felt that it would be a terrible thing, after really gaining the victory, to be
vanquished by the tongue. In consequence, he so won upon them by his long-suffering,
that, when time had lent its aid to his judgment, they exchanged their annoyance for admiration, and knelt before him to ask his pardon, in shame for their previous conduct, and
flinging away their hatred, submitted to him as their patriarch, lawgiver, and judge.

37. From the same zeal proceeded his opposition to the heretics, when, with the aid of
the Emperor's impiety, they made their expedition, in the hope of overpowering us also,
and adding us to the number of the others whom they had, in almost all cases, succeeded
in enslaving. For in this he afforded us no slight assistance, both in himself, and by
hounding us on like well-bred dogs against these most savage beasts, through his training
in piety. On one point I blame you both, and pray do not take amiss my plainspeaking, if
I should annoy you by expressing the cause of my pain. When I was disgusted at the evils
of life, and longing, if anyone of our day has longed, for solitude, and eager, as speedily as
possible, to escape to some haven of safety, from the surge and dust of public life, it was you
who, somehow or other seized and gave me up by the noble title of the priesthood to this
base and treacherous mart of souls. In consequence, evils have already befallen me, and
others are yet to be anticipated. For past experience renders a man somewhat distrustful
of the future, in spite of the better suggestions of reason to the contrary.

38. Another of his excellences I must not leave unnoticed. In general, he was a man of
great endurance, and superior to his robe of flesh: but during the pain of his last sickness,
a serious addition to the risks and burdens of old age, his weakness was common to him
and all other men; but this fitting sequel to the other marvels, so far from being common,
was peculiarly his own. He was at no time free from the anguish of pain, but often in the
day, sometimes in the hour, his only relief was the liturgy, to which the pain yielded, as if
to an edict of banishment. At last, after a life of almost a hundred years, exceeding David's
limit of our age,3266 forty-five of these, the average life of man, having been spent in the

Ps. xc. 10.

On the Death of His Father.

priesthood, he brought it to a close in a good old age. And in what manner? With the words
and forms of prayer, leaving behind no trace of vice, and many recollections of virtue. The
reverence felt for him was thus greater than falls to the lot of man, both on the lips and in
the hearts of all. Nor is it easy to find anyone who recollects him, and does not, as the
Scripture says, lay his hand upon his mouth3267 and salute his memory. Such was his life,
and such its completion and perfection.

39. And since some living memorial of his munificence ought to be left behind, what
other is required than this temple, which he reared for God and for us, with very little contribution from the people in addition to the expenditure of his private fortune? An exploit
which should not be buried in silence, since in size it is superior to most others, in beauty
absolutely to all. It surrounds itself with eight regular equilaterals, and is raised aloft by the
beauty of two stories of pillars and porticos, while the statues placed upon them are true to
the life; its vault flashes down upon us from above, and it dazzles our eyes with abundant
sources of light on every side, being indeed the dwelling-place of light. It is surrounded by
excrescent equiangular ambulatories of most splendid material, with a wide area in the
midst, while its doors and vestibules shed around it the lustre of their gracefulness, and offer
from a distance their welcome to those who are drawing nigh. I have not yet mentioned
the external ornament, the beauty and size of the squared and dove-tailed stonework,
whether it be of marble in the bases and capitals, which divide the angles, or from our own
quarries, which are in no wise inferior to those abroad; nor of the belts of many shapes and
colours, projecting or inlaid from the foundation to the roof-tree, which robs the spectator
by limiting his view. How could anyone with due brevity describe a work which cost so
much time and toil and skill: or will it suffice to say that amid all the works, private and
public, which adorn other cities, this has of itself been able to secure us celebrity among the
majority of mankind? When for such a temple a priest was needed, he also at his own expense
provided one, whether worthy of the temple or no, it is not for me to say. And when sacrifices
were required, he supplied them also, in the misfortunes of his son, and his patience under
trials, that God might receive at his hands a reasonable whole burnt offering and spiritual
priesthood, to be honourably consumed, instead of the sacrifice of the Law.

40. What sayest thou, my father? Is this sufficient, and dost thou find an ample recompense for all thy toils, which thou didst undergo for my learning, in this eulogy of farewell
or of entombment? And dost thou, as of old, impose silence on my tongue, and bid me stop
in due time, and so avoid excess? Or dost thou require some addition? I know thou bidst
me cease, for I have said enough. Yet suffer me to add this. Make known to us where thou
art in glory, and the light which encircles thee, and receive into the same abode thy partner
soon to follow thee, and the children whom thou hadst laid to rest before thee, and me also,

Job xl. 4.

On the Death of His Father.

after no further, or but a slight addition to the ills of this life: and before reaching that abode
receive me in this sweet stone,3268 which thou didst erect for both of us, to the honour even
here of thy consecrated namesake, and excuse me from the care both of the people which I
have already resigned,3269 and of that which for thy sake I have since accepted: and mayest
thou guide and free from peril, as I earnestly entreat, the whole flock and all the clergy,
whose father thou art said to be, but especially him who was overpowered by thy paternal
and spiritual coercion, so that he may not entirely consider that act of tyranny obnoxious
to blame.

41. And what do you think of us, O judge of my words and motions? If we have spoken
adequately, and to the satisfaction of your desire, confirm it by your decision, and we accept
it: for your decision is entirely the decision of God. But if it falls far short of his glory and
of your hope, my ally is not far to seek. Let fall thy voice, which is awaited by his merits like
a seasonable shower. And indeed he has upon you the highest claims, those of a pastor
upon a pastor and of a father upon his son in grace. What wonder if he, who has3270 through
your voice thundered throughout the world, should himself have some enjoyment of it? 
What more is needed? Only to unite with our spiritual Sarah, the consort and fellow-traveller through life of our great father Abraham, in the last Christian offices.

42. The nature of God, my mother, is not the same as that of men; indeed, to speak
generally, the nature of divine things is not the same as that of earthly things. They possess
unchangeableness and immortality, and absolute being with its consequences, for sure are
the properties of things sure. But how is it with what is ours? It is in a state of flux and
corruption, constantly undergoing some fresh change. Life and death, as they are called,
apparently so different, are in a sense resolved into, and successive to, each other. For the
one takes its rise from the corruption which is our mother, runs its course through the
corruption which is the displacement of all that is present, and comes to an end in the corruption which is the dissolution of this life; while the other, which is able to set us free from
the ills of this life, and oftentimes translates us to the life above, is not in my opinion accurately called death, and is more dreadful in name than in reality; so that we are in danger of
irrationally being afraid of what is not fearful, and courting as preferable what we really
ought to fear. There is one life, to look to life. There is one death, sin, for it is the destruction
of the soul. But all else, of which some are proud, is a dream-vision, making sport of realities,
and a series of phantasms which lead the soul astray. If this be our condition, mother, we
shall neither be proud of life, nor greatly hurt, by death. What grievance can we find in

Stone, i.e. the tomb in which his father was buried.

3269 Which I have resigned, i.e., Sasima. Accepted, i.e., Nazianzus.

3270 He who has. S. Gregory the elder was the principal mover in S. Basil's election and consecration.

On the Death of His Father.

being transferred hence to the true life? In being freed from the vicissitudes, the agitation,
the disgust, and all the vile tribute we must pay to this life, to find ourselves, amid stable
things, which know no flux, while as lesser lights, we circle round the great light?3271

43. Does the sense of separation cause you pain? Let hope cheer you. Is widowhood
grievous to you? Yet it is not so to him. And what is the good of love, if it gives itself easy
things, and assigns the more difficult to its neighbour? And why should it be grievous at
all, to one who is soon to pass away? The appointed day is at hand, the pain will not last
long. Let us not, by ignoble reasonings, make a burden of things which are really light. We
have endured a great loss-because the privilege we enjoyed was great. Loss is common to
all, such a privilege to few. Let us rise superior to the one thought by the consolation of the
other. For it is more reasonable, that that which is better should win the day. You have
borne, in a most brave, Christian spirit, the loss of children, who were still in their prime
and qualified for life; bear also the laying aside of his aged body by one who was weary of
life, although his vigor of mind preserved for him his senses unimpaired. Do you want some
one to care for you? Where is your Isaac, whom he left behind for you, to take his place in
all respects? Ask of him small things, the support of his hand and service, and requite him
with greater things, a mother's blessing and prayers, and the consequent freedom. Are you
vexed at being admonished? I praise you for it. For you have admonished many whom
your long life has brought under your notice. What I have said can have no application to
you, who are so truly wise; but let it be a general medicine of consolation for mourners, so
that they may know that they are mortals following mortals to the grave.

3271 Gen. i. 16.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

Oration XXI.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

The reference in §22 to "the Council which sat first at Seleucia...and afterwards at this
mighty city," leaves no room for doubting that the Oration was delivered at Constantinople. 
Further local colour is found in the allusions of §5. We are assured by the panegyric on S.
Cyprian (Orat. xxiv. 1) that it was already the custom of the Church of Constantinople to
observe annual festivals in honour of the Saints: and at present two days are kept by the
Eastern Church, viz., Jan. 18th, as the day of the actual death of S. Athanasius, and May 2d,
in memory of the translation of his remains to the church of S. Sophia at Constantinople. 
Probably, therefore, this Oration was delivered on the former day, on which Assemani holds
that S. Athanasius died. Papebroke and (with some hesitation) Dr. Bright pronounce in favour
of May 2d. Tillemont supposes that a.d. 379 is the year of its delivery; in which case it must
have been very shortly after S. Gregory's arrival in the city. Since, however, no allusion is
made to this, it seems, on the whole, more likely that it should be assigned to a.d. 380. The
sermon takes high rank, even among S. Gregory's discourses, as the model of an ecclesiastical
panegyric. It lacks, however, the charm of personal affection and intimate acquaintance with
the inner life, which is characteristic of the orations concerned with his own relatives and
friends.

1. In praising Athanasius, I shall be praising virtue. To speak of him and to praise virtue
are identical, because he had, or, to speak more truly, has embraced virtue in its entirety. 
For all who have lived according to God still live unto God, though they have departed
hence. For this reason, God is called the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, since He is the
God, not of the dead, but of the living.3272 Again, in praising virtue, I shall be praising God,
who gives virtue to men and lifts them up, or lifts them up again, to Himself by the enlightenment which is akin to Himself.3273 For many and great as are our blessings-none can
say how many and how great-which we have and shall have from God, this is the greatest
and kindliest of all, our inclination and relationship to Him. For God is to intelligible things
what the sun is to the things of sense. The one lightens the visible, the other the invisible,
world. The one makes our bodily eyes to see the sun, the other makes our intellectual natures
to see God. And, as that, which bestows on the things which see and are seen the power of
seeing and being seen, is itself the most beautiful of visible things; so God, who creates, for
those who think, and that which is thought of, the power of thinking and being thought of,
is Himself the highest of the objects of thought, in Whom every desire finds its bourne,

S. Matt. xxii. 32.

1 John i. 5.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

beyond Whom it can no further go. For not even the most philosophic, the most piercing,
the most curious intellect has, or can ever have, a more exalted object. For this is the utmost
of things desirable, and they who arrive at it find an entire rest from speculation.

2. Whoever has been permitted to escape by reason and contemplation from matter
and this fleshly cloud or veil (whichever it should be called) and to hold communion with
God, and be associated, as far as man's nature can attain, with the purest Light, blessed is
he, both from his ascent from hence, and for his deification there, which is conferred by
true philosophy, and by rising superior to the dualism of matter, through the unity which
is perceived in the Trinity. And whosoever has been depraved by being knit to the flesh,
and so far oppressed by the clay that he cannot look at the rays of truth, nor rise above things
below, though he is born from above, and called to things above, I hold him to be miserable
in his blindness, even though he may abound in things of this world; and all the more, because
he is the sport of his abundance, and is persuaded by it that something else is beautiful instead
of that which is really beautiful, reaping, as the poor fruit of his poor opinion, the sentence
of darkness, or the seeing Him to be fire, Whom he did not recognize as light.

3. Such has been the philosophy of few, both nowadays and of old-for few are the men
of God, though all are His handiwork,-among lawgivers, generals, priests, Prophets,
Evangelists, Apostles, shepherds, teachers, and all the spiritual host and band-and, among
them all, of him whom now we praise. And whom do I mean by these? Men like Enoch,
Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the twelve Patriarchs, Moses, Aaron, Joshua, the Judges,
Samuel, David, to some extent Solomon, Elijah, Elisha, the Prophets before the captivity,
those after the captivity, and, though last in order, first in truth, those who were concerned
with Christ's Incarnation or taking of our nature, the lamp3274 before the Light, the voice
before the Word, the mediator before the Mediator, the mediator between the old covenant
and the new, the famous John, the disciples of Christ, those after Christ, who were set over
the people, or illustrious in word, or conspicuous for miracles, or made perfect through
their blood.

4. With some of these Athanasius vied, by some he was slightly excelled, and others, if
it is not bold to say so, he surpassed: some he made his models in mental power, others in
activity, others in meekness, others in zeal, others in dangers, others in most respects, others
in all, gathering from one and another various forms of beauty (like men who paint figures
of ideal excellence), and combining them in his single soul, he made one perfect form of
virtue out of all, excelling in action men of intellectual capacity, in intellect men of action;
or, if you will, surpassing in intellect men renowned for intellect, in action those of the
greatest active power; outstripping those who had moderate reputation in both respects, by
his eminence in either, and those who stood highest in one or other, by his powers in both;

S. John i. 23; v. 35.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

and, if it is a great thing for those who have received an example, so to use it as to attach
themselves to virtue, he has no inferior title to fame, who for our advantage has set an example
to those who come after him.

5. To speak of and admire him fully, would perhaps be too long a task for the present
purpose of my discourse, and would take the form of a history rather than of a panegyric: 
a history which it has been the object of my desires to commit to writing for the pleasure
and instruction of posterity, as he himself wrote the life of the divine Antony,3275 and set
forth, in the form of a narrative, the laws of the monastic life. Accordingly, after entering
into a few of the many details of his history, such as memory suggests at the moment as
most noteworthy, in order both to satisfy my own longing and fulfil the duty which befits
the festival, we will leave the many others to those who know them. For indeed, it is neither
pious nor safe, while the lives of the ungodly are honoured by recollection, to pass by in silence those who have lived piously, especially in a city which could hardly be saved by many
examples of virtue, making sport, as it does, of Divine things, no less than of the horse-race
and the theatre.

6. He was brought up, from the first, in religious habits and practices, after a brief study
of literature and philosophy, so that he might not be utterly unskilled in such subjects, or
ignorant of matters which he had determined to despise. For his generous and eager soul
could not brook being occupied in vanities, like unskilled athletes, who beat the air instead
of their antagonists and lose the prize. From meditating on every book of the Old and New
Testament, with a depth such as none else has applied even to one of them, he grew rich in
contemplation, rich in splendour of life, combining them in wondrous sort by that golden
bond which few can weave; using life as the guide of contemplation, contemplation as the
seal of life. For the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and, so to say, its first
swathing band; but, when wisdom has burst the bonds of fear and risen up to love, it makes
us friends of God, and sons instead of bondsmen.

7. Thus brought up and trained, as even now those should be who are to preside over
the people, and take the direction of the mighty body of Christ,3276 according to the will
and foreknowledge of God, which lays long before the foundations of great deeds, he was
invested with this important ministry, and made one of those who draw near to the God
Who draws near to us, and deemed worthy of the holy office and rank, and, after passing
through the entire series of orders, he was (to make my story short) entrusted with the chief
rule over the people, in other words, the charge of the whole world: nor can I say whether

3275 Antony, "the founder of asceticism," the most celebrated of the monks and hermits of the Thebaid desert. 

His life by S. Athanasius is certainly genuine, and even if, as some suspect, interpolations have been inserted,

its substantial integrity is undoubted. (Newman, Ch. of the Fathers, p. 176.)

Body of Christ, i.e., the Church, His mystical body.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

he received the priesthood as the reward of virtue, or to be the fountain and life of the
Church. For she, like Ishmael,3277 fainting from her thirst for the truth, needed to be given
to drink, or, like Elijah,3278 to be refreshed from the brook, when the land was parched by
drought; and, when but faintly breathing, to be restored to life and left as a seed to Israel,3279
that we might not become like Sodom and Gomorrah,3280 whose destruction by the rain of
fire and brimstone is only more notorious than their wickedness. Therefore, when we were
cast down, a horn of salvation was raised up for us,3281 and a chief corner stone,3282 knitting
us to itself and to one another, was laid in due season, or a fire3283 to purify our base and
evil matter,3284 or a farmer's fan3285 to winnow the light from the weighty in doctrine, or
a sword to cut out the roots of wickedness; and so the Word finds him as his own ally, and
the Spirit takes possession of one who will breathe on His behalf.

8. Thus, and for these reasons, by the vote of the whole people, not in the evil fashion
which has since prevailed, nor by means of bloodshed and oppression, but in an apostolic
and spiritual manner, he is led up to the throne3286 of Saint Mark, to succeed him in piety,
no less than in office; in the latter indeed at a great distance from him, in the former, which
is the genuine right of succession, following him closely. For unity in doctrine deserves
unity in office; and a rival teacher sets up a rival throne; the one is a successor in reality, the
other but in name. For it is not the intruder, but he whose rights are intruded upon, who
is the successor, not the lawbreaker, but the lawfully appointed, not the man of contrary
opinions, but the man of the same faith; if this is not what we mean by successor, he succeeds
in the same sense as disease to health, darkness to light, storm to calm, and frenzy to sound
sense.

9. The duties of his office he discharged in the same spirit as that in which he had been
preferred to it. For he did not at once, after taking possession of his throne, like men who
have unexpectedly seized upon some sovereignty or inheritance, grow insolent from intoxication. This is the conduct of illegitimate and intrusive priests, who are unworthy of their
vocation; whose preparation for the priesthood has cost them nothing, who have endured

3277 Gen. xxi. 19.

1 Kings xvii. 4.

Isai. i. 9.

3280 Gen. xix. 24.

S. Luke i. 69.

Isai. xxviii. 16.

3283 Mal. iii. 2, 3.

1 Cor. iii. 13, 15.

S. Matt. iii. 12.

The throne, etc., as Patriarch of Alexandria. The date of his consecration is a.d. 326.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

no inconvenience for the sake of virtue, who only begin to study religion when appointed
to teach it, and undertake the cleansing of others before being cleansed themselves; yesterday
sacrilegious, to-day sacerdotal; yesterday excluded from the sanctuary,3287 to-day its officiants; proficient in vice, novices in piety; the product of the favour of man, not of the grace
of the Spirit; who, having run through the whole gamut of violence, at last tyrannize over
even piety; who, instead of gaining credit for their office by their character, need for their
character the credit of their office, thus subverting the due relation between them; who
ought to offer more sacrifices3288 for themselves than for the ignorances of the people;3289
who inevitably fall into one of two errors, either, from their own need of indulgence, being
excessively indulgent, and so even teaching, instead of checking, vice, or cloaking their own
sins under the harshness of their rule. Both these extremes he avoided; he was sublime in
action, lowly in mind; inaccessible in virtue, most accessible in intercourse; gentle, free from
anger, sympathetic, sweet in words, sweeter in disposition; angelic in appearance, more
angelic in mind; calm in rebuke, persuasive in praise, without spoiling the good effect of
either by excess, but rebuking with the tenderness of a father, praising with the dignity of a
ruler, his tenderness was not dissipated, nor his severity sour; for the one was reasonable,
the other prudent, and both truly wise; his disposition sufficed for the training of his spiritual children, with very little need of words; his words with very little need of the rod,3290
and his moderate use of the rod with still less for the knife.

10. But why should I paint for you the portrait of the man? St. Paul3291 has sketched
him by anticipation. This he does, when he sings the praises of the great High-priest, who
hath passed through the heavens3292 (for I will venture to say even this, since Scripture3293
can call those who live according to Christ by the name of Christs):3294 and again when by
the rules in his letter to Timothy,3295 he gives a model for future Bishops: for if you will
apply the law as a test to him who deserves these praises, you will clearly perceive his perfect
exactness. Come then to aid me in my panegyric; for I am labouring heavily in my speech,

The Sanctuary, or "the Sacraments." Exod. xxvi. 33.

To offer more sacrifices, i.e., These priests are not only "men which have infirmity," who need to offer

for their own sins, as well as for those of the people; but because they are even more sinful than their flocks, they

need a greater and more frequent atonement.

3289 Heb. vii. 27; ix. 7.

1 Cor. iv. 21.

St. Paul. To whom here the Ep. to the Hebrews is assigned.

3292 Heb. iv. 14.

Ps. cv. 15.

3294 Christs. i.e., Ps. cv. 15. "Touch not Mine anointed." (LXX.) and Vulg. "my Christs."

1 Tim. iii. 2 et seq.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

and though I desire to pass by point after point, they seize upon me one after another, and
I can find no surpassing excellence in a form which is in all respects well proportioned and
beautiful; for each as it occurs to me seems fairer than the rest and so takes by storm my
speech. Come then I pray, you who have been his admirers and witnesses, divide among
yourselves his excellences, contend bravely with one another, men and women alike, young
men and maidens, old men and children, priests and people, solitaries and cenobites,3296
men of simple or of exact life, contemplatives or practically minded. Let one praise him in
his fastings and prayers as if he had been disembodied and immaterial, another his unweariedness and zeal for vigils and psalmody, another his patronage of the needy, another his
dauntlessness towards the powerful, or his condescension to the lowly. Let the virgins celebrate the friend of the Bridegroom;3297 those under the yoke3298 their restrainer, hermits
him who lent wings to their course, cenobites their lawgiver, simple folk their guide, contemplatives the divine, the joyous their bridle, the unfortunate their consolation, the hoaryheaded their staff, youths their instructor, the poor their resource, the wealthy their steward. 
Even the widows will, methinks, praise their protector, even the orphans their father, even
the poor their benefactor, strangers their entertainer, brethren the man of brotherly love,
the sick their physician, in whatever sickness or treatment you will, the healthy the guard
of health, yea all men him who made himself all things to all men that he might gain almost,
if not quite, all.

11. On these grounds, as I have said, I leave others, who have leisure to admire the
minor details of his character, to admire and extol him. I call them minor details only in
comparing him and his character with his own standard, for that which hath been made
glorious hath not been made glorious, even though it be exceeding splendid by reason of
the glory that surpasseth,3299 as we are told; for indeed the minor points of his excellence
would suffice to win celebrity for others. But since it would be intolerable for me to leave
the word and serve3300 less important details, I must turn to that which is his chief characteristic; and God alone, on Whose behalf I am speaking, can enable me to say anything
worthy of a soul so noble and so mighty in the word.

12. In the palmy days of the Church, when all was well, the present elaborate, far-fetched
and artificial treatment of Theology had not made its way into the schools of divinity, but
playing with pebbles which deceive the eye by the quickness of their changes, or dancing
before an audience with varied and effeminate contortions, were looked upon as all one

3296 Cenobites μιγάδες. Cf. Orat. ii. 29; xliii. 62.

S. John iii. 29.

3298 Under the yoke, i.e. "Married." Cf. Orat. xlii. 11.

2 Cor. iii. 10.

3300 Acts vi. 2.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

with speaking or hearing of God in a way unusual or frivolous. But since the Sextuses3301
and Pyrrhos, and the antithetic style, like a dire and malignant disease, have infected our
churches, and babbling is reputed culture, and, as the book of the Acts3302 says of the
Athenians, we spend our time in nothing else but either to tell or to hear some new thing. 
O what Jeremiah3303 will bewail our confusion and blind madness; he alone could utter
lamentations befitting our misfortunes.

13. The beginning of this madness was Arius (whose name is derived from frenzy3304),
who paid the penalty of his unbridled tongue by his death in a profane spot,3305 brought
about by prayer not by disease, when he like Judas3306 burst asunder3307 for his similar
treachery to the Word. Then others, catching the infection, organized an art of impiety,
and, confining Deity to the Unbegotten, expelled from Deity not only the Begotten, but also
the Proceeding one, and honoured the Trinity with communion in name3308 alone, or even
refused to retain this for it. Not so that blessed one, Who was indeed a man of God and a
mighty trumpet of truth: but being aware that to contract3309 the Three Persons to a numerical Unity is heretical, and the innovation of Sabellius, who first devised a contraction
of Deity; and that to sever the Three Persons by a distinction of nature, is an unnatural
mutilation of Deity; he both happily preserved the Unity, which belongs to the Godhead,
and religiously taught the Trinity, which refers3310 to Personality, neither confounding the
Three Persons in the Unity, nor dividing the Substance among the Three Persons, but
abiding within the bounds of piety, by avoiding excessive inclination or opposition to either
side.

14. And therefore, first in the holy Synod of Nicaea,3311 the gathering of the three
hundred and eighteen chosen men, united by the Holy Ghost, as far as in him lay, he stayed

Sextuses. Sextus Empiricus (cent. 3 a.d.) a leader of the later Sceptic school. Pyrrho of Elis (cent. 4 b.c.)

was the founder of the earlier.

3302 Acts xvii. 21.

Lam. i. 1.

Frenzy. Cf. Orat. ii. 37; xxxiv. 8.

3305 A profane spot, lit. "profane places"-plural as contrasted with the ἐν τόπῳ ἁγίῳ, Lev. vi. 16. etc., etc.: 

in which the priests must eat of the sacrifices. The meaning of the phrase is "Arius died excommunicated"-indeed

on the eve of the day on which the Emperor Constantine had ordered him to be restored to communion.

Like Judas. Cf. Epiph. Haer. 68. 7; Socr. i. 38. Theodoret i. 4.

3307 Acts i. 18.

In name, etc., i.e., They used the name Trinity, although it was rendered meaningless by their false

doctrine as to the inequality of the Three Blessed Persons.

To contract, etc. On this whole passage cf. Orat. ii. 36, 37, notes.

3310 Which refers, etc., or "which consists in personal relations." Cf. on ἰδιότῆς. Orat. xliii. 30. note.

3311 Nicaea, a.d. 325. Athanasius was present as theological assistant to Alexander of Alexandria.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

the disease. Though not yet ranked among the Bishops, he held the first rank among the
members of the Council, for preference was given to virtue just as much as to office. Afterwards, when the flame had been fanned by the blasts of the evil one, and had spread very
widely (hence came the tragedies of which almost the whole earth and sea are full), the fight
raged fiercely around him who was the noble champion of the Word. For the assault is
hottest upon the point of resistance, while various dangers surround it on every side: for
impiety is skilful in designing evils, and excessively daring in taking them in hand: and how
would they spare men, who had not spared the Godhead? Yet one of the assaults was the
most dangerous of all: and I myself contribute somewhat to this scene; yea, let me plead
for the innocence of my dear fatherland, for the wickedness was not due to the land that
bore them, but to the men who undertook it. For holy indeed is that land, and everywhere
noted for its piety, but these men are unworthy of the Church which bore them, and ye have
heard of a briar growing in a vine;3312 and the traitor3313 was Judas, one of the disciples.

15. There are some who do not excuse even my namesake3314 from blame; who, living
at Alexandria at the time for the sake of culture, although he had been most kindly treated
by him, as if the dearest of his children, and received his special confidence, yet joined in
the revolutionary plot against his father and patron: for, though others took the active part
in it, the hand of Absalom3315 was with them, as the saying goes. If any of you had heard
of the hand which was produced by fraud against the Saint, and the corpse3316 of the living
man, and the unjust banishment, he knows what I mean. But this I will gladly forget. For
on doubtful points, I am disposed to think we ought to incline to the charitable side, and
acquit rather than condemn the accused. For a bad man would speedily condemn even a
good man, while a good man would not be ready to condemn even a bad one. For one who
is not ready to do ill, is not inclined even to suspect it. I come now to what is matter of fact,
not of report, what is vouched for as truth instead of unverified suspicion.

16. There was a monster3317 from Cappadocia, born on our farthest confines, of low
birth, and lower mind, whose blood was not perfectly free, but mongrel, as we know that
of mules to be; at first, dependent on the table of others, whose price was a barley cake, who

Isai. v. 2 (LXX.); vii. 23, v. l. "in a vineyard."

S. Luke vi. 16.

3314 Namesake. Gregory, a Cappadocian, nominated to the see of Alexandria, by the Arian Bishops at Antioch,

after the banishment of Athanasius, a.d. 340.

ἡ χὲιρ ̓Αβεσσαλὤμ. "The hand of Absalom," prob. a misquotation of 2 Sam. xiv. 19. "The hand of

Joab." 2 Sam. xv. 5.

3316 Corpse, etc. Athanasius was charged with having murdered Arsenius, and his enemies produced a hand

which, they said, had belonged to the dead man.

3317 Monster. George of Cappadocia, Arian intruder into the see of Alexandria, a.d. 356-361.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

had learnt to say and do everything with an eye to his stomach, and, at last, after sneaking
into public life, and filling its lowest offices, such as that of contractor for swine's flesh, the
soldiers' rations, and then having proved himself a scoundrel for the sake of greed in this
public trust, and been stripped to the skin, contrived to escape, and after passing, as exiles
do, from country to country and city to city, last of all, in an evil hour for the Christian
community, like one of the plagues of Egypt, he reached Alexandria. There, his wanderings
being stayed, he began his villany. Good for nothing in all other respects, without culture,
without fluency in conversation, without even the form and pretence of reverence, his skill
in working villany and confusion was unequalled.

17. His acts of insolence towards the saint you all know in full detail. Often were the
righteous given into the hands of the wicked,3318 not that the latter might be honoured, but
that the former might be tested: and though the wicked come, as it is written, to an awful
death,3319 nevertheless for the present the godly are a laughing stock, while the goodness
of God and the great treasuries of what is in store for each of them hereafter are concealed. 
Then indeed word and deed and thought will be weighed in the just balances of God, as He
arises to judge the earth,3320 gathering together counsel and works, and revealing what He
had kept sealed up.3321 Of this let the words and sufferings of Job convince thee, who was
a truthful, blameless, just, godfearing man, with all those other qualities which are testified
of him, and yet was smitten with such a succession of remarkable visitations, at the hands
of him who begged for power over him, that, although many have often suffered in the
whole course of time, and some even have, as is probable, been grievously afflicted, yet none
can be compared with him in misfortunes. For he not only suffered, without being allowed
space to mourn for his losses in their rapid succession, the loss of his money, his possessions,
his large and fair family, blessings for which all men care; but was at last smitten with an
incurable disease horrible to look upon, and, to crown his misfortunes, had a wife whose
only comfort was evil counsel. For his surpassing troubles were those of his soul added to
those of the body.3322 He had also among his friends truly miserable comforters,3323 as he
calls them, who could not help him. For when they saw his suffering, in ignorance of its
hidden meaning, they supposed his disaster to be the punishment of vice and not the
touchstone of virtue. And they not only thought this, but were not even ashamed to reproach

Job ix. 24.

Ib. ix. 23.

Ps. lxxxii. 8.

3321 Dan. xii. 9.

Job ii. 7 et seq.

Ib. xvi. 2.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

him with his lot,3324 at a time when, even if he had been suffering for vice, they ought to
have treated his grief with words of consolation.

18. Such was the lot of Job: such at first sight his history. In reality it was a contest
between virtue and envy:3325 the one straining every nerve to overcome the good, the other
enduring everything, that it might abide unsubdued; the one striving to smooth the way for
vice, by means of the chastisement of the upright, the other to retain its hold upon the good,
even if they do exceed others in misfortunes. What then of Him who answered Job out of
the whirlwind and cloud,3326 Who is slow to chastise and swift to help, Who suffers not
utterly the rod of the wicked to come into the lot of the righteous, lest the righteous should
learn iniquity?3327 At the end of the contests He declares the victory of the athlete in a
splendid proclamation and lays bare the secret of his calamities, saying: "Thinkest thou that
I have dealt with thee for any other purpose than the manifestation of thy righteousness?"3328 
This is the balm for his wounds, this is the crown of the contest, this the reward for his patience. For perhaps his subsequent prosperity was small, great as it may seem to some, and
ordained for the sake of small minds, even though he received again twice as much as he
had lost.

19. In this case then it is not wonderful, if George had the advantage of Athanasius; nay
it would be more wonderful, if the righteous were not tried in the fire of contumely; nor is
this very wonderful, as it would have been had the flames availed for more than this. Then
he was in retirement, and arranged his exile most excellently, for he betook himself to the
holy and divine homes3329 of contemplation in Egypt, where, secluding themselves from
the world, and welcoming the desert, men live to God more than all who exist in the body. 
Some struggle on in an utterly monastic and solitary life, speaking to themselves alone and
to God,3330 and all the world they know is what meets their eyes in the desert. Others,
cherishing the law of love in community, are at once Solitaries and Coenobites, dead to all
other men and to the eddies of public affairs which whirl us and are whirled about themselves
and make sport of us in their sudden changes, being the world to one another and whetting
the edge of their love in emulation. During his intercourse with them, the great Athanasius,
who was always the mediator and reconciler of all other men, like Him Who made peace

3324 His lot, lit. "the dreadful (thing)" i.e. "reproach him, as having brought his sufferings upon himself"-or

"reproach him with impiety"-the cause of his sufferings.

Envy, i.e., of the devil. Wisdom ii. 24. Cf. § 32 of this Oration.

Job xxxviii. 1.

Ps. cxxv. 3.

Job xl. 3 (LXX.).

3329 Homes, etc. The monasteries of lower Egypt and the Thebaid. This was a.d. 356.

1 Cor. xiv. 28.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

through His blood3331 between things which were at variance, reconciled the solitary with
the community life: by showing that the Priesthood is capable of contemplation, and that
contemplation is in need of a spiritual guide.

20. Thus he combined the two, and so united the partisans of both calm action and of
active calm, as to convince them that the monastic life is characterised by steadfastness of
disposition rather than by bodily retirement. Accordingly the great David was a man of at
once the most active and most solitary life, if any one thinks the verse, I am in solitude, till
I pass away,3332 of value and authority in the exposition of this subject. Therefore, though
they surpass all others in virtue, they fell further short of his mind than others fell short of
their own, and while contributing little to the perfection of his priesthood, they gained in
return greater assistance in contemplation. Whatever he thought, was a law for them,
whatever on the contrary he disapproved, they abjured: his decisions were to them the
tables of Moses,3333 and they paid him more reverence than is due from men to the Saints. 
Aye, and when men came to hunt the Saint like a wild beast, and, after searching for him
everywhere, failed to find him, they vouchsafed these emissaries not a single word, and
offered their necks to the sword, as risking their lives for Christ's sake, and considering the
most cruel sufferings on behalf of Athanasius to be an important step to contemplation,
and far more divine and sublime than the long fasts and hard lying and mortifications in
which they constantly revel.

21. Such were his surroundings when he approved the wise counsel of Solomon that
there is a time to every purpose:3334 so he hid himself for a while, escaping during the time
of war, to show himself when the time of peace came, as it did soon afterwards. Meanwhile
George, there being absolutely no one to resist him, overran Egypt, and desolated Syria, in
the might of ungodliness. He seized upon the East also as far as he could, ever attracting
the weak, as torrents roll down objects in their course, and assailing the unstable or fainthearted. He won over also the simplicity of the Emperor, for thus I must term his instability,
though I respect his pious motives. For, to say the truth, he had zeal, but not according to
knowledge.3335 He purchased those in authority who were lovers of money rather than
lovers of Christ-for he was well supplied with the funds for the poor, which he embezzled-especially the effeminate and unmanly men,3336 of doubtful sex, but of manifest
impiety; to whom, I know not how or why, Emperors of the Romans entrusted authority

3331 Col. i. 20.

Ps. cxli. 10 (LXX.).

Exod. xxxii. 15; xxxiv. 1.

Eccles. iii. 1.

3335 Rom. x. 2.

3336 Unmanly men, the Eunuchs, the chamberlains of Constantius.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

over men, though their proper function was the charge of women. In this lay the power of
that servant3337 of the wicked one, that sower of tares, that forerunner of Antichrist; foremost
in speech of the orators of his time among the Bishops; if any one likes to call him an orator
who was not so much an impious, as he was a hostile and contentious reasoner,-his name
I will gladly pass by: he was the hand of his party, perverting the truth by the gold subscribed
for pious uses, which the wicked made an instrument of their impiety.

22. The crowning feat of this faction was the council which sat first at Seleucia, the city
of the holy and illustrious virgin Thekla, and afterwards at this mighty city, thus connecting
their names, no longer with noble associations, but with these of deepest disgrace; whether
we must call that council, which subverted and disturbed everything, a tower of Chalane,3338
which deservedly confounded the tongues-would that theirs had been confounded for
their harmony in evil!-or a Sanhedrim of Caiaphas3339 where Christ was condemned, or
some other like name. The ancient and pious doctrine which defended the Trinity was abolished, by setting up a3340 palisade and battering down the Consubstantial: opening the
door to impiety by means of what is written, using as their pretext, their reverence for
Scripture and for the use of approved terms, but really introducing unscriptural Arianism. 
For the phrase "like, according to the Scriptures," was a bait to the simple, concealing the
hook of impiety, a figure seeming to look in the direction of all who passed by, a boot fitting
either foot, a winnowing with every wind,3341 gaining authority from the newly written
villany and device against the truth. For they were wise to do evil, but to do good they had
no knowledge.3342

23. Hence came their pretended condemnation3343 of the heretics, whom they renounced
in words, in order to gain plausibility for their efforts, but in reality furthered; charging
them not with unbounded impiety, but with exaggerated language. Hence came the profane
judges of the Saints, and the new combination, and public view and discussion of mysterious
questions, and the illegal enquiry into the actions of life, and the hired informers, and the

Servant, etc., probably Acacius.

3338 Gen. xi. 4.

S. John xi. 47 et seq.

χάρακα lit. "a pale"-one of the many which formed the palisade. Perhaps there is play on the word

χαρακτηρα "a letter" in reference to the insertion of the letter iota in the Nicene formula-which then became

Homoiousion, i.e., "Like in substance." This action on the part of the Semi-Arians (who formed the majority

of the Council of Seleucia a.d. 359), was the first step to the Homoion of the Acacian party, who prevailed at the

council of Constantinople, a.d. 360, and professed great devotion to the use of Scriptural terms.

Eccles. v. 9.

Jer. iv. 22.

3343 Condemnation, i.e., of Aetius, who was banished by Constantius after the Council.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

purchased sentences. Some were unjustly deposed3344 from their sees, others intruded, and
among other necessary qualifications, made to sign the bonds of iniquity: the ink was ready,
the informer at hand. This the majority even of us, who were not overcome, had to endure,
not falling in mind, though prevailed upon to sign,3345 and so uniting with men who were
in both respects wicked, and involving ourselves in the smoke,3346 if not in the flame. Over
this I have often wept, when contemplating the confusion of impiety at that time, and the
persecution of the orthodox teaching which now arose at the hands of the patrons of the
Word.

24. For in reality, as the Scripture says, the shepherds became brutish,3347 and many
shepherds destroyed My vineyard, and defiled my pleasant portion,3348 I mean the Church
of God, which has been gathered together by the sweat and blood of many toilers and victims
both before and after Christ, aye, even the great sufferings of God for us. For with very few
exceptions, and these either men who from their insignificance were disregarded, or from
their virtue manfully resisted, being left unto Israel,3349 as was ordained, for a seed and
root,3350 to blossom and come to life again amid the streams of the Spirit, everyone3351
yielded to the influences of the time, distinguished only by the fact that some did so earlier,
some later, that some became the champions and leaders of impiety, while such others were
assigned a lower rank, as had been shaken by fear, enslaved by need, fascinated by flattery,
or beguiled in ignorance; the last being the least guilty, if indeed we can allow even this to
be a valid excuse for men entrusted with the leadership of the people. For just as the force
of lions and other animals, or of men and of women, or of old and of young men is not the
same, but there is a considerable difference due to age or species-so it is also with rulers
and their subjects. For while we might pardon laymen in such a case, and often they escape,
because not put to the test, yet how can we excuse a teacher, whose duty it is, unless he is
falsely so-called, to correct the ignorance of others. For is it not absurd, while no one,
however great his boorishness and want of education, is allowed to be ignorant of the Roman
law, and while there is no law in favour of sins of ignorance, that the teachers of the mysteries
of salvation should be ignorant of the first principles of salvation, however simple and

3344 Deposed. Cyril of Jerusalem, Eustathius of Sebaste, Basil of Ancyra and others.

To sign, etc. Cf. Orat. xviii. 18.

The smoke, etc. Cf. Orat. xvi. 6; Ps. xviii. 9; cv. 32.

Jer. x. 21.

Ib. ii. 10.

Isai. i. 9.

Ib. xxxvii. 31 (LXX.).

Everyone. This was the time of which S. Jerome wrote "Ingemuit totus orbis, et miratus est se Arianum

esse."

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

shallow their minds may be in regard to other subjects. But, even granting indulgence to
them who erred in ignorance, what can be said for the rest, who lay claim to subtlety of intellect, and yet yielded to the court-party for the reasons I have mentioned, and after playing
the part of piety for a long while, failed in the hour of trial.

25. "Yet once more,"3352 I hear the Scripture say that the heaven and the earth shall be
shaken, inasmuch as this has befallen them before, signifying, as I suppose, a manifest
renovation of all things. And we must believe S. Paul when he says3353 that this last shaking
is none other than the second coming of Christ, and the transformation and changing of
the universe to a condition of stability which cannot be shaken. And I imagine that this
present shaking, in which3354 the contemplatives and lovers of God, who before the time
exercise their heavenly citizenship, are shaken from us, is of no less consequence than any
of former days. For, however peaceful and moderate in other respects these men are, yet
they cannot bear to carry their reasonableness so far as to be traitors to the cause of God for
quietness' sake: nay on this point they are excessively warlike and sturdy in fight; such is
the heat of their zeal, that they would sooner proceed to excess in disturbance, than fail to
notice anything that is amiss. And no small portion of the people is breaking away with
them, flying away, as a flock of birds does, with those who lead the flight, and even now
does not cease to fly with them.

26. Such was Athanasius to us, when present, the pillar of the Church; and such, even
when he retired before the insults of the wicked. For those who have plotted the capture of
some strong fort, when they see no other easy means of approaching or taking it, betake
themselves to arts, and then, after seducing the commander by money or guile, without any
effort possess themselves of the stronghold, or, if you will, as those who plotted against
Samson first cut off his hair,3355 in which his strength lay, and then seized upon the judge,
and made sport of him at will, to requite him for his former power: so did our foreign foes,
after getting rid of our source of strength, and shearing off the glory of the Church, revel in
like manner in utterances and deeds of impiety. Then the supporter3356 and patron of the
hostile shepherd3357 died, crowning3358 his reign, which had not been evil, with an evil
close, and unprofitably repenting, as they say, with his last breath, when each man, in view

3352 Hagg. ii. 7; Heb. xii. 26.

3353 Heb. xii. 27.

In which, etc. This sentence probably alludes to the excessive zeal of the monks of Nazianzus.

Judges xvi. 19.

The Supporter, Constantius, who died a.d. 360.

The hostile shepherd, George.

3358 Crowning, Clémencet renders "Appointing an evil head over an empire which was not evil," sc. Julian

the Apostate.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

of the higher judgement seat, is a prudent judge of his own conduct. For of these three evils,
which were unworthy of his reign, he said that he was conscious, the murder of his kinsmen,
the proclamation of the Apostate, and the innovation upon the faith; and with these words
he is said to have departed. Thus there was once more authority to teach the word of truth,
and those who had suffered violence had now undisturbed freedom of speech, while jealousy
was whetting the weapons of its wrath. Thus it was with the people of Alexandria, who,
with their usual impatience of the insolent, could not brook the excesses of the man, and
therefore marked his wickedness by an unusual death, and his death by an unusual ignominy. 
For you know that camel,3359 and its strange burden, and the new form of elevation, and
the first and, I think, the only procession, with which to this day the insolent are threatened.
27. But when from this hurricane of unrighteousness, this corrupter of godliness, this
precursor of the wicked one, such satisfaction had been exacted, in a way I cannot praise,
for we must consider not what he ought to have suffered, but what we ought3360 to do: exacted however it was, as the result of the public anger and excitement: and thereupon, our
champion was restored from his illustrious banishment, for so I term his exile on behalf of,
and under the blessing of, the Trinity, amid such delight of the people of the city and of almost
all Egypt, that they ran together from every side, from the furthest limits of the country,
simply to hear the voice of Athanasius, or feast their eyes upon the sight of him, nay even,
as we are told of the Apostles, that they might be hallowed by the shadow3361 and unsubstantial image of his body: so that, many as are the honours, and welcomes bestowed on
frequent occasions in the course of time upon various individuals, not only upon public
rulers and bishops, but also upon the most illustrious of private citizens, not one has been
recorded more numerously attended or more brilliant than this. And only one honour can
be compared with it by Athanasius himself, which had been conferred upon him on his
former entrance into the city, when returning from the same exile for the same reasons.

28. With reference to this honour there was also current some such report as the following; for I will take leave to mention it, even though it be superfluous, as a kind of flavouring
to my speech, or a flower scattered in honour of his entry. After that entry, a certain officer,
who had been twice Consul, was riding into the city; he was one of us, among the most
noted of Cappadocians. I am sure that you know that I mean Philagrius, who won upon
our affections far beyond any one else, and was honoured as much as he was loved, if I may
thus briefly set forth all his distinctions: who had been for a second time entrusted with the

3359 Camel. On the death of Constantius, the pagans of Alexandria murdered George, and carried his mangled

body through the streets on the back of a camel.

3360 We ought, etc. S. Gregory seems to imply that the deed had been done by Christians. Historical writers

and Julian's letter to the people make it clear that this was not really the case.

3361 Acts v. 15.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

government of the city, at the request of the citizens, by the decision of the Emperor. Then
one of the common people present, thinking the crowd enormous, like an ocean whose
bound no eye can see, is reported to have said to one of his comrades and friends-as often
happens in such a case-"Tell me, my good fellow, have you ever before seen the people
pour out in such numbers and so enthusiastically to do honour to any one man?" "No!"
said the young man, "and I fancy that not even Constantius himself would be so treated;"
indicating, by the mention of the Emperor, the climax of possible honour. "Do you speak
of that," said the other with a sweet and merry laugh, "as something wonderfully great? I
can scarcely believe that even the great Athanasius would be welcomed like this," adding at
the same time one of our native oaths in confirmation of his words. Now the point of what
he said, as I suppose you also plainly see, is this, that he set the subject of our eulogy before
the Emperor himself.

29. So great was the reverence of all for the man, and so amazing even now seems the
reception which I have described. For if divided according to birth, age and profession,
(and the city is most usually arranged in this way, when a public honour is bestowed on
anyone) how can I set forth in words that mighty spectacle? They formed one river, and it
were indeed a poet's task to describe that Nile, of really golden stream and rich in crops,
flowing back again from the city to the Chaereum, a day's journey, I take it, and more. Permit
me to revel a while longer in my description: for I am going there, and it is not easy to bring
back even my words from that ceremony. He rode upon a colt, almost, blame me not for
folly, as my Jesus did upon that other colt,3362 whether it were the people of the Gentiles,
whom He mounts in kindness, by setting it free from the bonds of ignorance, or something
else, which the Scripture sets forth. He was welcomed with branches of trees, and garments
with many flowers and of varied hue were torn off and strewn before him and under his
feet: there alone was all that was glorious and costly and peerless treated with dishonour. 
Like, once more, to the entry of Christ were those that went before with shouts and followed
with dances; only the crowd which sung his praises was not of children only, but every
tongue was harmonious, as men contended only to outdo one another. I pass by the universal
cheers, and the pouring forth of unguents, and the nightlong festivities, and the whole city
gleaming with light, and the feasting in public and at home, and all the means of testifying
to a city's joy, which were then in lavish and incredible profusion bestowed upon him. Thus
did this marvellous man, with such a concourse, regain his own city.

30. He lived then as becomes the rulers of such a people, but did he fail to teach as he
lived? Were his contests out of harmony with his teaching? Were his dangers less than
those of men who have contended for any truth? Were his honours inferior to the objects
for which he contended? Did he after his reception in any way disgrace that reception? By

S. Luke xix. 35.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

no means. Everything was harmonious, as an air upon a single lyre, and in the same key;
his life, his teaching, his struggles, his dangers, his return, and his conduct after his return. 
For immediately on his restoration to his Church, he was not like those who are blinded by
unrestrained passion, who, under the dominion of their anger, thrust away or strike at once
whatever comes in their way, even though it might well be spared. But, thinking this to be
a special time for him to consult his reputation, since one who is ill-treated is usually restrained, and one who has the power to requite a wrong is ungoverned, he treated so mildly
and gently those who had injured him, that even they themselves, if I may say so, did not
find his restoration distasteful.

31. He cleansed the temple of those who made merchandise of God, and trafficked in
the things of Christ, imitating Christ3363 in this also; only it was with persuasive words, not
with a twisted scourge that this was wrought. He reconciled also those who were at variance,
both with one another and with him, without the aid of any coadjutor. Those who had been
wronged he set free from oppression, making no distinction as to whether they were of his
own or of the opposite party. He restored too the teaching which had been overthrown: 
the Trinity was once more boldly spoken of, and set upon the lampstand, flashing with the
brilliant light of the One Godhead into the souls of all. He legislated again for the whole
world, and brought all minds under his influence, by letters to some, by invitations to others,
instructing some, who visited him uninvited, and proposing as the single law to all-Good
will.3364 For this alone was able to conduct them to the true issue. In brief, he exemplified
the virtues of two celebrated stones-for to those who assailed him he was adamant, and to
those at variance a magnet, which by some secret natural power draws iron to itself, and
influences the hardest of substances.

32. But yet it was not likely that envy could brook all this, or see the Church restored
again to the same glory and health as in former days, by the speedy healing over, as in the
body, of the wounds of separation. Therefore it was, that he raised up against Athanasius
the Emperor, a rebel like himself,3365 and his peer in villany, inferior to him only from lack
of time, the first of Christian Emperors to rage against Christ, bringing forth all at once the
basilisk of impiety with which he had long been in labour, when he obtained an opportunity,
and shewing himself, at the time when he was proclaimed Emperor, to be a traitor to the
Emperor who had entrusted him with the empire, and a traitor double dyed to the God who
had saved him. He devised the most inhuman of all the persecutions by blending speciousness with cruelty, in his envy of the honour won by the martyrs in their struggles; and so

S. John ii. 15.

τὸ βούλεσθαι, lit. "to will"-i.e. be willing to listen to, and understand the interests for which others

were contending, in a conciliatory spirit-for the sake of truth, not of victory.

3365 He...a rebel like himself. Envy, personifying the Evil one. Cf. supra § 18.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

he called in question their repute for courage, by making verbal twists and quibbles a part
of his character, or to speak the real truth, devoting himself to them with an eagerness born
of his natural disposition, and imitating in varied craft the Evil one who dwelt within him. 
The subjugation of the whole race of Christians he thought a simple task; but found it a
great one to overcome Athanasius and the power of his teaching over us. For he saw that
no success could be gained in the plot against us, because of this man's resistance and opposition; the places of the Christians cut down being at once filled up, surprising though it
seems, by the accession of Gentiles and the prudence of Athanasius. In full view therefore
of this, the crafty perverter and persecutor, clinging no longer to his cloak of illiberal sophistry, laid bare his wickedness and openly banished the Bishop from the city. For the illustrious warrior must needs conquer in three struggles3366 and thus make good his perfect
title to fame.

33. Brief was the interval before Justice pronounced sentence, and handed over the offender3367 to the Persians: sending him forth an ambitious monarch-and bringing him
back a corpse for which no one even felt pity; which, as I have heard, was not allowed to
rest in the grave, but was shaken out and thrown up by the earth which he had shaken: a
prelude-I take it-to his future chastisement. Then another king3368 arose,3369 not
shameless in countenance like the former, nor an oppressor of Israel with cruel tasks and
taskmasters, but most pious and gentle. In order to lay the best of foundations for his empire,
and begin, as is right, by an act of justice, he recalled from exile all the Bishops, but in the
first place him who stood first in virtue and had conspicuously championed the cause of
piety. Further, he inquired into the truth of our faith which had been torn asunder, confused,
and parcelled out into various opinions and portions by many; with the intention, if it were
possible, of reducing the whole world to harmony and union by the co-operation of the
Spirit: and, should he fail in this, of attaching himself to the best party, so as to aid and be
aided by it, thus giving token of the exceeding loftiness and magnificence of his ideas on
questions of the greatest moment. Here too was shown in a very high degree the simplemindedness of Athanasius, and the steadfastness of his faith in Christ. For, when all the
rest who sympathised with us were divided into three parties, and many were faltering in
their conception of the Son, and still more in that of the Holy Ghost, (a point on which to
be only slightly in error was to be orthodox) and few indeed were sound upon both points,
he was the first and only one, or with the concurrence of but a few, to venture to confess in

In three struggles. He was thrice banished. a.d. 336 by Constantine, a.d. 356 under Constantius, and

a.d. 362 by Julian.

The offender, Julian.

3368 Another king-the Emperor Jovian.

Exod. i. 8.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

writing, with entire clearness and distinctness, the Unity of Godhead and Essence of the
Three Persons, and thus to attain in later days, under the influence of inspiration, to the
same faith in regard to the Holy Ghost, as had been bestowed at an earlier time on most of
the Fathers in regard to the Son. This confession, a truly royal and magnificent gift, he
presented to the Emperor, opposing to the unwritten innovation, a written account3370 the
orthodox faith, so that an emperor might be overcome by an emperor, reason by reason,
treatise by treatise.

34. This confession was, it seems, greeted with respect by all, both in West and East,
who were capable of life; some cherishing piety within their own bosoms, if we may credit
what they say, but advancing no further, like a still-born child which dies within its mother's
womb; others kindling to some extent, as it were, sparks, so far as to escape the difficulties
of the time, arising either from the more fervent of the orthodox, or the devotion of the
people; while others spoke the truth with boldness, on whose side I would be, for I dare
make no further boast; no longer consulting my own fearfulness-in other words, the views
of men more unsound than myself (for this we have done enough and to spare, without
either gaining anything from others, or guarding from injury that which was our own, just
as bad stewards do) but bringing forth to light my offspring, nourishing it with eagerness,
and exposing it, in its constant growth, to the eyes of all.

35. This, however, is less admirable than his conduct. What wonder that he, who had
already made actual ventures on behalf of the truth, should confess it in writing? Yet this
point I will add to what has been said, as it seems to me especially wonderful and cannot
with impunity be passed over in a time so fertile in disagreements as this. For his action, if
we take note of him, will afford instruction even to the men of this day. For as, in the case
of one and the same quantity of water, there is separated from it, not only the residue which
is left behind by the hand when drawing it, but also those drops, once contained in the hand,
which trickle out through the fingers; so also there is a separation between us and, not only
those who hold aloof in their impiety, but also those who are most pious, and that both in
regard to such doctrines as are of small consequence (a matter of less moment) and also in
regard to expressions intended to bear the same meaning. We use in an orthodox sense the
terms one Essence and three Hypostases, the one to denote the nature of the Godhead, the
other the properties3371 of the Three; the Italians3372 mean the same, but, owing to the
scantiness of their vocabulary, and its poverty of terms, they are unable to distinguish between

3370 A written account. A synodal letter drawn up in council, probably at Alexandria, and conveyed and

presented to Jovian at Antioch by S. Athanasius.

Properties. Cf. Orat. xliii. 30. note.

The Italians, etc. Cf. Newman's Arians, pp. 376-384. S. Athanasius' Orations against the Arians, Ed.

Bright, p. lxxxi. Pelav. de Trin. IV. ii. 5-10 and iv.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

Essence and Hypostases, and therefore introduce the term Persons, to avoid being understood
to assert three Essences. The result, were it not piteous, would be laughable. This slight
difference of sound was taken to indicate a difference of faith. Then, Sabellianism was suspected in the doctrine of Three Persons, Arianism in that of Three Hypostases, both being
the offspring of a contentious spirit. And then, from the gradual but constant growth of
irritation (the unfailing result of contentiousness) there was a danger of the whole world
being torn asunder in the strife about syllables. Seeing and hearing this, our blessed one,
true man of God and great steward of souls as he was, felt it inconsistent with his duty to
overlook so absurd and unreasonable a rending of the word, and applied his medicine to
the disease. In what manner? He conferred in his gentle and sympathetic way with both
parties, and after he had carefully weighed the meaning of their expressions, and found that
they had the same sense, and were in nowise different in doctrine, by permitting each party
to use its own terms, he bound them3373 together in unity of action.

36. This in itself was more profitable than the long course of labours and teaching on
which all writers enlarge, for in it somewhat of ambition mingled, and consequently, perhaps,
somewhat of novelty in expressions. This again was of more value than his many vigils and
acts of discipline,3374 the advantage of which is limited to those who perform them. This
was worthy of our hero's famous banishments and flights; for the object, in view of which
he chose to endure such sufferings, he still pursued when the sufferings were past. Nor did
he cease to cherish the same ardour in others, praising some, gently rebuking others; rousing
the sluggishness of these, restraining the passion of those; in some cases eager to prevent a
fall, in others devising means of recovery after a fall; simple in disposition, manifold in the
arts of government; clever in argument, more clever still in mind; condescending to the
more lowly, outsoaring the more lofty; hospitable,3375 protector of suppliants, averted of
evils, really combining in himself alone the whole of the attributes parcelled out by the sons
of Greece among their deities. Further he was the patron of the wedded and virgin state
alike, both peaceable and a peacemaker, and attendant upon those who are passing from
hence. Oh, how many a title does his virtue afford me, if I would detail its many-sided excellence.

37. After such a course, as taught and teacher, that his life and habits form the ideal of
an Episcopate, and his teaching the law of orthodoxy, what reward does he win for his piety? 
It is not indeed right to pass this by. In a good old age he closed his life,3376 and was gathered
to his fathers, the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Apostles, and Martyrs, who contended for

Bound them, etc. At the Council of Alexandria, a.d. 362. Newman's Arians, pp. 364, sqq.

3374 Acts of discipline. χαμευνιῶν, "lying on the ground."

3375 Hospitable, etc., titles given to Zeus, and other Greek gods.

3376 Closed his life a.d. 373.

On the Great Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

the truth. To be brief in my epitaph, the honours at his departure surpassed even those of
his return from exile; the object of many tears, his glory, stored up in the minds of all, outshines all its visible tokens. Yet, O thou dear and holy one, who didst thyself, with all thy
fair renown, so especially illustrate the due proportions of speech and of silence, do thou
stay here my words, falling short as they do of thy true meed of praise, though they have
claimed the full exercise of all my powers. And mayest thou cast upon us from above a
propitious glance, and conduct this people in its perfect worship of the perfect Trinity,
which, as Father, Son, Holy Ghost, we contemplate and adore. And mayest thou, if my lot
be peaceful, possess and aid me in my pastoral charge, or if it pass through struggles, uphold
me, or take me to thee, and set me with thyself and those like thee (though I have asked a
great thing) in Christ Himself, our Lord, to whom be all glory, honour, and power for
evermore. Amen.

Introduction to the 'Theological' Orations.

Introduction to the 'Theological' Orations.

Introduction to the "Theological" Orations.

"It has been said with truth," says the writer of the Article on Gregory of Nazianzus in
the Dictionary of Christian Biography, "that these discourses would lose their chief charm
in a translation....Critics have rivalled each other in the praises they have heaped upon
them, but no praise is so high as that of the many Theologians who have found in them
their own best thoughts. A Critic who cannot be accused of partiality towards Gregory has
given in a few words perhaps the truest estimate of them: ‘A solidity of thought, the concentration of all that is spread through the writings of Hilary, Basil, and Athanasius, a flow of
softened eloquence which does not halt or lose itself for a moment, an argument nervous
without dryness on the one hand, and without useless ornament on the other, give these
five Discourses a place to themselves among the monuments of this fine Genius, who was
not always in the same degree free from grandiloquence and affectation. In a few pages,
and in a few hours, Gregory has summed up and closed the controversy of a whole Century.'"3377 They were preached in the Church called Anastasia,3378 at Constantinople,
between 379 and 381, and have gained for their author the title of The Theologian, which
he shares with S. John the Evangelist alone. It should perhaps, however, be noted that the
word is not here used in the wide and general sense in which we employ it, but in a narrower
and more specific way, denoting emphatically the Defender of the Deity of the Logos. His
principal opponents were the followers of Eunomius and Macedonius, and it is almost entirely
against them that these Orations on Theology, or the Godhead of the Word and the Holy
Ghost, are directed. The chief object of the Preacher in these and most other of his public
utterances, is to maintain the Nicene Faith of the Trinity or Trinity of God; that is, the
Doctrine that while there is but One Substance or Essence3379 in the Godhead, and by

3377 De Broglie, "L'Eglise et l'Empire," v. 385.-"Ce sont autant de modèles dans l'art délicat d'imprimer la

forme oratoire aux développements philosophiques. Une pensée substantielle, formée de tous les sucs répandus

dans les écrits d'Hilaire, de Basile et d'Athanase; un courant d'éloquence tempérée qui ne se ralentit, ni ne s'égare

en aucun moment; une argumentation nerveuse sans sècheresse, mais sans vaine parure d'ornements, font à

ces cinq discours une place à part parmi les monuments de ce beau génie, auquel l'emphase et l'affectation ne

furent pas toujours aussi étrangers. En quelques pages, et en quelques heures, Grégoire avait résumé et clos la

controverse de tout un siècle."

See Prolegomena p. 171.

"There is but one divine Essence or Substance; Father, Son, and Spirit, are one in essence, or consubstan-

tial. They are in one another, inseparable, and cannot be conceived without each other. In this point the Nicene

doctrine is thoroughly monotheistic, or monarchian, in distinction from tritheism, which is but a new form of

the polytheism of the pagans. "The terms Essence (οὐσία) and Nature (φύσις), in the philosophical sense, denote

not an individual, a personality, but the Genus or Species; not Unum in Numero, but Ens Unum in Multis. All

men are of the same substance, partake of the same human nature; though as persons and individuals they are

Introduction to the 'Theological' Orations.

consequence God is in the most absolute sense One, yet God is not Unipersonal, but within
this Undivided Unity there are three Self-determining Subjects or Persons, distinguished
from one another by special characteristics (ἰδιότητες) or personal properties-Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. With this object he entered into conflict with the heretics named above,
who denied either the Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, or the perfect Godhead
and Personality of the Holy Ghost.

Eunomius, whom Ullmann calls one of the most interesting heretics of the Fourth
Century, was by birth a Cappadocian, and slightly older than Gregory. As a young man he
was a pupil and amanuensis of Aëtius, by whom the Arian heresy was developed to its extreme
results. The disciple never shrank from drawing the furthest logical conclusions from his
master's premises, or from stating them with a frankness, which to those who regarded the
premises themselves from which he reasoned as horrible blasphemies, seemed nothing less
than diabolical in its impiety. So precisely did he complete and formulate his teacher's
heretical tenets, that the Anomoean Arians were ever afterwards called Eunomians, rather
than Aëtians. They asserted the absolute Unlikeness of the Being of the Father and of the
Son. Starting with the conception of God as Absolute Being, of Whom no Generation can
be predicated, Unbegotten and incapable of Begetting, they went on to say that an Eternal
Generation is inconceivable, and that the Generation of the Son of God must have had a
beginning. Of course, therefore, the Arian conclusion followed, namely, that there was a
time when the Son did not exist (ἦν ποτὲ ὅτε οῦκ ἦν), and His Essence is altogether unlike

very different. The term Homo-ousion, in its strict grammatical sense, differs from Mono-ousion or Touto-

ousion, as well as from Hetero-ousion, and signifies not numerical identity, but equality of essence or community

of nature among several beings. It is clearly thus used in the Chalcedonian Symbol, where it is said that Christ

is ‘consubstantial (Homo-ousios) with the Father as touching the Godhead, and consubstantial with us (and yet

individually distinct from us) as touching the Manhood.' But in the Divine Trinity consubstantiality denotes

not only sameness of kind, but at the same time Numerical unity; not merely the Unum in Specie, but also the

Unum in Numero. The three Persons are related to the Divine Substance not as three individuals to their species,

as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, or Peter, John, and Paul, to human nature; they are only one God. The divine

Substance is absolutely indivisible by reason of its simplicity, and absolutely inextensible and untransferable by

reason of its infinity; whereas a corporeal substance can be divided, and the human nature can be multiplied by

generation. Three Divine substances would limit and exclude each other, and therefore could not be infinite

or absolute. The whole fulness of the one undivided Essence of God, with all its attributes, is in all the Persons

of the Trinity, though in each in His own way; in the Father as Original Principle, in the Son by eternal Generation,

in the Spirit by eternal Procession. The Church teaches not One Divine Essence and Three Persons, but One

Essence In Three Persons. Father, Son, and Spirit cannot be conceived as Three separate individuals, but are

in one another, and form a solidaric Unity." (Schaff, History of the Church, Nic. & Post-Nic. Period, Div. ii. p.

672.)

Introduction to the 'Theological' Orations.

that of the Unbegotten Father. Equality of essence and Similarity of essence, are alike untenable, from the mere fact that the one Essence is Unbegotten, and the other is Begotten. 
The Son, they said, is the First Creation of the Divine Energy, and is the Instrument by
whom God created the world, and in this sense, as the Organ of creative power, may be said
to be the Express Image and Likeness of the Energy of the Father.3380

As they viewed the Holy Ghost as sharing the Divine Nature in an even remoter degree,
as being only the noblest production of the Only-begotten Son, Eunomius was the first
person heretically to discontinue the practice of threefold immersion in Holy Baptism. He
also corrupted the Form of that Sacrament, by setting aside the use of the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and baptizing people "in the name of the Creator, and into
the death of Christ." Therefore the Council of Constantinople ordered that converts from
Eunomianism should be baptized, although those from other forms of Arianism were admitted into the Catholic Church by simple imposition of hands. Through the influence of
the followers of Aëtius, Eunomius became, in 360, Bishop of Cyzicus in Mysia, but he does
not appear to have occupied the See very long. At any rate when Gregory came, in 379, to
Constantinople, he was living in retirement near Chalcedon. All parties concur in representing him as a consummate Dialectician, but the Orthodox declared that he had turned
Theology into a mere Technology. Readiness of Dialectic was the great characteristic of his
Sect, and it was they who introduced into the Capital that bad spirit of theological disputatiousness which Gregory deplores in the first of these famous Orations. He also differed
entirely from Gregory, not merely in the conclusions at which he arrived, but in the method
by which he reached them; following the system of Aristotle, rather than of Plato, and using
an exclusively intellectual method, while Gregory treated Religion as belonging to the entire
man. The point at issue between them, besides this of the Interior relations of the Three
Blessed Persons within the Godhead, was mainly the question as to the complete comprehensibility of the Divine Nature, which the Eunomians maintained, and Gregory denied. 
The latter argued that, while we have a sure conviction that God is, we have not a full understanding of What He is. He would not, however, exclude us from all knowledge of God's
Nature, only he limits our capacity to so much as God has been pleased to reveal to us of
Himself. "In my opinion," he says (Or. xxiv. 4), "it is impossible to express God, and yet
more impossible to conceive Him-seeing that the thick covering of the flesh is an obstacle
to the understanding of the truth." Similarly in the Fourth of these Orations (Or. xxx. 17)
he says, "The Deity cannot be expressed in words. And this is proved to us, not only by arguments, but by the wisest and most ancient of the Hebrews, so far as they have given us

Two terms borrowed from Holy Scripture (Heb. i. 3). But observe, borrowed with a difference-not

"the Image of His Substance," which they would not admit, but of His "Energy," which is a very different con-

ception.

Introduction to the 'Theological' Orations.

reason for conjecture. For they appropriated certain characters to the honour of the Deity,
and would not even allow the name of anything inferior to God to be written with the same
letters as that of God, because to their mind it was improper that the Deity should even to
that extent admit any of His creatures to a share with Himself. How then could they have
admitted that the indivisible and separate Nature can be explained by divisible words?"

In the mind of Gregory, the Orthodox doctrine of the Blessed Trinity is the fundamental
dogma of Christianity, in contrast with all other religions, and with all heretical systems. 
"Remember your confession," he says to his hearers in an Oration against the Arians; "Into
what were you baptized? The Father? Good, but still Jewish. The Son? Good; no longer
Jewish, but not yet perfect. The Holy Ghost? Very good; this is perfect. Was it then simply
into these, or was there some one common Name of these? Yes, there was, and it is God." 
And in the same oration he calls Arianism a new Judaism, because it ascribes full Deity only
to the Father; and he speaks of One Nature in Three Individualities, intelligent, perfect, selfexistent, distinct numerically, but one in Godhead. "In created things," says Ullmann, "the
several individuals are embraced in a common conception, though in themselves only
connected together in thought, while in fact they are not one. Manhood is only an intellectual conception; in fact there exist only Men. But in the Godhead the Three Persons are
not only in conception, but in fact, One; and this Unity is not only a relative but an absolute
Unity, because the Divine Being is perfect in all Three Persons, and in all in a perfect
equality. In this sense therefore Gregory and all orthodox Trinitarians maintain the Unity
of God. But within this Unity there is a true Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, a Trinity
of Persons in a Unity of Nature." We worship, he says (Or. xxxiii. 16), the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, One Nature in Three Individualities. So that, as he says elsewhere (Or. in laud.
Athanasii, xxi. 10), the Trinity is a true Trinity; not a numbering of unlike things, but a
binding together of equals. Each of the Persons is God in the fullest sense. The Son and
the Holy Ghost have their Source of Being in the Father, but in such sense that They are
fully consubstantial with Him, and that neither of Them differs from Him in any particular
of Essence. The points of difference lie in the Personal Attributes; the Father Unoriginate,
and Source of Deity; the Son deriving His Being eternally from the Father, and Himself the
Source of all created existence; the Holy Ghost proceeding eternally from God, and sent
into the world.

In the first of these five discourses the Preacher sets himself to clear the ground for the
fitting presentation of his great theme. He endeavours to lay down the principles on which
Theologians should proceed in such discussions, and very earnestly deprecates the habit of
promiscuous argument in all sorts of places, upon all sorts of occasions, and before all sorts
of hearers, of the deepest and most sacred truths and mysteries of the Faith. They only
should be allowed to engage in such conversation who are fitted for it by the practice of

Introduction to the 'Theological' Orations.

Christian virtue. For others there are many other subjects upon which they can exercise
their dialectical attainments, without doing or incurring any injury.

In the second oration Gregory lays down the position referred to above, that it is impossible for even the most exalted human reason fully to grasp the Nature of God, though
His Existence is patent to all. We can only, he says, predicate negatives concerning Him. 
He gives three reasons for this incapacity. First to enhance our estimation of this knowledge,
when attained hereafter; secondly to save us from the danger of falling through pride, like
Lucifer, if we attained it prematurely; and thirdly, to support and sustain us in the trials and
conflicts of this life, by the certainty that its attainment hereafter will be the reward of
faithful service in them. The cause of our present inability is the body with which our soul
is united, the grossness of whose present condition hinders us from rising to the complete
apprehension of the invisible and immaterial. God, out of compassion for our weakness,
has been pleased to designate Himself in Holy Scripture by various names taken from material objects, or from moral virtues; but these are only stepping-stones to the truth, and
have indeed been sometimes perverted, and made a basis for polytheism. It is, however,
only natural that the Divine Essence should be shrouded in Mystery, for the same is the case
with the created essences also.

In the Third and Fourth he deals with the question of the Son. His position may be
summed up as follows: The Son is absolutely of One Substance with the Father, and shares
with Him all the Attributes of Godhead. Yet He is a distinct Person, marked off by the fact
that He is begotten of the Father. But we must be careful not to allow this term "Begotten"
to suggest to us any analogy with created things. It is wholly independent of time and space
and sense.

This position he had to defend against many assailants, and especially against the Eunomians. These heretics maintained that the use of this term necessarily implied a beginning
of the Essence of the Son, and they asked the orthodox to tell them when that beginning
took place. Gregory replies that the Generation of God the Son is beyond all time; pointing
out that Paternity is an Essential attribute of God the Father, and therefore is as eternal as
His Essence, so that there never was a time when He was not the Father, and consequently
never a time when the Generation of the Son began. He admits that there is a sense in which
it is possible to say that the Son and the Spirit are not unoriginate, but then you must be
careful not to use the word Origin in the sense of Beginning, but in that of Cause. They
derive Their Being eternally from the Father, and all Three Persons are coeternal together. 
In respect of cause They are not unoriginate, but the cause is not necessarily prior in time
to its effect, just as the Sun is not prior to its own light. In respect of time, then, They may
be said to be unoriginate, for the Sources of time cannot be subject to time. "If the Father
has not ceased to beget, His Generation is an imperfect one; and if He has ceased, He must
have begun, for an end implies a beginning." "Not so," says Gregory, "unless you are prepared

Introduction to the 'Theological' Orations.

to admit that what has no end has necessarily no beginning; and in that case what will you
say about the Angels, or the human soul? These will have no end; had either of them
therefore no beginning?" By a similar process of Reductio ad absurdum he dissipates all the
quibbles of Eunomian sophistry, and lays down the orthodox Faith of the Church. Then
in the remainder of the Third and Fourth Orations he goes on to examine the Scriptural
testimony adduced by his opponents, and to shew by a similar catena on the other side that
the overwhelming preponderance of the authority of the Bible is clearly against them. In
connection with this point he lays down the canon that in the interpretation of Scripture in
regard to our Lord, all expressions savouring of humility or weakness are to be referred to
that pure Humanity which He assumed for our sake; while all that speaks of Majesty and
Power belongs to His Godhead.

In the Fifth he deals with the doctrine of the Holy Ghost. The heresy of Arius was at
first directly concerned only with the Person of our Lord, though not without a side-glance
at that also of the Holy Ghost. The Council of Nicaea had confined itself to the first question,
and its Creed ended with, "We believe in the Holy Ghost." This, it was afterwards argued,
was enough to proclaim His Divinity, and so Gregory argues in this Oration, "If He be only
a creature, how do we believe on Him, how are we made perfect in Him, for the first of these
belongs to Deity, the second may be said of anything" (c. vi.). The reason, however, that
the Great Synod made no express definition on the point seems to have been that the controversy had not yet been carried so far in direct terms (cf. S. Basil, Epp. lxxviii. ccclxxxvii.). 
But fifty years later the growth of the heresy rendered a definition of the Church's faith on
this point needful; and in 363, on his return from his fourth period of exile, S. Athanasius
held a provincial Synod at Alexandria, in whose Synodical Letter to the Emperor Jovian the
Godhead of the Holy Ghost is maintained in terms which, as Canon Bright says, partly anticipate the language of the Creed of Constantinople (Dict. Biog. Art. Athanasius). The new
development of the heresy had begun to appear at Constantinople as well as in Thrace and
Asia Minor. Macedonius, a Semi-Arian, had been elected Bishop of Constantinople in 341,
and in spite of violent opposition, which he met by still more violent measures, had maintained his position till 360, when he was deposed and driven out by the Anomoean Arians. 
He then in his retirement became the leader of the Semi-Arian party. Accepting the statement
that the Son was Like in Essence to the Father, he would not concede even this to the Holy
Ghost, but declared Him to be a mere creature (Thdt. Hist. Eccl. ii. 6), and the servant or
minister of the Son; applying to Him terms which without error could only be used of the
Angels (Sozomen. H. E. iv. 27). His followers were known as Macedonians, or sometimes
Marathonians, from a certain Marathonius, formerly a Paymaster of the Praetorian Guards,
who had become a Deacon of Constantinople, and, having done much in the way of
founding and maintaining Monastic Houses and Houses of Charity in the City, was consecrated by Macedonius as Bishop of Nicomedia. They were also known as Pneumatomachi,

Introduction to the 'Theological' Orations.

from the nature of their Heresy. A controversy had now begun to arise as to the precise
position which the true faith was to assign to the Holy Spirit. There were those who left it
doubtful whether He had indeed a separate Personality, or whether He were not rather a
mere Influence or Activity of the Father and the Son. Gregory tells us how, when he came
to the Metropolis, he found the wildest confusion prevalent. Some, he says, conceived of
the Holy Ghost as a mere Energy of God, others thought Him a Creature, others believed
Him to be God; while many out of an alleged reverence for Holy Scripture, hesitated to give
Him the Name of God. To this last class belonged, according to Socrates (H. E. ii. 45), Eustathius, who had been ejected from the Bishopric of Sebasteia in Pontus. He refused to
admit that the Holy Spirit is God, while yet He did not dare to affirm that He is a mere
creature. When Gregory proceeded to preach the Deity of the Spirit, he was accused of introducing a strange and unscriptural god, because, as he acknowledges, the letter of the
Bible is not so clear on the doctrine of the Spirit as it is on that of the Son. But he points
out that it is possible to be superstitious in one's reverence for the letter of the Bible, and
that such superstition leads directly to heresy. He explains the reticence of the New Testament on this point by shewing (in this Oration, cc. 26, 27) how God's Self-Revelation to
man has always been a gradual one; how the Old Testament revealed the Father clearly, with
obscure hints about the Son; and the New Testament manifested the Son, but only hinted
at the Godhead of the Spirit; but now, he says, the Spirit dwells among us, and allows us to
recognize Him more clearly. For it would not have been advisable, as long as the Godhead
of the Father was not acknowledged, to proclaim that of the Son; and while the Deity of the
Son was not yet accepted, to add another burden in that of the Holy Spirit. Recognizing
thus a Divine economy in the Self-Revelations of God, he was not averse to using a similar
caution in his own dealings with weak or ill-instructed minds.3381 But yet when real necessity
arose, he could speak out with perfect plainness on this subject; and he even incurred danger
to life and limb from the violence of the opposing party. He met their opposition by the
clearest statements of the Catholic Dogma. "Is the Spirit God?" he asks. "Yes." "But is He
consubstantial?" "Yes, if He is God." (Orat. xxxi. 10.) He appeals both to the Bible, and to
the experience of the Christian life. If the Spirit is not to be adored, how can He deify me
in Baptism? From the Spirit comes our new Birth; from the new Birth our new Life; and
from the new Life our knowledge of the Dignity of Him from Whom it is derived (Ibid. C.
29). He is, however, milder in his treatment of these heretics than of the strict Arians, both,
as he says, because they approached more nearly to the Orthodox belief on the subject of
the Son, and because their conspicuous piety of life shewed that their error was not altogether
wilful. In this Oration he shows that though the Name of God may not actually be given in

In his Fifty-third Epistle, addressed to S. Basil, there is an amusing instance of his defence of this tolerant

disposition, which S. Basil also displayed in dealing with minds of this class.

Introduction to the 'Theological' Orations.

the New Testament to the Holy Ghost, yet all the attributes of God are ascribed to Him, and
that therefore the use of the Name is a matter of legitimate inference. He carries on the argument in the Oration on Pentecost (No. XLI. See the Introduction to that Oration in the
present Volume).

With regard to the doctrine of the Procession, Gregory gives us no clear information. 
He is silent as to the Procession from the Son. It is enough for him that the Spirit is not
Begotten but Proceeding (in SS. Lumina, c. 12), and that Procession is His distinctive
Property, which involves at once His Personality and His Essential Deity.

At length in 381 the work of local Synods and episcopal conferences was completed and
clinched by the Ruling of a Second Ecumenical Council. It is true that the Council which
Theodosius summoned to meet at Constantinople could scarcely have regarded itself as
possessing Ecumenical authority; whilst in the West it certainly was not regarded in this
light before the Sixth Century. Nevertheless the honours of Ecumenicity were ultimately
awarded to it by the whole Church, because it completes the series of Great Councils by
which the Doctrine of the Deity of the Holy Spirit was affirmed; and in fact it expressed the
final judgment of the Catholic Church upon the Macedonian controversy. Its first Canon
anathematises the Semiarians or Pneumatomachi by name as well as the Eunomians or
Anomoean Arians (cf. Dict. Biog. Art. Gregory of Nazianzus, by Dr. H. B. Swete).

The First Theological Oration. A Preliminary Discourse Against the Eunomians.

The First Theological Oration. A Preliminary Discourse Against the Eun...

Oration XXVII.

The First Theological Oration.

A Preliminary Discourse Against the Eunomians.

I. I am to speak against persons who pride themselves on their eloquence; so, to begin
with a text of Scripture, "Behold, I am against thee, O thou proud one,"3382 not only in thy
system of teaching, but also in thy hearing, and in thy tone of mind. For there are certain
persons who have not only their ears3383 and their tongues, but even, as I now perceive,
their hands too, itching for our words; who delight in profane babblings, and oppositions
of science falsely so called,3384 and strifes about words, which tend to no profit; for so Paul,
the Preacher and Establisher of the "Word cut short,"3385 the disciple and teacher of the
Fishermen,3386 calls all that is excessive or superfluous in discourse. But as to those to whom
we refer, would that they, whose tongue is so voluble and clever in applying itself to noble
and approved language, would likewise pay some attention to actions. For then perhaps in
a little while they would become less sophistical, and less absurd and strange acrobats of
words, if I may use a ridiculous expression about a ridiculous subject.

II. But since they neglect every path of righteousness, and look only to this one point,
namely, which of the propositions submitted to them they shall bind or loose, (like those
persons who in the theatres perform wrestling matches in public, but not that kind of
wrestling in which the victory is won according to the rules of the sport, but a kind to deceive
the eyes of those who are ignorant in such matters, and to catch applause), and every marketplace must buzz with their talking; and every dinner party be worried to death with silly
talk and boredom; and every festival be made unfestive and full of dejection, and every occasion of mourning be consoled by a greater calamity3387-their questions-and all the
women's apartments accustomed to simplicity be thrown into confusion and be robbed of
its flower of modesty by the torrent of their words...since, I say this is so, the evil is intolerable
and not to be borne, and our Great Mystery is in danger of being made a thing of little mo-

Jer. l. 31.

2 Tim. iv. 3.

Ib. ii. 16.

3385 Rom. ix. 28.

S. Paul is called a disciple of the fishermen, as having been in some sense their follower (though in fact

he was never a literal disciple of any of them); and their teacher as having taught such Successors of the Apostles

as SS. Timothy and Titus.

i.e. be thrown into the shade by something more serious which caused them by comparison to be scarcely

felt any longer.

The First Theological Oration. A Preliminary Discourse Against the Eun...

ment. Well then, let these spies3388 bear with us, moved as we are with fatherly compassion,
and as holy Jeremiah says, torn in our hearts;3389 let them bear with us so far as not to give
a savage reception to our discourse upon this subject; and let them, if indeed they can, restrain
their tongues for a short while and lend us their ears. However that may be, you shall at
any rate suffer no loss. For either we shall have spoken in the ears of them that will hear,3390
and our words will bear some fruit, namely an advantage to you (since the Sower soweth
the Word3391 upon every kind of mind; and the good and fertile bears fruit), or else you
will depart despising this discourse of ours as you have despised others, and having drawn
from it further material for gainsaying and railing at us, upon which to feast yourselves yet
more.

And you must not be astonished if I speak a language which is strange to you and contrary to your custom, who profess to know everything and to teach everything in a too impetuous and generous manner...not to pain you by saying ignorant and rash.

III. Not to every one, my friends, does it belong to philosophize about God; not to every
one; the Subject is not so cheap and low; and I will add, not before every audience, nor at
all times, nor on all points; but on certain occasions, and before certain persons, and within
certain limits.

Not to all men, because it is permitted only to those who have been examined, and are
passed masters in meditation, and who have been previously purified in soul and body, or
at the very least are being purified. For the impure to touch the pure is, we may safely say,
not safe, just as it is unsafe to fix weak eyes upon the sun's rays. And what is the permitted
occasion? It is when we are free from all external defilement or disturbance, and when that
which rules within us is not confused with vexatious or erring images; like persons mixing
up good writing with bad, or filth with the sweet odours of unguents. For it is necessary to
be truly at leisure to know God; and when we can get a convenient season, to discern the
straight road of the things divine. And who are the permitted persons? They to whom the
subject is of real concern, and not they who make it a matter of pleasant gossip, like any
other thing, after the races, or the theatre, or a concert, or a dinner, or still lower employments. To such men as these, idle jests and pretty contradictions about these subjects are
a part of their amusement.

IV. Next, on what subjects and to what extent may we philosophize? On matters
within our reach, and to such an extent as the mental power and grasp of our audience may

κατάσκοποι quasi ψευδεπίσκοποι.

Jer. iv. 19.

Ecclus. xxv. 9.

S. Mark iv. 3 and 14. "He that soweth the Word soweth upon," etc. So Billius and the Benedictines, but

the rendering in the text seems preferable.

The First Theological Oration. A Preliminary Discourse Against the Eun...

extend. No further, lest, as excessively loud sounds injure the hearing, or excess of food the
body, or, if you will, as excessive burdens beyond the strength injure those who bear them,
or excessive rains the earth; so these too, being pressed down and overweighted by the
stiffness, if I may use the expression, of the arguments should suffer loss even in respect of
the strength they originally possessed.3392

V. Now, I am not saying that it is not needful to remember God at all times;...I must
not be misunderstood, or I shall be having these nimble and quick people down upon me
again. For we ought to think of God even more often than we draw our breath; and if the
expression is permissible, we ought to do nothing else. Yea, I am one of those who entirely
approve that Word which bids us meditate day and night,3393 and tell at eventide and
morning and noon day,3394 and praise the Lord at every time;3395 or, to use Moses' words,
whether a man lie down, or rise up, or walk by the way, or whatever else he be doing3396-and
by this recollection we are to be moulded to purity. So that it is not the continual remembrance of God that I would hinder, but only the talking about God; nor even that as in itself
wrong, but only when unseasonable; nor all teaching, but only want of moderation. As of
even honey repletion and satiety, though it be of honey, produce vomiting;3397 and, as Solomon says and I think, there is a time for every thing,3398 and that which is good ceases to
be good if it be not done in a good way; just as a flower is quite out of season in winter, and
just as a man's dress does not become a woman, nor a woman's a man; and as geometry is
out of place in mourning, or tears at a carousal; shall we in this instance alone disregard the
proper time, in a matter in which most of all due season should be respected? Surely not,
my friends and brethren (for I will still call you Brethren, though you do not behave like
brothers). Let us not think so nor yet, like hot tempered and hard mouthed horses, throwing
off our rider Reason, and casting away Reverence, that keeps us within due limits, run far
away from the turning point,3399 but let us philosophize within our proper bounds, and not

i.e. Should not only fail to be strengthened thereby, but be actually weakened, through their inability to

understand the argument. A bad defence weakens a good cause.

Ps. i. 2.

Ps. lv. 17.

Ps. xxxiv. 1.

3396 Deut. vi. 7.

Prov. xxv. 16.

Eccles. iii. 1.

The course of the chariot races in the Greek Games was round the Hippodrome a certain number of

times. To facilitate this arrangement, a party wall was built down the middle, and at either end of it certain posts

were set up called νύσσαι, or in Latin Metae, round which the cars were to turn. The object of the charioteers

was to turn round these as close as possible, to save distance; and to do this well it was necessary to have the

horses under perfect control, as well as perfectly trained, to make the semicircle at full gallop almost on the axis

The First Theological Oration. A Preliminary Discourse Against the Eun...

be carried away into Egypt, nor be swept down into Assyria3400, nor sing the Lord's song
in a strange land, by which I mean before any kind of audience, strangers or kindred, hostile
or friendly, kindly or the reverse, who watch what we do with over great care, and would
like the spark of what is wrong in us to become a flame, and secretly kindle and fan it and
raise it to heaven with their breath and make it higher than the Babylonian flame which
burnt up every thing around it. For since their strength lies not in their own dogmas, they
hunt for it in our weak points. And therefore they apply themselves to our-shall I say
"misfortunes" or "failings"?-like flies to wounds. But let us at least be no longer ignorant
of ourselves, or pay too little attention to the due order in these matters. And if it be impossible to put an end to the existing hostility, let us at least agree upon this, that we will
utter Mysteries under our breath, and holy things in a holy manner, and we will not cast to
ears profane that which may not be uttered, nor give evidence that we possess less gravity
than those who worship demons, and serve shameful fables and deeds; for they would
sooner give their blood to the uninitiated than certain words. But let us recognize that as
in dress and diet and laughter and demeanour there is a certain decorum, so there is also
in speech and silence; since among so many titles and powers of God, we pay the highest
honour to The Word. Let even our disputings then be kept within bounds.

VI. Why should a man who is a hostile listener to such words be allowed to hear about
the Generation of God, or his creation, or how God was made out of things which had no
existence, or of section and analysis and division?3401 Why do we make our accusers judges? 
Why do we put swords into the hands of our enemies? How, thinkest thou, or with what
temper, will the arguments about such subjects be received by one who approves of adulteries,
and corruption of children, and who worships the passions and cannot conceive of aught
higher than the body...who till very lately set up gods for himself, and gods too who were
noted for the vilest deeds? Will it not first be from a material standpoint, shamefully and
ignorantly, and in the sense to which he has been accustomed? Will he not make thy
Theology a defence for his own gods and passions? For if we ourselves wantonly misuse
these words,3402 it will be a long time before we shall persuade them to accept our philosophy. And if they are in their own persons inventors of evil things, how should they refrain
from grasping at such things when offered to them? Such results come to us from mutual

of the car. The horses that got out of hand and galloped wildly round a large circle would almost certainly lose

distance enough to lose the race, while the driver would be laughed at for his unskilfulness.

3400 Dan. iii. 12.

The allusion is to the Arian and Eunomian habit of gossiping about the most sacred subjects in every

sort of place or company or time, in order to promote their heresy.

Such expressions as Generation and the like would certainly be understood in a material sense by the

heathen; and so would place an unnecessary stumbling-block in the way of their conversion.

The First Theological Oration. A Preliminary Discourse Against the Eun...

contest. Such results follow to those who fight for the Word beyond what the Word approves;
they are behaving like mad people, who set their own house on fire, or tear their own children,
or disavow their own parents, taking them for strangers.

VII. But when we have put away from the conversation those who are strangers to it,
and sent the great legion3403 on its way to the abyss into the herd of swine, the next thing
is to look to ourselves, and polish our theological self to beauty like a statue. The first point
to be considered is-What is this great rivalry of speech and endless talking? What is this
new disease of insatiability? Why have we tied our hands and armed our tongues? We do
not praise either hospitality, or brotherly love, or conjugal affection, or virginity; nor do we
admire liberality to the poor, or the chanting of Psalms, or nightlong vigils,3404 or tears. 
We do not keep under the body by fasting, or go forth to God by prayer; nor do we subject
the worse to the better-I mean the dust to the spirit-as they would do who form a just
judgment of our composite nature; we do not make our life a preparation for death; nor do
we make ourselves masters of our passions, mindful of our heavenly nobility; nor tame our
anger when it swells and rages, nor our pride that bringeth to a fall, nor unreasonable grief,
nor unchastened pleasure, nor meretricious laughter, nor undisciplined eyes, nor insatiable
ears, nor excessive talk, nor absurd thoughts, nor aught of the occasions which the Evil One
gets against us from sources within ourselves; bringing upon us the death that comes through
the windows,3405 as Holy Scripture saith; that is, through the senses. Nay we do the very
opposite, and have given liberty to the passions of others, as kings give releases from service
in honour of a victory, only on condition that they incline to our side, and make their assault
upon God more boldly, or more impiously. And we give them an evil reward for a thing
which is not good, license of tongue for their impiety.

VIII. And yet, O talkative Dialectician, I will ask thee one small question,3406 and answer
thou me, as He saith to Job, Who through whirlwind and cloud giveth Divine admonitions.3407 Are there many mansions in God's House, as thou hast heard, or only one? Of
course you will admit that there are many, and not only one. Now, are they all to be filled,
or only some, and others not; so that some will be left empty, and will have been prepared
to no purpose? Of course all will be filled, for nothing can be in vain which has been done
by God. And can you tell me what you will consider this Mansion to be? Is it the rest and
glory which is in store There for the Blessed, or something else?-No, not anything else. 

Luke viii. 31.

S. John Chrysostom, consecrated Archbishop of Constantinople in 397, incurred much unpopularity

among his clergy by insisting on the revival of the Night Hours of prayer.

Jer. ix. 21.

Job xxxviii. 3.

Job xxxviii. 1.

The First Theological Oration. A Preliminary Discourse Against the Eun...

Since then we are agreed upon this point, let us further examine another also. Is there any
thing that procures these Mansions, as I think there is; or is there nothing?-Certainly there
is-What is it? Is it not that there are various modes of conduct, and various purposes, one
leading one way, another another way, according to the proportion of faith, and these we
call Ways? Must we, then, travel all, or some of these Ways...the same individual along
them all, if that be possible; or, if not, along as many as may be; or else along some of them? 
And even if this may not be, it would still be a great thing, at least as it appears to me, to
travel excellently along even one.-"You are right in your conception."-What then when
you hear there is but One way, and that a narrow one,3408 does the word seem to you to
shew? That there is but one on account of its excellence. For it is but one, even though it
be split into many parts. And narrow because of its difficulties, and because it is trodden
by few in comparison with the multitude of the adversaries, and of those who travel along
the road of wickedness. "So I think too." Well, then, my good friend, since this is so, why
do you, as though condemning our doctrine for a certain poverty, rush headlong down that
one which leads through what you call arguments and speculations, but I frivolities and
quackeries? Let Paul reprove you with those bitter reproaches, in which, after his list of the
Gifts of Grace, he says, Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? etc.3409

IX. But, be it so. Lofty thou art, even beyond the lofty, even above the clouds, if thou
wilt, a spectator of things invisible, a hearer of things unspeakable; one who hast ascended
after Elias, and who after Moses hast been deemed worthy of the Vision of God, and after
Paul hast been taken up into heaven; why dost thou mould the rest of thy fellows in one day
into Saints, and ordain them Theologians, and as it were breathe into them instruction, and
make them many councils of ignorant oracles? Why dost thou entangle those who are
weaker in thy spider's web, if it were something great and wise? Why dost thou stir up
wasps' nests against the Faith? Why dost thou suddenly spring a flood of dialectics upon
us, as the fables of old did the Giants? Why hast thou collected all that is frivolous and unmanly among men, like a rabble, into one torrent, and having made them more effeminate
by flattery, fashioned a new workshop, cleverly making a harvest for thyself out of their want
of understanding? Dost thou deny that this is so, and are the other matters of no account
to thee? Must thy tongue rule at any cost, and canst thou not restrain the birthpang of thy
speech? Thou mayest find many other honourable subjects for discussion. To these turn
this disease of thine with some advantage. Attack the silence of Pythagoras,3410 and the

3408 Matt. vii. 14.

1 Cor. xii. 29.

The disciples of Pythagoras were made to keep silence absolutely for five years as a qualification for

initiation into the mysteries of his order. Further, they were bidden to abstain from eating beans, as these were

said to be one receptacle of human souls in the course of their peregrinations; and when asked for proof of their

peculiar doctrines, contented themselves with the reply, "αὐτὸς ἔθα" "the master said so."

The First Theological Oration. A Preliminary Discourse Against the Eun...

Orphic beans, and the novel brag about "The Master said." Attack the ideas of Plato,3411
and the transmigrations and courses of our souls, and the reminiscences, and the unlovely
loves of the soul for lovely bodies. Attack the atheism of Epicurus,3412 and his atoms, and
his unphilosophic pleasure; or Aristotle's petty Providence, and his artificial system, and
his discourses about the mortality of the soul, and the humanitarianism of his doctrine. 
Attack the superciliousness of the Stoa,3413 or the greed and vulgarity of the Cynic.3414 
Attack the "Void and Full" (what nonsense), and all the details about the gods and the sacrifices and the idols and demons, whether beneficent or malignant, and all the tricks that
people play with divination, evoking of gods, or of souls, and the power of the stars. And
if these things seem to thee unworthy of discussion as petty and already often confuted, and
thou wilt keep to thy line, and seek the satisfaction of thy ambition in it; then here too I will
provide thee with broad paths. Philosophize about the world or worlds; about matter; about
soul; about natures endowed with reason, good or bad; about resurrection, about judgment,
about reward, or the Sufferings of Christ. For in these subjects to hit the mark is not useless,
and to miss it is not dangerous. But with God we shall have converse, in this life only in a
small degree; but a little later, it may be, more perfectly, in the Same, our Lord Jesus Christ,
to Whom be glory for ever. Amen.

Plato taught that all things that exist are copies of certain objective archetypal Forms, emanations from

the Mind of God, which God copied in creation. He also taught a doctrine of transmigration of souls.

Epicurus, an Athenian philosopher, of a materialistic type, taught that God had no existence, and that

the world was made by a fortuitous concourse of innumerable atoms of matter, which are self-existent; and he

placed the highest good in pleasure, which he defined as the absence of pain.

3413 The Stoa, a school of philosophers opposed to the Epicureans, took their name from a certain Colonnade

at Athens, in which Zeno, their founder, used to teach. Their highest good consisted in the complete subdual

of all feeling; and so they were not unnaturally characterized by a haughty affectation of indifference.

The Cynics, so called from their snarling way, were a school founded by Antisthenes. They professed

to despise everything human.

The Second Theological Oration.

The Second Theological Oration.

Oration XXVIII.

The Second Theological Oration.

I. In the former Discourse we laid down clearly with respect to the Theologian, both
what sort of character he ought to bear, and on what kind of subject he may philosophize,
and when, and to what extent. We saw that he ought to be, as far as may be, pure, in order
that light may be apprehended by light; and that he ought to consort with serious men, in
order that his word be not fruitless through falling on an unfruitful soil; and that the suitable
season is when we have a calm within from the whirl of outward things; so as not like
madmen3415 to lose our breath; and that the extent to which we may go is that to which we
have ourselves advanced, or to which we are advancing. Since then these things are so, and
we have broken up for ourselves the fallows of Divinity3416, so as not to sow upon thorns,3417
and have made plain the face of the ground,3418 being moulded and moulding others by
Holy Scripture...let us now enter upon Theological questions, setting at the head thereof
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, of Whom we are to treat; that the Father may be
well pleased, and the Son may help us, and the Holy Ghost may inspire us; or rather that
one illumination may come upon us from the One God, One in diversity, diverse in Unity,
wherein is a marvel.

II. Now when I go up eagerly into the Mount3419-or, to use a truer expression, when
I both eagerly long, and at the same time am afraid (the one through my hope and the other
through my weakness) to enter within the Cloud, and hold converse with God, for so God
commands; if any be an Aaron, let him go up with me, and let him stand near, being ready,
if it must be so, to remain outside the Cloud. But if any be a Nadad or an Abihu, or of the
Order of the Elders, let him go up indeed, but let him stand afar off, according to the value
of his purification. But if any be of the multitude, who are unworthy of this height of contemplation, if he be altogether impure let him not approach at all,3420 for it would be dangerous to him; but if he be at least temporarily purified, let him remain below and listen to
the Voice alone, and the trumpet,3421 the bare words of piety, and let him see the Mountain
smoking and lightening, a terror at once and a marvel to those who cannot get up. But if
any is an evil and savage beast, and altogether incapable of taking in the subject matter of

3415 A marginal reading noted by the Benedictines gives "sobbing" or "panting," which is a better sense.

Jerem. iv. 3.

3417 Matt. xiii. 7.

Isa. xxviii. 25.

Exod. xxiv. 1.

Ib. xix. 14.

Ib. xix. 16-18.

The Second Theological Oration.

Contemplation and Theology, let him not hurtfully and malignantly lurk in his den among
the woods, to catch hold of some dogma or saying by a sudden spring, and to tear sound
doctrine to pieces by his misrepresentations, but let him stand yet afar off and withdraw
from the Mount, or he shall be stoned and crushed, and shall perish miserably in his
wickedness. For to those who are like wild beasts true and sound discourses are stones. If
he be a leopard let him die with his spots.3422 If a ravening and roaring lion, seeking what
he may devour3423 of our souls or of our words; or a wild boar, trampling under foot the
precious and translucent pearls of the Truth;3424 or an Arabian3425 and alien wolf, or one
keener even than these in tricks of argument; or a fox, that is a treacherous and faithless
soul, changing its shape according to circumstances or necessities, feeding on dead or putrid
bodies, or on little vineyards3426 when the large ones have escaped them; or any other carnivorous beast, rejected by the Law as unclean for food or enjoyment; our discourse must
withdraw from such and be engraved on solid tables of stone, and that on both sides because
the Law is partly visible, and partly hidden; the one part belonging to the mass who remain
below, the other to the few who press upward into the Mount.

III. What is this that has happened to me, O friends, and initiates, and fellow-lovers of
the truth? I was running to lay hold on God, and thus I went up into the Mount, and drew
aside the curtain of the Cloud, and entered away from matter and material things, and as
far as I could I withdrew within myself. And then when I looked up, I scarce saw the back
parts of God;3427 although I was sheltered by the Rock, the Word that was made flesh for
us. And when I looked a little closer, I saw, not the First and unmingled Nature, known to
Itself-to the Trinity, I mean; not That which abideth within the first3428 veil, and is hidden
by the Cherubim; but only that Nature, which at last even reaches to us. And that is, as far
as I can learn, the Majesty, or as holy David calls it, the Glory3429 which is manifested among
the creatures, which It has produced and governs. For these are the Back Parts of God,
which He leaves behind Him, as tokens of Himself3430 like the shadows and reflection of

Jer. xiii. 23.

1 Pet. v. 8.

3424 Matt. vii. 6.

3425 Arabian: So the LXX. renders the word which in A.V. Jer. v. 6, is translated "of the evening," and in the

Vulg. "at evening." R.V. gives as an alternative, "of the deserts."

3426 The LXX. in Cant. xi. 15, admits of this translation as well as of that followed by A.V.

Exod. xxxiii. 23.

3428 This veil of the Mercy Seat, spoken of in Exod. xxvi. 31, signifies in Gregory's sense the denial of contem-

plation of that Highest Nature.

Ps. viii. 1.

3430 The Face of God signifies His Essence and Deity, which were before all worlds: His back parts are Creation

and Providence, by which He reveals Himself.

The Second Theological Oration.

the sun in the water, which shew the sun to our weak eyes, because we cannot look at the
sun himself, for by his unmixed light he is too strong for our power of perception. In this
way then shalt thou discourse of God; even wert thou a Moses and a god to Pharaoh;3431
even wert thou caught up like Paul to the Third Heaven,3432 and hadst heard unspeakable
words; even wert thou raised above them both, and exalted to Angelic or Archangelic place
and dignity. For though a thing be all heavenly, or above heaven, and far higher in nature
and nearer to God than we, yet it is farther distant from God, and from the complete comprehension of His Nature, than it is lifted above our complex and lowly and earthward
sinking composition.

IV. Therefore we must begin again thus. It is difficult to conceive God but to define
Him in words is an impossibility, as one of the Greek teachers of Divinity3433 taught, not
unskilfully, as it appears to me; with the intention that he might be thought to have apprehended Him; in that he says it is a hard thing to do; and yet may escape being convicted of
ignorance because of the impossibility of giving expression to the apprehension. But in my
opinion it is impossible to express Him, and yet more impossible to conceive Him. For that
which may be conceived may perhaps be made clear by language, if not fairly well, at any
rate imperfectly, to any one who is not quite deprived of his hearing, or slothful of understanding. But to comprehend the whole of so great a Subject as this is quite impossible and
impracticable, not merely to the utterly careless and ignorant, but even to those who are
highly exalted, and who love God, and in like manner to every created nature; seeing that
the darkness of this world and the thick covering of the flesh is an obstacle to the full understanding of the truth. I do not know whether it is the same with the higher natures and
purer Intelligences3434 which because of their nearness to God, and because they are illumined with all His Light, may possibly see, if not the whole, at any rate more perfectly
and distinctly than we do; some perhaps more, some less than others, in proportion to their
rank.

V. But enough has been said on this point. As to what concerns us, it is not only the
Peace of God3435 which passeth all understanding and knowledge, nor only the things which

Exod. iv. 2.

2 Cor. xii. 2.

Plato, Tim., 28 E.

3434 No one doubts, say the Benedictine Editors, that the Angels do see God, and that men, too, will see Him,

when they attain to Eternal Bliss. S. Thomas (Summa I. qu. xii. 4) argues that the Angels have cognition of God's

Essence not by nature but by grace: but yet (Ib. qu. lvi. 3) that they have by nature a certain cognition of Him,

as represented and as it were mirrored in their own essence; though not the actual vision of His Essence. The

Angel, he says again (Ib. qu. lxiv. 1) has a higher cognition of God than man has, on account of the perfection

of his intellect; and this cognition remains even in the fallen Angels.

Phil. iv. 7.

The Second Theological Oration.

God hath stored up in promise for the righteous, which "eye hath not seen, nor ear heard,
nor mind conceived"3436 except in a very small degree, nor the accurate knowledge of the
Creation. For even of this I would have you know that you have only a shadow when you
hear the words, "I will consider the heavens, the work of Thy fingers, the moon and the
stars,"3437 and the settled order therein; not as if he were considering them now, but as
destined to do so hereafter. But far before them is That nature Which is above them, and
out of which they spring, the Incomprehensible and Illimitable-not, I mean, as to the fact
of His being, but as to Its nature. For our preaching is not empty, nor our Faith vain,3438
nor is this the doctrine we proclaim; for we would not have you take our candid statement
as a starting point for a quibbling denial of God, or of arrogance on account of our confession
of ignorance. For it is one thing to be persuaded of the existence of a thing, and quite another
to know what it is.

VI. Now our very eyes and the Law of Nature teach us that God exists and that He is
the Efficient and Maintaining Cause of all things: our eyes, because they fall on visible objects,
and see them in beautiful stability and progress, immovably moving and revolving if I may
so say; natural Law, because through these visible things and their order, it reasons back to
their Author. For how could this Universe have come into being or been put together, unless
God had called it into existence, and held it together? For every one who sees a beautifully
made lute, and considers the skill with which it has been fitted together and arranged, or
who hears its melody, would think of none but the lutemaker, or the luteplayer, and would
recur to him in mind, though he might not know him by sight. And thus to us also is
manifested That which made and moves and preserves all created things, even though He
be not comprehended by the mind. And very wanting in sense is he who will not willingly
go thus far in following natural proofs; but not even this which we have fancied or formed,
or which reason has sketched for us, proves the existence of a God. But if any one has got
even to some extent a comprehension of this, how is God's Being to be demonstrated? Who
ever reached this extremity of wisdom? Who was ever deemed worthy of so great a gift? 
Who has opened the mouth of his mind and drawn in the Spirit,3439 so as by Him that
searcheth all things, yea the deep thing of God,3440 to take in God, and no longer to need
progress, since he already possesses the Extreme Object of desire, and That to which all the
social life and all the intelligence of the best men press forward?

Isa. lxiv. 4; 1 Cor. ii. 9.

Ps. viii. 3.

1 Cor. xv. 19.

Ps. cxix. 21.

1 Cor. ii. 10.

The Second Theological Oration.

VII. For what will you conceive the Deity to be, if you rely upon all the approximations
of reason? Or to what will reason carry you, O most philosophic of men and best of Theologians, who boast of your familiarity with the Unlimited? Is He a body? How then is He
the Infinite and Limitless, and formless, and intangible, and invisible? or are these attributes
of a body? What arrogance for such is not the nature of a body! Or will you say that He
has a body, but not these attributes? O stupidity, that a Deity should possess nothing more
than we do. For how is He an object of worship if He be circumscribed? Or how shall He
escape being made of elements, and therefore subject to be resolved into them again, or
even altogether dissolved? For every compound is a starting point of strife, and strife of
separation, and separation of dissolution. But dissolution is altogether foreign to God and
to the First Nature. Therefore there can be no separation, that there may be no dissolution,
and no strife that there may be no separation, and no composition that there may be no
strife. Thus also there must be no body, that there may be no composition, and so the argument is established by going back from last to first.

VIII. And how shall we preserve the truth that God pervades all things and fills all, as
it is written "Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith the Lord,"3441 and "The Spirit of the Lord
filleth the world,"3442 if God partly contains and partly is contained? For either He will
occupy an empty Universe, and so all things will have vanished for us, with this result, that
we shall have insulted God by making Him a body, and by robbing Him of all things which
He has made; or else He will be a body contained in other bodies, which is impossible; or
He will be enfolded in them, or contrasted with them, as liquids are mixed, and one divides
and is divided by another;-a view which is more absurd and anile than even the atoms of
Epicurus3443 and so this argument concerning the body will fall through, and have no body
and no solid basis at all. But if we are to assert that He is immaterial (as for example that
Fifth Element which some3444 have imagined), and that He is carried round in the circular
movement...let us assume that He is immaterial, and that He is the Fifth Element; and, if
they please, let Him be also bodiless in accordance with the independent drift and arrangement of their argument; for I will not at present differ with them on this point; in what respect
then will He be one of those things which are in movement and agitation, to say nothing of
the insult involved in making the Creator subject to the same movement as the creatures,
and Him That carries all (if they will allow even this) one with those whom He carries. 

Jer. xxiii. 24.

3442 Wisd. i. 7.

Epicurus taught that Matter is eternal, and consists of an indefinite number of Atoms or indivisible

units, floating about in space, and mutually attracting and repelling each other; and that all that exists is due to

some chance meeting and coalition of these atoms.

3444 This is a speculation of Aristotle, who imagined a Fifth Element, consisting of formless matter.

The Second Theological Oration.

Again, what is the force that moves your Fifth Element, and what is it that moves all things,
and what moves that, and what is the force that moves that? And so on ad infinitum. And
how can He help being altogether contained in space if He be subject to motion? But if they
assert that He is something other than this Fifth Element; suppose it is an angelic nature
that they attribute to Him, how will they shew that Angels are corporeal, or what sort of
bodies they have? And how far in that case could God, to Whom the Angels minister, be
superior to the Angels? And if He is above them, there is again brought in an irrational
swarm of bodies, and a depth of nonsense, that has no possible basis to stand upon.

IX. And thus we see that God is not a body. For no inspired teacher has yet asserted
or admitted such a notion, nor has the sentence of our own Court allowed it. Nothing then
remains but to conceive of Him as incorporeal. But this term Incorporeal, though granted,
does not yet set before us-or contain within itself His Essence, any more than Unbegotten,
or Unoriginate, or Unchanging, or Incorruptible, or any other predicate which is used
concerning God or in reference to Him. For what effect is produced upon His Being or
Substance3445 by His having no beginning, and being incapable of change or limitation? 
Nay, the whole question of His Being is still left for the further consideration and exposition
of him who truly has the mind of God and is advanced in contemplation. For just as to say
"It is a body," or "It was begotten," is not sufficient to present clearly to the mind the various
objects of which these predicates are used, but you must also express the subject of which
you use them, if you would present the object of your thought clearly and adequately (for
every one of these predicates, corporeal, begotten, mortal, may be used of a man, or a cow,
or a horse). Just so he who is eagerly pursuing the nature of the Self-existent will not stop
at saying what He is not, but must go on beyond what He is not, and say what He is; inasmuch
as it is easier to take in some single point than to go on disowning point after point in endless
detail, in order, both by the elimination of negatives and the assertion of positives to arrive
at a comprehension of this subject.

But a man who states what God is not without going on to say what He is, acts much
in the same way as one would who when asked how many twice five make, should answer,
"Not two, nor three, nor four, nor five, nor twenty, nor thirty, nor in short any number below
ten, nor any multiple of ten;" but would not answer "ten," nor settle the mind of his questioner upon the firm ground of the answer. For it is much easier, and more concise to shew
what a thing is not from what it is, than to demonstrate what it is by stripping it of what it
is not. And this surely is evident to every one.

Petavius (De Trin. IV. ii. 7) notes that ὑπόστασις seems used here of the Essence and Nature common

to the Three Persons of the Blessed Trinity.

The Second Theological Oration.

X. Now since we have ascertained that God is incorporeal, let us proceed a little further
with our examination. Is He Nowhere or Somewhere. For if He is Nowhere,3446 then some
person of a very inquiring turn of mind might ask, How is it then that He can even exist? 
For if the non-existent is nowhere, then that which is nowhere is also perhaps non-existent. 
But if He is Somewhere, He must be either in the Universe, or above the Universe. And if
He is in the Universe, then He must be either in some part or in the whole. If in some part,
then He will be circumscribed by that part which is less than Himself; but if everywhere,
then by one which is further and greater-I mean the Universal, which contains the Particular; if the Universe is to be contained by the Universe, and no place is to be free from circumscription. This follows if He is contained in the Universe. And besides, where was He
before the Universe was created, for this is a point of no little difficulty. But if He is above
the Universe, is there nothing to distinguish this from the Universe, and where is this above
situated? And how could this Transcendence and that which is transcended be distinguished
in thought, if there is not a limit to divide and define them? Is it not necessary that there
shall be some mean to mark off the Universe from that which is above the Universe? And
what could this be but Place, which we have already rejected? For I have not yet brought
forward the point that God would be altogether circumscript, if He were even comprehensible
in thought: for comprehension is one form of circumscription.

XI. Now, why have I gone into all this, perhaps too minutely for most people to listen
to, and in accordance with the present manner of discourse, which despises noble simplicity,
and has introduced a crooked and intricate3447 style? That the tree may be known by its
fruits;3448 I mean, that the darkness which is at work in such teaching may be known by
the obscurity of the arguments. For my purpose in doing so was, not to get credit for myself
for astonishing utterances, or excessive wisdom, through tying knots and solving difficulties
(this was the great miraculous gift of Daniel),3449 but to make clear the point at which my
argument has aimed from the first. And what was this? That the Divine Nature cannot be
apprehended by human reason, and that we cannot even represent to ourselves all its
greatness. And this not out of envy, for envy is far from the Divine Nature, which is passionless, and only good and Lord of all;3450 especially envy of that which is the most honour-

3446 Nowhere is in this passage used in an ambiguous sense. As asserted of God, it means that His being is

in no way limited by place: not that He has no existence in place, for He is everywhere, and He transcends all

place. Before the creation of the Universe He existed, and He created Place, which therefore cannot be the seat

of His Being.

v. 1. Affected. The allusion is especially to the ostentatious dialectics and tedious arguments of Aëtius

and his followers, Eunomius and others.

Luke vi. 44.

cf. Dan. v. 12.

Plato, Tim., 10.

The Second Theological Oration.

able3451 of all His creatures. For what does the Word prefer to the rational and speaking
creatures? Why, even their very existence is a proof of His supreme goodness. Nor yet is
this incomprehensibility for the sake of His own glory and honour, Who is full,3452 as if His
possession of His glory and majesty depended upon the impossibility of approaching Him. 
For it is utterly sophistical and foreign to the character, I will not say of God, but of any
moderately good man, who has any right ideas about himself, to seek his own supremacy
by throwing a hindrance in the way of another.

XII. But whether there be other causes for it also, let them see who are nearer God, and
are eye witnesses and spectators of His unsearchable judgments;3453 if there are any who
are so eminent in virtue, and who walk in the paths of the Infinite, as the saying is. As far,
however, as we have attained, who measure with our little measure things hard to be understood, perhaps one reason is to prevent us from too readily throwing away the possession
because it was so easily come by. For people cling tightly to that which they acquire with
labour; but that which they acquire easily they quickly throw away, because it can be easily
recovered. And so it is turned into a blessing, at least to all men who are sensible, that this
blessing is not too easy. Or perhaps it is in order that we may not share the fate of Lucifer,
who fell, and in consequence of receiving the full light make our necks stiff against the Lord
Almighty, and suffer a fall, of all things most pitiable, from the height we had attained. Or
perhaps it may be to give a greater reward hereafter for their labour and glorious life to those
who have here been purified, and have exercised long patience in respect of that which they
desired.

Therefore this darkness of the body has been placed between us and God, like the cloud
of old between the Egyptians and the Hebrews;3454 and this is perhaps what is meant by
"He made darkness His secret place,"3455 namely our dulness, through which few can see
even a little. But as to this point, let those discuss it whose business it is; and let them ascend
as far as possible in the examination. To us who are (as Jeremiah saith), "prisoners of the
earth,"3456 and covered with the denseness of carnal nature, this at all events is known, that
as it is impossible for a man to step over his own shadow, however fast he may move (for
the shadow will always move on as fast as it is being overtaken) or, as it is impossible for
the eye to draw near to visible objects apart from the intervening air and light, or for a fish
to glide about outside of the waters; so it is quite impracticable for those who are in the body

v. 1. Most Akin to Himself. Combefis.

Isa. i. 11.

3453 Rom. xi. 33.

Exod. xiv. 20.

Ps. xviii. 11.

Lam. iii. 34.

The Second Theological Oration.

to be conversant with objects of pure thought apart altogether from bodily objects. For
something in our own environment is ever creeping in, even when the mind has most fully
detached itself from the visible, and collected itself, and is attempting to apply itself to those
invisible things which are akin to itself.

XIII. This will be made clear to you as follows:-Are not Spirit, and Fire, and Light,
Love, and Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Mind and Reason, and the like, the names of
the First Nature? What then? Can you conceive of Spirit apart from motion and diffusion;
or of Fire without its fuel and its upward motion, and its proper colour and form? Or of
Light unmingled with air, and loosed from that which is as it were its father and source? 
And how do you conceive of a mind? Is it not that which is inherent in some person not
itself, and are not its movements thoughts, silent or uttered? And Reason...what else can
you think it than that which is either silent within ourselves, or else outpoured (for I shrink
from saying loosed)? And if you conceive of Wisdom, what is it but the habit of mind which
you know as such, and which is concerned with contemplations either divine or human? 
And Justice and Love, are they not praiseworthy dispositions, the one opposed to injustice,
the other to hate, and at one time intensifying themselves, at another relaxed, now taking
possession of us, now leaving us alone, and in a word, making us what we are, and changing
us as colours do bodies? Or are we rather to leave all these things, and to look at the Deity
absolutely, as best we can, collecting a fragmentary perception of It from Its images? What
then is this subtile thing, which is of these, and yet is not these, or how can that Unity which
is in its Nature uncomposite and incomparable, still be all of these, and each one of them
perfectly? Thus our mind faints to transcend corporeal things, and to consort with the Incorporeal, stripped of all clothing of corporeal ideas, as long as it has to look with its inherent
weakness at things above its strength. For every rational nature longs for God and for the
First Cause, but is unable to grasp Him, for the reasons I have mentioned. Faint therefore
with the desire, and as it were restive and impatient of the disability, it tries a second course,
either to look at visible things, and out of some of them to make a god...(a poor contrivance,
for in what respect and to what extent can that which is seen be higher and more godlike
than that which sees, that this should worship that?) or else through the beauty and order
of visible things to attain to that which is above sight; but not to suffer the loss of God
through the magnificence of visible things.

XIV. From this cause some have made a god of the Sun, others of the Moon, others of
the host of Stars, others of heaven itself with all its hosts, to which they have attributed the
guiding of the Universe, according to the quality or quantity of their movement. Others
again of the Elements, earth, air, water, fire, because of their useful nature, since without
them human life cannot possibly exist. Others again have worshipped any chance visible
objects, setting up the most beautiful of what they saw as their gods. And there are those
who worship pictures and images, at first indeed of their own ancestors-at least, this is the

The Second Theological Oration.

case with the more affectionate and sensual-and honour the departed with memorials; and
afterwards even those of strangers are worshipped by men of a later generation separated
from them by a long interval; through ignorance of the First Nature, and following the traditional honour as lawful and necessary; for usage when confirmed by time was held to be
Law. And I think that some who were courtiers of arbitrary power and extolled bodily
strength and admired beauty, made a god in time out of him whom they honoured, perhaps
getting hold of some fable to help on their imposture.

XV. And those of them who were most subject to passion deified their passions, or
honoured them among their gods; Anger and Blood-thirstiness, Lust and Drunkenness,
and every similar wickedness; and made out of this an ignoble and unjust excuse for their
own sins. And some they left on earth, and some they hid beneath the earth (this being the
only sign of wisdom about them), and some they raised to heaven.3457 O ridiculous distribution of inheritance! Then they gave to each of these concepts the name of some god or
demon, by the authority and private judgment of their error, and set up statues whose
costliness is a snare, and thought to honour them with blood and the steam of sacrifices,
and sometimes even by most shameful actions, frenzies and manslaughter. For such honours
were the fitting due of such gods. And before now men have insulted themselves by worshipping monsters, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things,3458 and of the very vilest
and most absurd, and have made an offering to them of the glory of God; so that it is not
easy to decide whether we ought most to despise the worshippers or the objects of their
worship. Probably the worshippers are far the most contemptible, for though they are of a
rational nature, and have received grace from God, they have set up the worse as the better. 
And this was the trick of the Evil One, who abused good to an evil purpose, as in most of
his evil deeds. For he laid hold of their desire in its wandering in search of God, in order
to distort to himself3459 the power, and steal the desire, leading it by the hand, like a blind
man asking a road; and he hurled down and scattered some in one direction and some in
another, into one pit of death and destruction.

XVI. This was their course. But reason receiving us in our desire for God, and in our
sense of the impossibility of being without a leader and guide, and then making us apply
ourselves to things visible and meeting with the things which have been since the beginning,
doth not stay its course even here. For it was not the part of Wisdom to grant the sovereignty

3457 Referring to the mythical partition of the Universe, which gave heaven to Zeus, the sea to Poseidon, and

the infernal regions to Aidoneus.

3458 Rom. i. 23.

It was a very general belief in the early Church that the gods whom the heathen worshipped were in

reality actual evil spirits; and this belief is certainly supported by S. Paul's argument about εἰδωλόθυτον in 1

Cor. x. 19-21.

The Second Theological Oration.

to things which are, as observation tells us, of equal rank. By these then it leads to that which
is above these, and by which being is given to these. For what is it which ordered things in
heaven and things in earth, and those which pass through air, and those which live in water;
or rather the things which were before these, heaven and earth, air and water? Who mingled
these, and who distributed them? What is it that each has in common with the other, and
their mutual dependence and agreement? For I commend the man, though he was a heathen,
who said, What gave movement to these, and drives their ceaseless and unhindered motion? 
Is it not the Artificer of them Who implanted reason in them all, in accordance with which
the Universe is moved and controlled? Is it not He who made them and brought them into
being? For we cannot attribute such a power to the Accidental. For, suppose that its existence
is accidental, to what will you let us ascribe its order? And if you like we will grant you this: 
to what then will you ascribe its preservation and protection in accordance with the terms
of its first creation. Do these belong to the Accidental, or to something else? Surely not to
the Accidental. And what can this Something Else be but God? Thus reason that proceeds
from God, that is implanted in all from the beginning and is the first law in us, and is bound
up in all, leads us up to God through visible things. Let us begin again, and reason this out.
XVII. What God is in nature and essence, no man ever yet has discovered or can discover. Whether it will ever be discovered is a question which he who will may examine and
decide. In my opinion it will be discovered when that within us which is godlike and divine,
I mean our mind and reason, shall have mingled with its Like, and the image shall have ascended to the Archetype, of which it has now the desire. And this I think is the solution of
that vexed problem as to "We shall know even as we are known."3460 But in our present
life all that comes to us is but a little effluence, and as it were a small effulgence from a great
Light. So that if anyone has known God, or has had the testimony of Scripture to his
knowledge of God, we are to understand such an one to have possessed a degree of knowledge
which gave him the appearance of being more fully enlightened than another who did not
enjoy the same degree of illumination; and this relative superiority is spoken of as if it were
absolute knowledge, not because it is really such, but by comparison with the power of that
other.

XVIII. Thus Enos "hoped to call upon the Name of the Lord."3461 Hope was that for
which he is commended; and that, not that he should know God, but that he should call
upon him. And Enoch was translated,3462 but it is not yet clear whether it was because he

1 Cor. xiii. 12, but with a reading ἐπιγνώσεσθε, which is not in the New Testament.

3461 Gen. iv. 26. The verb has by some been taken as passive, and not middle, "hoped that the Name of the

Lord would be called upon."

Ib. v. 24, Ecclus. xlix. 14.

The Second Theological Oration.

already comprehended the Divine Nature, or in order that he might comprehend it. And
Noah's3463 glory was that he was pleasing to God; he who was entrusted with the saving of
the whole world from the waters, or rather of the Seeds of the world, escaped the Deluge in
a small Ark. And Abraham, great Patriarch though he was, was justified by faith,3464 and
offered a strange victim,3465 the type of the Great Sacrifice. Yet he saw not God as God, but
gave Him food as a man.3466 He was approved because he worshipped as far as he comprehended.3467 And Jacob dreamed of a lofty ladder and stair of Angels, and in a mystery
anointed a pillar3468-perhaps to signify the Rock that was anointed for our sake-and gave
to a place the name of The House of God3469 in honour of Him whom he saw; and wrestled
with God in human form; whatever this wrestling of God with man may mean...possibly
it refers to the comparison of man's virtue with God's; and he bore on his body the marks
of the wrestling, setting forth the defeat of the created nature; and for a reward of his reverence he received a change of his name; being named, instead of Jacob, Israel-that great
and honourable name. Yet neither he nor any one on his behalf, unto this day, of all the
Twelve Tribes who were his children, could boast that he comprehended the whole nature
or the pure sight of God.

XIX. To Elias neither the strong wind, nor the fire, nor the earthquake, as you learn
from the story,3470 but a light breeze adumbrated the Presence of God, and not even this
His Nature. And who was this Elias? The man whom a chariot of fire took up to heaven,
signifying the superhuman excellency of the righteous man. And are you not amazed at
Manoah the Judge of yore, and at Peter the disciple in later days; the one being unable to
endure the sight even of one in whom was a representation of God; and saying, "We are
undone, O wife, we have seen God;"3471 speaking as though even a vision of God could not

3463 Gen. vi. 8.

Ib. xviii. 18.

Ib. xxviii. 2.

3466 Gen. xviii. 2. Elias Cretensis sees in this occurrence a foreshadowing of the Incarnation; and also with

many others, a revelation of the Trinity, in that Abraham saw Three and conversed with One.

3467 Gen. xxxii. 28.

Ib. ver. 28.

v. l. The Form of God, which would refer to the occasion cited below. The reading is grammatically

easier, as an accusative is required; but in that case we might have expected the wrestling with the Angel to have

been mentioned first, as the name Penuel was given by Jacob on the day following the night in which he wrestled,

and received his own change of name. The Benedictines, while retaining House in text and version, express a

preference for Form, because the subject of the argument is the Vision of God.

1 Kings xix. 11, 12. LXX. has a Sound of a Light breeze.

Judg. xiii. 22.

The Second Theological Oration.

be grasped by human beings, let alone the Nature of God; and the other unable to endure
the Presence of Christ in his boat and therefore bidding Him depart;3472 and this though
Peter was more zealous than the others for the knowledge of Christ, and received a blessing
for this,3473 and was entrusted with the greatest gifts. What would you say of Isaiah or
Ezekiel, who was an eyewitness of very great mysteries, and of the other Prophets; for one
of these saw the Lord of Sabaoth sitting on the Throne of glory,3474 and encircled and praised
and hidden by the sixwinged Seraphim, and was himself purged by the live coal, and equipped
for his prophetic office. And the other describes the Cherubic Chariot3475 of God, and the
Throne upon them, and the Firmament over it, and Him that shewed Himself in the Firmament, and Voices, and Forces, and Deeds.3476 And whether this was an appearance by
day, only visible to Saints, or an unerring vision of the night, or an impression on the mind
holding converse with the future as if it were the present; or some other ineffable form of
prophecy, I cannot say; the God of the Prophets knoweth, and they know who are thus inspired. But neither these of whom I am speaking, nor any of their fellows ever stood before
the Council3477 and Essence of God, as it is written, or saw, or proclaimed the Nature of
God.

XX. If it had been permitted to Paul to utter what the Third Heaven3478 contained, and
his own advance, or ascension, or assumption thither, perhaps we should know something
more about God's Nature, if this was the mystery of the rapture. But since it was ineffable,
we too will honour it by silence. Thus much we will hear Paul say about it, that we know
in part and we prophesy in part.3479 This and the like to this are the confessions of one who
is not rude in knowledge,3480 who threatens to give proof of Christ speaking in him, the

Luke v. 8.

3473 Matt. xvi. 16, 17.

Isa. vi. 1 sqq.

Ezek. i. 4-28.

v. l. Orders, i.e. of angels.

This is a quotation from the LXX. of Jer. xxiii. 18, where for ὑποστήματι Aquila has ἀπορρήτῳ, and

Symmachus ὁμιλίᾳ, (according to Trommius). ὑπόστημα properly means a Station of troops, and such is the

meaning in the other two places where the word occurs in the LXX., viz.:-2 Sam. xxiii. 14, and 1 Chron. xi. 16. 

The Hebrew word which it represents in this passage is one of frequent use, and means "a Council," or, in a

sense derived from this, Familiar Intercourse. In Job xv. 8 it is rendered in A.V. The Secret of God, where the

LXX. has σύνταγμα. The Vulgate in both cases has Concilium Dei; the Benedictines however render it Substance. 

A.V. has Counsel, and in marg. Secret; while R.V. reads Council, with no marginal alternative.

2 Cor. xii. 2.

1 Cor. xiii. 9.

2 Cor. xi. 6.

The Second Theological Oration.

great doctor and champion of the truth. Wherefore he estimates all knowledge on earth
only as through a glass darkly,3481 as taking its stand upon little images of the truth. Now,
unless I appear to anyone too careful, and over anxious about the examination of this matter,
perhaps it was of this and nothing else that the Word Himself intimated that there were
things which could not now be borne, but which should be borne and cleared up hereafter,3482 and which John the Forerunner of the Word and great Voice of the Truth declared
even the whole world could not contain.3483

XXI. The truth then, and the whole Word is full of difficulty and obscurity; and as it
were with a small instrument we are undertaking a great work, when with merely human
wisdom we pursue the knowledge of the Self-existent, and in company with, or not apart
from, the senses, by which we are borne hither and thither, and led into error, we apply
ourselves to the search after things which are only to be grasped by the mind, and we are
unable by meeting bare realities with bare intellect to approximate somewhat more closely
to the truth, and to mould the mind by its concepts.

Now the subject of God is more hard to come at,3484 in proportion as it is more perfect
than any other, and is open to more objections, and the solutions of them are more laborious. 
For every objection, however small, stops and hinders the course of our argument, and cuts
off its further advance, just like men who suddenly check with the rein the horses in full
career, and turn them right round by the unexpected shock. Thus Solomon, who was the
wisest of all men,3485 whether before him or in his own time, to whom God gave breadth
of heart, and a flood of contemplation, more abundant than the sand, even he, the more he
entered into the depth, the more dizzy he became, and declared the furthest point of wisdom
to be the discovery of how very far off she was from him.3486 Paul also tries to arrive at, I
will not say the nature of God, for this he knew was utterly impossible, but only the judgments
of God; and since he finds no way out, and no halting place in the ascent, and moreover,
since the earnest searching of his mind after knowledge does not end in any definite conclusion, because some fresh unattained point is being continually disclosed to him (O marvel,
that I have a like experience), he closes his discourse with astonishment, and calls this the
riches of God,3487 and the depth, and confesses the unsearchableness of the judgments of

1 Cor. xiii. 12.

John xvi. 12.

S. John xxi. 25. By a curious slip of the tongue S. Gregory here attributes to the Baptist words of the

Evangelist.

cf. Petav. de Deo, iii., c. 7.

1 Kings iii. 12.

Ecc. vii. 23.

3487 Rom. xi. 23.

The Second Theological Oration.

God, in almost the very words of David, who at one time calls God's judgments the great
deep whose foundations cannot be reached by measure or sense;3488 and at another says
that His knowledge of him and of his own constitution was marvellous,3489 and had attained
greater strength than was in his own power or grasp.

XXII. For if, he says, I leave everything else alone, and consider myself and the whole
nature and constitution of man, and how we are mingled, and what is our movement, and
how the mortal was compounded with the immortal, and how it is that I flow downwards,
and yet am borne upwards, and how the soul is circumscribed;3490 and how it gives life and
shares in feelings; and how the mind is at once circumscribed and unlimited,3491 abiding
in us and yet travelling over the Universe in swift motion and flow; how it is both received
and imparted by word, and passes through air, and enters with all things; how it shares in
sense, and enshrouds itself away from sense. And even before these questions-what was
our first moulding and composition in the workshop of nature, and what is our last formation
and completion? What is the desire for and imparting of nourishment, and who brought
us spontaneously to those first springs and sources of life? How is the body nourished by
food, and the soul by reason? What is the drawing of nature, and the mutual relation between
parents and children, that it should be held together by a spell of love? How is it that species
are permanent, and are different in their characteristics, although there are so many that
their individual marks cannot be described? How is it that the same animal is both mortal
and immortal3492, the one by decease, the other by coming into being? For one departs,
and another takes its place, just like the flow of a river, which is never still, yet ever constant. 
And you might discuss many more points concerning men's members and parts, and their
mutual adaptation both for use and beauty, and how some are connected and others disjoined, some are more excellent and others less comely, some are united and others divided,
some contain and others are contained, according to the law and reason of Nature. Much
too might be said about voices and ears. How is it that the voice is carried by the vocal organs,
and received by the ears, and both are joined by the smiting and resounding of the medium
of the air? Much too of the eyes, which have an indescribable communion with visible objects,
and which are moved by the will alone, and that together, and are affected exactly as is the

Ps. xxxvi. 7.

Ib. cxxxix. 6.

v. l. And how the soul is carried round.

v. l. Invisible.

3492 Gregory is not here speaking of the immorality of the individual soul, but of that of the Race, which it

shares with other animals, and which is effected by continual succession.

The Second Theological Oration.

mind. For with equal speed the mind is joined to the objects of thought, the eye to those of
sight. Much too concerning the other senses, not objects of the research of reason. And
much concerning our rest in sleep, and the figments of dreams, and of memory and remembrance; of calculation, and anger, and desire; and in a word, all by which this little world
called Man is swayed.

XXIII. Shall I reckon up for you the differences of the other animals, both from us and
from each other,-differences of nature, and of production, and of nourishment, and of
region, and of temper, and as it were of social life? How is it that some are gregarious and
others solitary, some herbivorous and others carnivorous, some fierce and others tame,
some fond of man and domesticated, others untamable and free? And some we might call
bordering on reason and power of learning, while others are altogether destitute of reason,
and incapable of being taught. Some with fuller senses, others with less; some immovable,
and some with the power of walking, and some very swift, and some very slow; some surpassing in size or beauty, or in one or other of these respects; others very small or very ugly,
or both; some strong, others weak, some apt at self-defence, others timid and crafty3493 and
others again are unguarded. Some are laborious and thrifty, others altogether idle and improvident. And before we come to such points as these, how is it that some are crawling
things, and others upright; some attached to one spot, some amphibious; some delight in
beauty and others are unadorned; some are married and some single; some temperate and
others intemperate; some have numerous offspring and others not; some are long-lived and
others have but short lives? It would be a weary discourse to go through all the details.

XXIV. Look also at the fishy tribe gliding through the waters, and as it were flying
through the liquid element, and breathing its own air, but in danger when in contact with
ours, as we are in the waters; and mark their habits and dispositions, their intercourse and
their births, their size and their beauty, and their affection for places, and their wanderings,
and their assemblings and departings, and their properties which so nearly resemble those
of the animals that dwell on land; in some cases community, in others contrast of properties,
both in name and shape. And consider the tribes of birds, and their varieties of form and
colour, both of those which are voiceless and of songbirds. What is the reason of their
melody, and from whom came it? Who gave to the grasshopper the lute in his breast, and
the songs and chirruping on the branches, when they are moved by the sun to make their
midday music, and sing among the groves, and escort the wayfarer with their voices? Who
wove the song for the swan when he spreads his wings to the breezes, and makes melody of
their rustling? For I will not speak of the forced voices, and all the rest that art contrives
against the truth. Whence does the peacock, that boastful bird of Media, get his love of

3493 The Benedictines here insert Some well protected; but it is their own conjecture, and is not found in the

Manuscripts.

The Second Theological Oration.

beauty and of praise (for he is fully conscious of his own beauty), so that when he sees any
one approaching, or when, as they say, he would make a show before his hens, raising his
neck and spreading his tail in circle around him, glittering like gold and studded with stars,
he makes a spectacle of his beauty to his lovers with pompous strides? Now Holy Scripture
admires the cleverness in weaving even of women, saying, Who gave to woman skill in
weaving and cleverness in the art of embroidery?3494 This belongeth to a living creature
that hath reason, and exceedeth in wisdom and maketh way even as far as the things of
heaven.

XXV. But I would have you marvel at the natural knowledge even of irrational creatures,
and if you can, explain its cause. How is it that birds have for nests rocks and trees and
roofs, and adapt them both for safety and beauty, and suitably for the comfort of their
nurslings? Whence do bees and spiders get their love of work and art, by which the former
plan their honeycombs, and join them together by hexagonal and co-ordinate tubes, and
construct the foundation by means of a partition and an alternation of the angles with
straight lines; and this, as is the case, in such dusky hives and dark combs; and the latter
weave their intricate webs by such light and almost airy threads stretched in divers ways,
and this from almost invisible beginnings, to be at once a precious dwelling, and a trap for
weaker creatures with a view to enjoyment of food? What Euclid ever imitated these, while
pursuing philosophical enquiries with lines that have no real existence, and wearying himself
with demonstrations? From what Palamedes came the tactics, and, as the saying is, the
movements and configurations of cranes, and the systems of their movement in ranks and
their complicated flight? Who were their Phidiae and Zeuxides, and who were the Parrhasii
and Aglaophons who knew how to draw and mould excessively beautiful things? What
harmonious Gnossian chorus of Daedalus, wrought for a girl3495 to the highest pitch of
beauty? What Cretan Labyrinth, hard to get through, hard to unravel, as the poets say, and
continually crossing itself through the tricks of its construction? I will not speak of the ants'
storehouses and storekeepers, and of their treasurings of wood in quantities corresponding
to the time for which it is wanted, and all the other details which we know are told of their
marches and leaders and their good order in their works.

XXVI. If this knowledge has come within your reach and you are familiar with these
branches of science, look at the differences of plants also, up to the artistic fashion of the
leaves, which is adapted both to give the utmost pleasure to the eye, and to be of the greatest
advantage to the fruit. Look too at the variety and lavish abundance of fruits, and most of
all at the wondrous beauty of such as are most necessary. And consider the power of roots,

Job xxxviii. 36. LXX.

3495 The allusion is to a group made by Daedalus for Ariadne, representing a chorus of youths and maidens,

which seemed to be moving in musical rhythm. It is described by Homer (Il., xviii., 592 sqq.).

The Second Theological Oration.

and juices, and flowers, and odours, not only so very sweet, but also serviceable as medicines;
and the graces and qualities of colours; and again the costly value, and the brilliant transparency of precious stones. Since nature has set before you all things as in an abundant banquet
free to all, both the necessaries and the luxuries of life, in order that, if nothing else, you
may at any rate know God by His benefits, and by your own sense of want be made wiser
than you were. Next, I pray you, traverse the length and breadth of earth, the common
mother of all, and the gulfs of the sea bound together with one another and with the land,
and the beautiful forests, and the rivers and springs abundant and perennial, not only of
waters cold and fit for drinking, and on the surface of the earth; but also such as running
beneath the earth, and flowing under caverns, are then forced out by a violent blast, and
repelled, and then filled with heat by this violence of strife and repulsion, burst out by little
and little wherever they get a chance, and hence supply our need of hot baths in many parts
of the earth, and in conjunction with the cold give us a healing which is without cost and
spontaneous. Tell me how and whence are these things? What is this great web unwrought
by art? These things are no less worthy of admiration, in respect of their mutual relations
than when considered separately.

How is it that the earth stands solid and unswerving? On what is it supported? What
is it that props it up, and on what does that rest? For indeed even reason has nothing to
lean upon, but only the Will of God. And how is it that part of it is drawn up into mountain
summits, and part laid down in plains, and this in various and differing ways? And because
the variations are individually small, it both supplies our needs more liberally, and is more
beautiful by its variety; part being distributed into habitations, and part left uninhabited,
namely all the great height of Mountains, and the various clefts of its coast line cut off from
it. Is not this the clearest proof of the majestic working of God?

XXVII. And with respect to the Sea even if I did not marvel at its greatness, yet I should
have marvelled at its gentleness, in that although loose it stands within its boundaries; and
if not at its gentleness, yet surely at its greatness; but since I marvel at both, I will praise the
Power that is in both. What collected it? What bounded it? How is it raised and lulled to
rest, as though respecting its neighbour earth? How, moreover, does it receive all the rivers,
and yet remain the same, through the very superabundance of its immensity, if that term
be permissible? How is the boundary of it, though it be an element of such magnitude, only
sand? Have your natural philosophers with their knowledge of useless details anything to
tell us, those men I mean who are really endeavouring to measure the sea with a wineglass,
and such mighty works by their own conceptions? Or shall I give the really scientific explanation of it from Scripture concisely, and yet more satisfactorily and truly than by the longest
arguments? "He hath fenced the face of the water with His command."3496 This is the chain

Job xxvi. 10. LXX.

The Second Theological Oration.

of fluid nature. And how doth He bring upon it the Nautilus that inhabits the dry land (i.e.,
man) in a little vessel, and with a little breeze (dost thou not marvel at the sight of this,-is
not thy mind astonished?), that earth and sea may be bound together by needs and commerce,
and that things so widely separated by nature should be thus brought together into one for
man? What are the first fountains of springs? Seek, O man, if you can trace out or find any
of these things. And who was it who cleft the plains and the mountains for the rivers, and
gave them an unhindered course? And how comes the marvel on the other side, that the
Sea never overflows, nor the Rivers cease to flow? And what is the nourishing power of
water, and what the difference therein; for some things are irrigated from above, and others
drink from their roots, if I may luxuriate a little in my language when speaking of the luxuriant gifts of God.

XXVIII. And now, leaving the earth and the things of earth, soar into the air on the
wings of thought, that our argument may advance in due path; and thence I will take you
up to heavenly things, and to heaven itself, and things which are above heaven; for to that
which is beyond my discourse hesitates to ascend, but still it shall ascend as far as may be. 
Who poured forth the air, that great and abundant wealth, not measured to men by their
rank or fortunes; not restrained by boundaries; not divided out according to people's ages;
but like the distribution of the Manna,3497 received in sufficiency, and valued for its equality
of distribution; the chariot of the winged creation; the seat of the winds; the moderator of
the seasons; the quickener of living things, or rather the preserver of natural life in the body;
in which bodies have their being, and by which we speak; in which is the light and all that
it shines upon, and the sight which flows through it? And mark, if you please, what follows. 
I cannot give to the air the whole empire of all that is thought to belong to the air. What
are the storehouses of the winds?3498 What are the treasuries of the snow? Who, as Scripture
hath said, hath begotten the drops of dew? Out of Whose womb came the ice? and Who
bindeth the waters in the clouds, and, fixing part in the clouds (O marvel!) held by His Word
though its nature is to flow, poureth out the rest upon the face of the whole earth, and
scattereth it abroad in due season, and in just proportions, and neither suffereth the whole
substance of moisture to go out free and uncontrolled (for sufficient was the cleansing in
the days of Noah; and He who cannot lie is not forgetful of His own covenant);...nor yet
restraineth it entirely that we should not again stand in need of an Elias3499 to bring the
drought to an end. If He shall shut up heaven, it saith, who shall open it? If He open the
floodgates, who shall shut them up?3500 Who can bring an excess or withhold a sufficiency

Exod. xvi. 18.

Job xxxvii. 9, 10.

1 Kings xviii. 44.

Job xii. 14.

The Second Theological Oration.

of rain, unless he govern the Universe by his own measures and balances? What scientific
laws, pray, can you lay down concerning thunder and lightning, O you who thunder from
the earth, and cannot shine with even little sparks of truth? To what vapours from earth
will you attribute the creation of cloud, or is it due to some thickening of the air, or pressure
or crash of clouds of excessive rarity, so as to make you think the pressure the cause of the
lightning, and the crash that which makes the thunder? Or what compression of wind
having no outlet will account to you for the lightning by its compression, and for the thunder
by its bursting out?

Now if you have in your thought passed through the air and all the things of air, reach
with me to heaven and the things of heaven. And let faith lead us rather than reason, if at
least you have learnt the feebleness of the latter in matters nearer to you, and have known
reason by knowing the things that are beyond reason, so as not to be altogether on the earth
or of the earth, because you are ignorant even of your ignorance.

XXIX. Who spread the sky around us, and set the stars in order? Or rather, first, can
you tell me, of your own knowledge of the things in heaven, what are the sky and the stars;
you who know not what lies at your very feet, and cannot even take the measure of yourself,
and yet must busy yourself about what is above your nature, and gape at the illimitable? 
For, granted that you understand orbits and periods, and waxings and wanings, and settings
and risings, and some degrees and minutes, and all the other things which make you so
proud of your wonderful knowledge; you have not arrived at comprehension of the realities
themselves, but only at an observation of some movement, which, when confirmed by longer
practice, and drawing the observations of many individuals into one generalization, and
thence deducing a law, has acquired the name of Science (just as the lunar phenomena have
become generally known to our sight), being the basis of this knowledge. But if you are very
scientific on this subject, and have a just claim to admiration, tell me what is the cause of
this order and this movement. How came the sun to be a beacon-fire to the whole world,
and to all eyes like the leader of some chorus, concealing all the rest of the stars by his
brightness, more completely than some of them conceal others. The proof of this is that
they shine against him, but he outshines them and does not even allow it to be perceived
that they rose simultaneously with him, fair as a bridegroom, swift and great as a giant3501
for I will not let his praises be sung from any other source than my own Scriptures-so
mighty in strength that from one end to the other of the world he embraces all things in his
heat, and there is nothing hid from the feeling thereof, but it fills both every eye with light,
and every embodied creature with heat; warming, yet not burning, by the gentleness of its
temper, and the order of its movement, present to all, and equally embracing all.

Ps. xix. 5.

The Second Theological Oration.

XXX. Have you considered the importance of the fact that a heathen writer3502 speaks
of the sun as holding the same position among material objects as God does among objects
of thought? For the one gives light to the eyes, as the Other does to the mind; and is the
most beautiful of the objects of sight, as God is of those of thought. But who gave him motion
at first? And what is it which ever moves him in his circuit, though in his nature stable and
immovable, truly unwearied, and the giver and sustainer of life, and all the rest of the titles
which the poets justly sing of him, and never resting in his course or his benefits? How
comes he to be the creator of day when above the earth, and of night when below it? or
whatever may be the right expression when one contemplates the sun? What are the mutual
aggressions and concessions of day and night, and their regular irregularities-to use a
somewhat strange expression? How comes he to be the maker and divider of the seasons,
that come and depart in regular order, and as in a dance interweave with each other, or
stand apart by a law of love on the one hand, and of order on the other, and mingle little by
little, and steal on their neighbour, just as nights and days do, so as not to give us pain by
their suddenness. This will be enough about the sun.

Do you know the nature and phenomena of the Moon, and the measures and courses
of light, and how it is that the sun bears rule over the day, and the moon presides over the
night; and while She gives confidence to wild beasts, He stirs Man up to work, raising or
lowering himself as may be most serviceable? Know you the bond of Pleiades, or the fence
of Orion3503 as He who counteth the number of the stars and calleth them all by their
names?3504 Know you the differences of the glory3505 of each, and the order of their
movement, that I should trust you, when by them you weave the web of human concerns,
and arm the creature against the Creator?

XXXI. What say you? Shall we pause here, after discussing nothing further than matter
and visible things, or, since the Word knows the Tabernacle of Moses to be a figure of the
whole creation-I mean the entire system of things visible and invisible-shall we pass the
first veil, and stepping beyond the realm of sense, shall we look into the Holy Place, the Intellectual and Celestial creation? But not even this can we see in an incorporeal way, though
it is incorporeal, since it is called-or is-Fire and Spirit. For He is said to make His Angels
spirits, and His Ministers a flame of fire3506...though perhaps this "making" means preserving
by that Word by which they came into existence. The Angel then is called spirit and fire;
Spirit, as being a creature of the intellectual sphere; Fire, as being of a purifying nature; for

Plato.

Job xxxviii. 31.

Ps. cxlvii. 4.

1 Cor. xv. 41.

Ps. civ. 4.

The Second Theological Oration.

I know that the same names belong to the First Nature. But, relatively to us at least, we must
reckon the Angelic Nature incorporeal, or at any rate as nearly so as possible. Do you see
how we get dizzy over this subject, and cannot advance to any point, unless it be as far as
this, that we know there are Angels and Archangels, Thrones, Dominions, Princedoms,
Powers, Splendours, Ascents, Intelligent Powers or Intelligencies, pure natures and unalloyed,
immovable to evil, or scarcely movable; ever circling in chorus round the First Cause (or
how should we sing their praises?) illuminated thence with the purest Illumination, or one
in one degree and one in another, proportionally to their nature and rank...so conformed
to beauty and moulded that they become secondary Lights, and can enlighten others by the
overflowings and largesses of the First Light? Ministrants of God's Will, strong with both
inborn and imparted strength, traversing all space, readily present to all at any place through
their zeal for ministry and the agility of their nature...different individuals of them embracing
different parts of the world, or appointed over different districts of the Universe, as He
knoweth who ordered and distributed it all. Combining all things in one, solely with a view
to the consent of the Creator of all things; Hymners of the Majesty of the Godhead, eternally
contemplating the Eternal Glory, not that God may thereby gain an increase of glory, for
nothing can be added to that which is full-to Him, who supplies good to all outside Himself
but that there may never be a cessation of blessings to these first natures after God. If we
have told these things as they deserve, it is by the grace of the Trinity, and of the one Godhead
in Three Persons; but if less perfectly than we have desired, yet even so our discourse has
gained its purpose. For this is what we were labouring to shew, that even the secondary
natures surpass the power of our intellect; much more then the First and (for I fear to say
merely That which is above all), the only Nature.

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

Oration XXIX.

The Third Theological Oration.

On the Son.

I. This then is what might be said to cut short our opponents' readiness to argue and
their hastiness with its consequent insecurity in all matters, but above all in those discussions
which relate to God. But since to rebuke others is a matter of no difficulty whatever, but a
very easy thing, which any one who likes can do; whereas to substitute one's own belief for
theirs is the part of a pious and intelligent man; let us, relying on the Holy Ghost, Who
among them is dishonoured, but among us is adored, bring forth to the light our own conceptions about the Godhead, whatever these may be, like some noble and timely birth. Not
that I have at other times been silent; for on this subject alone I am full of youthful strength
and daring; but the fact is that under present circumstances I am even more bold to declare
the truth, that I may not (to use the words of Scripture) by drawing back fall into the condemnation of being displeasing to God.3507 And since every discourse is of a twofold nature,
the one part establishing one's own, and the other overthrowing one's opponents' position;
let us first of all state our own position, and then try to controvert that of our opponents;-and both as briefly as possible, so that our arguments may be taken in at a glance
(like those of the elementary treatises which they have devised to deceive simple or foolish
persons), and that our thoughts may not be scattered by reason of the length of the discourse,
like water which is not contained in a channel, but flows to waste over the open land.

II. The three most ancient opinions concerning God are Anarchia, Polyarchia, and
Monarchia. The first two are the sport of the children of Hellas, and may they continue to
be so. For Anarchy is a thing without order; and the Rule of Many is factious, and thus anarchical, and thus disorderly. For both these tend to the same thing, namely disorder; and
this to dissolution, for disorder is the first step to dissolution.

But Monarchy is that which we hold in honour. It is, however, a Monarchy that is not
limited to one Person, for it is possible for Unity if at variance with itself to come into a
condition of plurality;3508 but one which is made of an equality of Nature and a Union of
mind, and an identity of motion, and a convergence of its elements to unity-a thing which
is impossible to the created nature-so that though numerically distinct there is no severance
of Essence. Therefore Unity3509 having from all eternity arrived by motion at Duality, found

3507 Heb. ii. 4; x. 38.

Billius and others here read Authority, which is not supported by the best mss., or by the context.

Elias explains this to mean that of old men knew only One Person in the Godhead: and until the Incarn-

ation this knowledge was sufficient; but from that time forward they acknowledged a Second Person, and through

Him a Third also, the Holy Ghost. But this explanation falls far short of Gregory's meaning, which certainly is

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

its rest in Trinity. This is what we mean by Father and Son and Holy Ghost. The Father is
the Begetter and the Emitter;3510 without passion of course, and without reference to time,
and not in a corporeal manner. The Son is the Begotten, and the Holy Ghost the Emission;
for I know not how this could be expressed in terms altogether excluding visible things. 
For we shall not venture to speak of "an overflow of goodness," as one of the Greek Philosophers dared to say, as if it were a bowl overflowing, and this in plain words in his Discourse
on the First and Second Causes.3511 Let us not ever look on this Generation as involuntary,
like some natural overflow, hard to be retained, and by no means befitting our conception
of Deity. Therefore let us confine ourselves within our limits, and speak of the Unbegotten
and the Begotten and That which proceeds from the Father, as somewhere God the Word
Himself saith.

III. When did these come into being? They are above all "When." But, if I am to speak
with something more of boldness,-when the Father did. And when did the Father come
into being. There never was a time when He was not. And the same thing is true of the Son
and the Holy Ghost. Ask me again, and again I will answer you, When was the Son begotten? 
When the Father was not begotten. And when did the Holy Ghost proceed? When the Son
was, not proceeding but, begotten-beyond the sphere of time, and above the grasp of
reason; although we cannot set forth that which is above time, if we avoid as we desire any
expression which conveys the idea of time. For such expressions as "when" and "before"
and "after" and "from the beginning" are not timeless, however much we may force them;
unless indeed we were to take the Aeon, that interval which is coextensive with the eternal
things, and is not divided or measured by any motion, or by the revolution of the sun, as
time is measured.

How then are They not alike unoriginate, if They are coeternal? Because They are from
Him, though not after Him. For that which is unoriginate is eternal, but that which is

that the movement of self-consciousness in God from all Eternity made the Generation of the Son, and the

Procession of the Holy Ghost, a necessity. All is objective in God. cf. Petav. de Deo, II., viii., 16; also, Greg.

Naz., Or. xxiii. 5.

προβολεὺς-προβολὴ was a term used by the Gnostics to describe the Emanations by which the distance

between the Finite and the Infinite was according to them bridged over; and on this account it fell under suspicion,

and was rejected by both Arius and Athanasius. Tertullian used it with an explanation which is satisfactory as

regards the προβολὴ of the Son; but when he comes to apply it to the Procession of the Holy Ghost he uses an

illustration which is in almost the very words rejected by Gregory (c. Prax., 7, 8. See Swete, p. 56). Origen did

not admit it. Later when this danger was past, the word came into use again as the equivalent of ἐκπόρευσις, at

first with reserve and explanations in the text, but later on as an accepted term. See Swete ,"On The Doctrine

Of The Holy Spirit," p. 36.

3511 The expression is from Plato.

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

eternal is not necessarily unoriginate, so long as it may be referred to the Father as its origin. 
Therefore in respect of Cause They are not unoriginate; but it is evident that the Cause is
not necessarily prior to its effects, for the sun is not prior to its light. And yet They are in
some sense unoriginate, in respect of time, even though you would scare simple minds with
your quibbles, for the Sources of Time are not subject to time.

IV. But how can this generation be passionless? In that it is incorporeal. For if corporeal
generation involves passion, incorporeal generation excludes it. And I will ask of you in
turn, How is He God if He is created? For that which is created is not God. I refrain from
reminding you that here too is passion if we take the creation in a bodily sense, as time, desire,
imagination, thought, hope, pain, risk, failure, success, all of which and more than all find
a place in the creature, as is evident to every one. Nay, I marvel that you do not venture so
far as to conceive of marriages and times of pregnancy, and dangers of miscarriage, as if the
Father could not have begotten at all if He had not begotten thus; or again, that you did not
count up the modes of generation of birds and beasts and fishes, and bring under some one
of them the Divine and Ineffable Generation, or even eliminate the Son out of your new
hypothesis. And you cannot even see this, that as His Generation according to the flesh
differs from all others (for where among men do you know of a Virgin Mother?), so does
He differ also in His spiritual Generation; or rather He, Whose Existence is not the same as
ours, differs from us also in His Generation.

V. Who then is that Father Who had no beginning? One Whose very Existence had
no beginning; for one whose existence had a beginning must also have begun to be a Father. 
He did not then become a Father after He began to be, for His being had no beginning. 
And He is Father in the absolute sense, for He is not also Son; just as the Son is Son in the
absolute sense, because He is not also Father. These names do not belong to us in the absolute
sense, because we are both, and not one more than the other; and we are of both, and not
of one only; and so we are divided, and by degrees become men, and perhaps not even men,
and such as we did not desire, leaving and being left, so that only the relations remain,
without the underlying facts.3512

But, the objector says, the very form of the expression "He begat" and "He was begotten,"
brings in the idea of a beginning of generation. But what if you do not use this expression,
but say, "He had been begotten from the beginning" so as readily to evade your far-fetched
and time-loving objections? Will you bring Scripture against us, as if we were forging
something contrary to Scripture and to the truth? Why, every one knows that in practice
we very often find tenses interchanged when time is spoken of; and especially is this the
custom of Holy Scripture, not only in respect of the past tense, and of the present; but even

Elias explains this to refer to the fact that children leave and are left by parents; or else to the death of

either one or the other.

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

of the future, as for instance "Why did the heathen rage?"3513 when they had not yet raged
and "they shall cross over the river on foot,"3514 where the meaning is they did cross over. 
It would be a long task to reckon up all the expressions of this kind which students have
noticed.

VI. So much for this point. What is their next objection, how full of contentiousness
and impudence? He, they say, either voluntarily begat the Son, or else involuntarily. Next,
as they think, they bind us on both sides with cords; these however are not strong, but very
weak. For, they say, if it was involuntarily He was under the sway of some one, and who
exercised this sway? And how is He, over whom it is exercised, God? But if voluntarily, the
Son is a Son of Will; how then is He of the Father?-and they thus invent a new sort of
Mother for him,-the Will,-in place of the Father. There is one good point which they
may allege about this argument of theirs; namely, that they desert Passion, and take refuge
in Will. For Will is not Passion.

Secondly, let us look at the strength of their argument. And it were best to wrestle with
them at first at close quarters. You yourself, who so recklessly assert whatever takes your
fancy; were you begotten voluntarily or involuntarily by your father? If involuntarily, then
he was under some tyrant's sway (O terrible violence!) and who was the tyrant? You will
hardly say it was nature,-for nature is tolerant of chastity. If it was voluntarily, then by a
few syllables your father is done away with, for you are shewn to be the son of Will, and not
of your father. But I pass to the relation between God and the creature, and I put your own
question to your own wisdom. Did God create all things voluntarily or under compulsion? 
If under compulsion, here also is the tyranny, and one who played the tyrant; if voluntarily,
the creatures also are deprived of their God, and you before the rest, who invent such arguments and tricks of logic. For a partition is set up between the Creator and the creatures in
the shape of Will. And yet I think that the Person who wills is distinct from the Act of
willing; He who begets from the Act of begetting; the Speaker from the speech, or else we
are all very stupid. On the one side we have the mover, and on the other that which is, so
to speak, the motion. Thus the thing willed is not the child of will, for it does not always
result therefrom; nor is that which is begotten the child of generation, nor that which is
heard the child of speech, but of the Person who willed, or begat, or spoke. But the things
of God are beyond all this, for with Him perhaps the Will to beget is generation, and there
is no intermediate action (if we may accept this altogether, and not rather consider generation
superior to will).

VII. Will you then let me play a little upon this word Father, for your example encourages me to be so bold? The Father is God either willingly or unwillingly; and how will you

Ps. ii. 1.

Ps. lxvi. 6.

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

escape from your own excessive acuteness? If willingly, when did He begin to will? It could
not have been before He began to be, for there was nothing prior to Him. Or is one part of
Him Will and another the object of Will? If so, He is divisible. So the question arises, as
the result of your argument, whether He Himself is not the Child of Will. And if unwillingly,
what compelled Him to exist, and how is He God if He was compelled-and that to nothing
less than to be God? How then was He begotten, says my opponent. How was He created,
if as you say, He was created? For this is a part of the same difficulty. Perhaps you would
say, By Will and Word. You have not yet solved the whole difficulty; for it yet remains for
you to shew how Will and Word gained the power of action. For man was not created in
this way.

VIII. How then was He begotten? This Generation would have been no great thing, if
you could have comprehended it who have no real knowledge even of your own generation,
or at least who comprehend very little of it, and of that little you are ashamed to speak; and
then do you think you know the whole? You will have to undergo much labour before you
discover the laws of composition, formation, manifestation, and the bond whereby soul is
united to body,-mind to soul, and reason to mind; and movement, increase, assimilation
of food, sense, memory, recollection, and all the rest of the parts of which you are compounded; and which of them belongs to the soul and body together, and which to each independently of the other, and which is received from each other. For those parts whose maturity
comes later, yet received their laws at the time of conception. Tell me what these laws are? 
And do not even then venture to speculate on the Generation of God; for that would be
unsafe. For even if you knew all about your own, yet you do not by any means know about
God's. And if you do not understand your own, how can you know about God's? For in
proportion as God is harder to trace out than man, so is the heavenly Generation harder to
comprehend than your own. But if you assert that because you cannot comprehend it,
therefore He cannot have been begotten, it will be time for you to strike out many existing
things which you cannot comprehend; and first of all God Himself. For you cannot say
what He is, even if you are very reckless, and excessively proud of your intelligence. First,
cast away your notions of flow and divisions and sections, and your conceptions of immaterial as if it were material birth, and then you may perhaps worthily conceive of the Divine
Generation. How was He begotten?-I repeat the question in indignation. The Begetting
of God must be honoured by silence. It is a great thing for you to learn that He was begotten. 
But the manner of His generation we will not admit that even Angels can conceive, much
less you. Shall I tell you how it was? It was in a manner known to the Father Who begat,
and to the Son Who was begotten. Anything more than this is hidden by a cloud, and escapes
your dim sight.

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

IX. Well, but the Father begat a Son who either was or was not in existence.3515 What
utter nonsense! This is a question which applies to you or me, who on the one hand were
in existence, as for instance Levi in the loins of Abraham;3516 and on the other hand came
into existence; and so in some sense we are partly of what existed, and partly of what was
nonexistent; whereas the contrary is the case with the original matter, which was certainly
created out of what was non-existent, notwithstanding that some pretend that it is unbegotten. But in this case "to be begotten," even from the beginning, is concurrent with "to be." 
On what then will you base this captious question? For what is older than that which is
from the beginning, if we may place there the previous existence or non-existence of the
Son? In either case we destroy its claim to be the Beginning. Or perhaps you will say, if we
were to ask you whether the Father was of existent or non-existent substance, that he is
twofold, partly pre-existing, partly existing; or that His case is the same with that of the Son;
that is, that He was created out of non-existing matter, because of your ridiculous questions
and your houses of sand, which cannot stand against the merest ripple.

I do not admit either solution, and I declare that your question contains an absurdity,
and not a difficulty to answer. If however you think, in accordance with your dialectic assumptions, that one or other of these alternatives must necessarily be true in every case, let
me ask you one little question: Is time in time, or is it not in time? If it is contained in time,
then in what time, and what is it but that time, and how does it contain it? But if it is not
contained in time, what is that surpassing wisdom which can conceive of a time which is
timeless? Now, in regard to this expression, "I am now telling a lie," admit one of these alternatives, either that it is true, or that it is a falsehood, without qualification (for we cannot
admit that it is both). But this cannot be. For necessarily he either is lying, and so is telling
the truth, or else he is telling the truth, and so is lying. What wonder is it then that, as in
this case contraries are true, so in that case they should both be untrue, and so your clever
puzzle prove mere foolishness? Solve me one more riddle. Were you present at your own
generation, and are you now present to yourself, or is neither the case? If you were and are
present, who were you, and with whom are you present? And how did your single self become thus both subject and object? But if neither of the above is the case, how did you get
separated from yourself, and what is the cause of this disjoining? But, you will say, it is
stupid to make a fuss about the question whether or no a single individual is present to
himself; for the expression is not used of oneself but of others. Well, you may be certain
that it is even more stupid to discuss the question whether That which was begotten from
the beginning existed before its generation or not. For such a question arises only as to
matter divisible by time.

3515 This is the Arian dilemma, "Did the Son exist before he was begotten?"

3516 Heb. vii. 10.

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

X. But they say, The Unbegotten and the Begotten are not the same; and if this is so,
neither is the Son the same as the Father. It is clear, without saying so, that this line of argument manifestly excludes either the Son or the Father from the Godhead. For if to be Unbegotten is the Essence of God, to be begotten is not that Essence; if the opposite is the case,
the Unbegotten is excluded. What argument can contradict this? Choose then whichever
blasphemy you prefer, my good inventor of a new theology, if indeed you are anxious at all
costs to embrace a blasphemy. In the next place, in what sense do you assert that the Unbegotten and the Begotten are not the same? If you mean that the Uncreated and the created
are not the same, I agree with you; for certainly the Unoriginate and the created are not of
the same nature. But if you say that He That begat and That which is begotten are not the
same, the statement is inaccurate. For it is in fact a necessary truth that they are the same. 
For the nature of the relation of Father to Child is this, that the offspring is of the same
nature with the parent. Or we may argue thus again. What do you mean by Unbegotten
and Begotten, for if you mean the simple fact of being unbegotten or begotten, these are not
the same; but if you mean Those to Whom these terms apply, how are They not the same? 
For example, Wisdom and Unwisdom are not the same in themselves, but yet both are attributes of man, who is the same; and they mark not a difference of essence, but one external
to the essence.3517 Are immortality and innocence and immutability also the essence of
God? If so God has many essences and not one; or Deity is a compound of these. For He
cannot be all these without composition, if they be essences.

XI. They do not however assert this, for these qualities are common also to other beings. 
But God's Essence is that which belongs to God alone, and is proper to Him. But they, who
consider matter and form to be unbegotten, would not allow that to be unbegotten is the
property of God alone (for we must cast away even further the darkness of the
Manichaeans).3518 But suppose that it is the property of God alone. What of Adam? Was
he not alone the direct creature of God? Yes, you will say. Was he then the only human
being? By no means. And why, but because humanity does not consist in direct creation? 
For that which is begotten is also human. Just so neither is He Who is Unbegotten alone
God, though He alone is Father. But grant that He Who is Begotten is God; for He is of
God, as you must allow, even though you cling to your Unbegotten. Then how do you describe the Essence of God? Not by declaring what it is, but by rejecting what it is not. For
your word signifies that He is not begotten; it does not present to you what is the real nature
or condition of that which has no generation. What then is the Essence of God? It is for
your infatuation to define this, since you are so anxious about His Generation too; but to

cf. Petavius De Trin., V. ii., 2.

3518 The Manichaeans, who believed in two eternal principles of good and evil, light and darkness, held that

darkness too was unbegotten (Elias).

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

us it will be a very great thing, if ever, even in the future, we learn this, when this darkness
and dulness is done away for us, as He has promised Who cannot lie. This then may be the
thought and hope of those who are purifying themselves with a view to this. Thus much
we for our part will be bold to say, that if it is a great thing for the Father to be Unoriginate,
it is no less a thing for the Son to have been Begotten of such a Father. For not only would
He share the glory of the Unoriginate, since he is of the Unoriginate, but he has the added
glory of His Generation, a thing so great and august in the eyes of all those who are not altogether grovelling and material in mind.

XII. But, they say, if the Son is the Same as the Father in respect of Essence, then if the
Father is unbegotten, the Son must be so likewise. Quite so-if the Essence of God consists
in being unbegotten; and so He would be a strange mixture, begottenly unbegotten. If,
however, the difference is outside the Essence, how can you be so certain in speaking of
this? Are you also your father's father, so as in no respect to fall short of your father, since
you are the same with him in essence? Is it not evident that our enquiry into the Nature of
the Essence of God, if we make it, will leave Personality absolutely unaffected? But that
Unbegotten is not a synonym of God is proved thus. If it were so, it would be necessary
that since God is a relative term, Unbegotten should be so likewise; or that since Unbegotten
is an absolute term, so must God be....God of no one. For words which are absolutely
identical are similarly applied. But the word Unbegotten is not used relatively. For to what
is it relative? And of what things is God the God? Why, of all things. How then can God
and Unbegotten be identical terms? And again, since Begotten and Unbegotten are contradictories, like possession and deprivation, it would follow that contradictory essences would
co-exist, which is impossible.3519 Or again, since possessions are prior to deprivations, and
the latter are destructive of the former, not only must the Essence of the Son be prior to that
of the Father, but it must be destroyed by the Father, on your hypothesis.

XIII. What now remains of their invincible arguments? Perhaps the last they will take
refuge in is this. If God has never ceased to beget, the Generation is imperfect; and when
will He cease? But if He has ceased, then He must have begun. Thus again these carnal
minds bring forward carnal arguments. Whether He is eternally begotten or not, I do not
yet say, until I have looked into the statement, "Before all the hills He begetteth Me,"3520
more accurately. But I cannot see the necessity of their conclusion. For if, as they say,
everything that is to come to an end had also a beginning, then surely that which has no
end had no beginning. What then will they decide concerning the soul, or the Angelic
nature? If it had a beginning, it will also have an end; and if it has no end, it is evident that
according to them it had no beginning. But the truth is that it had a beginning, and will

Because "Son" implies "begotten." But (ex hyp.) "Unbegotten" is synonymous with "God."

Prov. viii. 25.

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

never have an end. Their assertion, then, that which will have an end had also a beginning,
is untrue. Our position, however, is, that as in the case of a horse, or an ox, or a man, the
same definition applies to all the individuals of the same species, and whatever shares the
definition has also a right to the Name; so in the very same way there is One Essence of God,
and One Nature, and One Name; although in accordance with a distinction in our thoughts
we use distinct Names and that whatever is properly called by this Name really is God; and
what He is in Nature, That He is truly called-if at least we are to hold that Truth is a matter
not of names but of realities. But our opponents, as if they were afraid of leaving any stone
unturned to subvert the Truth, acknowledge indeed that the Son is God when they are
compelled to do so by arguments3521 and evidences; but they only mean that He is God in
an ambiguous sense, and that He only shares the Name.

XIV. And when we advance this objection against them, "What do you mean to say
then? That the Son is not properly God, just as a picture of an animal is not properly an
animal? And if not properly God, in what sense is He God at all?" They reply, Why should
not these terms be ambiguous, and in both cases be used in a proper sense? And they will
give us such instances as the land-dog and the dogfish; where the word Dog is ambiguous,
and yet in both cases is properly used, for there is such a species among the ambiguously
named, or any other case in which the same appellative is used for two things of different
nature. But, my good friend, in this case, when you include two natures under the same
name, you do not assert that either is better than the other, or that the one is prior and the
other posterior, or that one is in a greater degree and the other in a lesser that which is predicated of them both, for there is no connecting link which forces this necessity upon them. 
One is not a dog more than the other, and one less so; either the dogfish more than the landdog, or the land-dog than the dogfish. Why should they be, or on what principle? But the
community of name is here between things of equal value, though of different nature. But
in the case of which we are speaking, you couple the Name of God with adorable Majesty,
and make It surpass every essence and nature (an attribute of God alone), and then you
ascribe this Name to the Father, while you deprive the Son of it, and make Him subject to
the Father, and give Him only a secondary honour and worship; and even if in words you
bestow on Him one which is Equal, yet in practice you cut off His Deity, and pass malignantly
from a use of the same Name implying an exact equality, to one which connects things
which are not equal. And so the pictured and the living man are in your mouth an apter
illustration of the relations of Deity than the dogs which I instanced. Or else you must
concede to both an equal dignity of nature as well as a common name-even though you
introduced these natures into your argument as different; and thus you destroy the analogy

The Benedictines here translate λόγῳ by "Scripture," on the ground that Reason is not competent to

assert the Divinity of the Word.

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

of your dogs, which you invented as an instance of inequality. For what is the force of your
instance of ambiguity, if those whom you distinguish are not equal in honour? For it was
not to prove an equality but an inequality that you took refuge in your dogs. How could
anybody be more clearly convicted of fighting both against his own arguments, and against
the Deity?

XV. And if, when we admit that in respect of being the Cause the Father is greater than
the Son, they should assume the premiss that He is the Cause by Nature, and then deduce
the conclusion that He is greater by Nature also, it is difficult to say whether they mislead
most themselves or those with whom they are arguing. For it does not absolutely follow
that all that is predicated of a class can also be predicated of all the individuals composing
it; for the different particulars may belong to different individuals. For what hinders me, if
I assume the same premiss, namely, that the Father is greater by Nature, and then add this
other, Yet not by nature in every respect greater nor yet Father-from concluding, Therefore
the Greater is not in every respect greater, nor the Father in every respect Father? Or, if you
prefer it, let us put it in this way: God is an Essence: But an Essence is not in every case
God; and draw the conclusion for yourself-Therefore God is not in every case God. I think
the fallacy here is the arguing from a conditioned to an unconditioned use of a term,3522 to
use the technical expression of the logicians. For while we assign this word Greater to His
Nature viewed as a Cause, they infer it of His Nature viewed in itself. It is just as if when
we said that such a one was a dead man they were to infer simply that he was a Man.

XVI. How shall we pass over the following point, which is no less amazing than the
rest? Father, they say, is a name either of an essence or of an Action, thinking to bind us
down on both sides. If we say that it is a name of an essence, they will say that we agree with
them that the Son is of another Essence, since there is but one Essence of God, and this,
according to them, is preoccupied by the Father. On the other hand, if we say that it is the
name of an Action, we shall be supposed to acknowledge plainly that the Son is created and
not begotten. For where there is an Agent there must also be an Effect. And they will say
they wonder how that which is made can be identical with That which made it. I should
myself have been frightened with your distinction, if it had been necessary to accept one or
other of the alternatives, and not rather put both aside, and state a third and truer one,
namely, that Father is not a name either of an essence or of an action, most clever sirs. But
it is the name of the Relation in which the Father stands to the Son, and the Son to the
Father. For as with us these names make known a genuine and intimate relation, so, in the
case before us too, they denote an identity of nature between Him That is begotten and Him

3522 Or as the schoolmen say the fallacy is, A dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, one of the many

forms of Undistributed Middle Term. Petavius, however (De Trin.. II., v., 12), pronounces the argument of this

section unsatisfactory.

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

That begets. But let us concede to you that Father is a name of essence, it will still bring in
the idea of Son, and will not make it of a different nature, according to common ideas and
the force of these names. Let it be, if it so please you, the name of an action; you will not
defeat us in this way either. The Homoousion would be indeed the result of this action, or
otherwise the conception of an action in this matter would be absurd. You see then how,
even though you try to fight unfairly, we avoid your sophistries. But now, since we have
ascertained how invincible you are in your arguments and sophistries, let us look at your
strength in the Oracles of God, if perchance you may choose to persuade us out of them.

XVII. For we have learnt to believe in and to teach the Deity of the Son from their great
and lofty utterances. And what utterances are these? These: God-The Word-He That
Was In The Beginning and With The Beginning, and The Beginning. "In the Beginning
was The Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God,"3523 and "With Thee
is the Beginning,"3524 and "He who calleth her The Beginning from generations."3525 Then
the Son is Only-begotten: The only "begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, it
says, He hath declared Him."3526 The Way, the Truth, the Life, the Light. "I am the Way,
the Truth, and the Life;" and "I am the Light of the World."3527 Wisdom and Power, "Christ,
the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God."3528 The Effulgence, the Impress, the Image,
the Seal; "Who being the Effulgence of His glory and the Impress of His Essence,"3529 and
"the Image of His Goodness,"3530 and "Him hath God the Father sealed."3531 Lord, King,
He That Is, The Almighty. "The Lord rained down fire from the Lord;"3532 and "A sceptre
of righteousness is the sceptre of Thy Kingdom;"3533 and "Which is and was and is to come,
the Almighty"3534-all which are clearly spoken of the Son, with all the other passages of
the same force, none of which is an afterthought, or added later to the Son or the Spirit, any
more than to the Father Himself. For Their Perfection is not affected by additions. There
never was a time when He was without the Word, or when He was not the Father, or when

John i. 1.

Ps. cx. 3.

Isa. xli. 4.

John i. 18.

John vii. 12; ix. 5; xiv. 6.

1 Cor. i. 24.

3529 Heb. i. 3 R.V.

3530 Wisd. vii. 26.

John vi. 27.

3532 Gen. xix. 24.

Ps. xlv. 6.

3534 Rev. i. 8.

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

He was not true, or not wise, or not powerful, or devoid of life, or of splendour, or of
goodness.

But in opposition to all these, do you reckon up for me the expressions which make for
your ignorant arrogance, such as "My God and your God,"3535 or greater, or created, or
made, or sanctified;3536 Add, if you like, Servant3537 and Obedient3538 and Gave3539 and
Learnt,3540 and was commanded,3541 was sent,3542 can do nothing of Himself, either say,
or judge, or give, or will.3543 And further these,-His ignorance,3544 subjection,3545 prayer,3546 asking,3547 increase,3548 being made perfect.3549 And if you like even more humble
than these; such as speak of His sleeping,3550 hungering,3551 being in an agony,3552 and
fearing;3553 or perhaps you would make even His Cross and Death a matter of reproach to
Him. His Resurrection and Ascension I fancy you will leave to me, for in these is found
something to support our position. A good many other things too you might pick up, if
you desire to put together that equivocal and intruded god of yours, Who to us is True God,
and equal to the Father. For every one of these points, taken separately, may very easily, if
we go through them one by one, be explained to you in the most reverent sense, and the
stumbling-block of the letter be cleaned away-that is, if your stumbling at it be honest, and
not wilfully malicious. To give you the explanation in one sentence. What is lofty you are
to apply to the Godhead, and to that Nature in Him which is superior to sufferings and in-

John xx. 17, 28.

Prov. viii. 22; John x. 36; Acts ii. 36.

Phil. ii. 7.

Phil. ii. 8.

John i. 12.

3540 Heb. v. 8.

John x. 18; xiv. 31.

Ib. iv. 34; v. 23, sq.

Ib. v. 19, 30.

3544 Mark xiii. 32.

1 Cor. xv. 28.

Luke vi. 12.

John xiv. 16.

Luke ii. 52.

3549 Heb. v. 9, etc.

3550 Matt. viii. 24; Mark iv. 38.

3551 Matt. iv. 2; Luke iv. 2.

Luke xxii. 44.

3553 Heb. v. 7.

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

corporeal; but all that is lowly to the composite condition3554 of Him who for your sakes
made Himself of no reputation and was Incarnate-yes, for it is no worse thing to say, was
made Man, and afterwards was also exalted. The result will be that you will abandon these
carnal and grovelling doctrines, and learn to be more sublime, and to ascend with His
Godhead, and you will not remain permanently among the things of sight, but will rise up
with Him into the world of thought, and come to know which passages refer to His Nature,
and which to His assumption of Human Nature.3555

XIX. For He Whom you now treat with contempt was once above you. He Who is now
Man was once the Uncompounded. What He was He continued to be; what He was not
He took to Himself.3556 In the beginning He was, uncaused; for what is the Cause of God? 
But afterwards for a cause He was born. And that cause was that you might be saved, who
insult Him and despise His Godhead, because of this, that He took upon Him your denser
nature, having converse with Flesh by means of Mind.3557 While His inferior Nature, the
Humanity, became God, because it was united to God, and became One Person3558 because
the Higher Nature prevailed in order that I too might be made God so far as He is made
Man.3559 He was born-but He had been begotten: He was born of a woman-but she was

S. Gregory often speaks of Human Nature as our composite being; and here he means the Sacred Humanity

exclusively; there is no shadow of suspicion of Nestorianism or Eutychianism attaching to his name.

The word οἰκονομία is used in four principal senses: (a) The ministry of the Gospel, cf. Ephes. iii. 2;

Col. i. 25; etc., and S. Cyril Hieros., has the expression "Economy of the Mystery" (Cat. xxv.). It is also used

absolutely by S. Chrysostom and others. (b) The Providence of God, as by Epiphanius, Greg. Nyss., and others. 

(c) The Incarnation, as in the text, without any epithet-in which use it is opposed to ἡ θεότης. Sometimes

however epithets are added. (d) The whole Mystery of Redemption, including the Passion.

cf. S. Leo, Serm. xxi., De Nativ. Dei, c. ii. "Remaining what He was, and putting on what He was not,

He united the true form of a servant to that form in which He was equal to God the Father, and combined both

natures in a union so close that the lower was not consumed by receiving glory, nor the higher lessened by as-

suming lowliness.

"Mediante anima," cf. Orat. xxxviii., 13. S. T. Aq., Summa, III., vi. Jungmann, de Verbo Incarn., c. 68. 

Forbes, On Nicene Creed, p. 188. Petav. de Incarn, IV., xiii., 2.

γενόμενος ἄνθρωπος ὁ κάτω θεός. The passage is one of great difficulty. Elias Cretensis renders the

words as follows:-"Becoming Man, the inferior God, because humanity was" etc.; but his rendering is rejected

as impossible by Petavius (de Incarn., IV., ix., 2, 3). (i.) It is grammatically possible (Madvig, Gk. Syntax, 9 a.

rem. 3) for ὁ κάτω, standing as it does, to qualify ἄνθρωπος. (ii.) But the καὶ γενόμενος ...θεός may be taken

as a nom. absolute, which would have been expressed by a gen. if ἄνθρωπος had not been the same Person as

ὁμιλήσας.

3559 As by the Incarnation He who was God was made perfect Man, so Man was made perfect God, and each

nature retained its own qualities. Or it may mean that God Incarnate was made Man in respect of body, soul,

and mind; that is, in all points: and the Humanity which He assumed was in all these points Deified; and

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

a Virgin. The first is human, the second Divine. In His Human nature He had no Father,
but also in His Divine Nature no Mother.3560 Both these3561 belong to Godhead. He dwelt
in the womb-but He was recognized by the Prophet,3562 himself still in the womb, leaping
before the Word, for Whose sake He came into being. He was wrapped in swaddling
clothes3563-but He took off the swathing bands of the grave by His rising again. He was
laid in a manger-but He was glorified by Angels, and proclaimed by a star, and worshipped
by the Magi. Why are you offended by that which is presented to your sight, because you
will not look at that which is presented to your mind? He was driven into exile into
Egypt-but He drove away the Egyptian idols.3564 He had no form nor comeliness in the

therefore they who are His kindred and imitators share to that extent the Deification (Elias). In the First Epistle

to Cledonius (v. infra) the Priest, against Apollinarius, which is sometimes reckoned as the 51st Oration, S.

Gregory says, "The Godhead and the Manhood are two natures, just as soul and body are. But there are not

two Sons or two Gods; although Paul did thus entangle the outward man and the inward. And, to speak succinctly,

the Natures which make our Saviour are distinct, for the Invisible is not the same as the visible, nor the Timeless

as that which is subject to time; but He is not two Persons, God forbid, for both these are one in the union, God

being made Man, and Man being made God, or however else you may express it." And upon this S. Thomas

Aquinas remarks that it is true, if by Man you understand simply Human Nature, and not a Human Person; in

this sense it was brought to pass that Man was God; or in other words Human Nature was made that of the Son

of God. (Summa, III., xvi., 7.)

"If any does not admit Mary to be the Mother of God (θεοτόκον), he is separated from God. If any say

that He passed through the Virgin as through a conduit, and that He was not formed in her both divinely and

humanly (divinely, because without a human father; humanly, because in accordance with the laws of gestation),

he is in like manner atheistic. If any assert that the Humanity was thus formed, and the Deity subsequently

added, he is condemned; for this is not a generation of God, but an evasion of generation" (S. G. N. ad Cled.,

Ep. i.) S. Thomas Aquinas explains the fitness of the title thus: The Blessed Virgin could be denied to be the

Mother of God only if either His Humanity had been conceived and born before That Man was the Son of

God:-which was the position taken up by Photinus; or else if the Humanity had not been assumed into the

unity of the Person (or Hypostasis) of the Son of God;-which was the position of Nestorius. Both these positions

are erroneous. Therefore to deny that the Blessed Virgin is the Mother of God is heretical (Summa, III.. xxxv.

4). In the text S. Gregory merely means that the Godhead of our Lord was not derived from His Blessed Mother,

just as his Manhood was not derived from any man; but, as the extract at the beginning of this Note shews, he

would be the last to take up the Nestorian notion, which was afterwards condemned at the Council of Ephesus.

Both These, i.e., the being without Father, and without Mother is a condition which belongs only to the

Godhead.

S. John the Baptist (S. Luke i.).

Luke ii. 41.

Referring, perhaps, to the tradition that at the coming of Christ into Egypt all the Idols in the land fell

down and were broken.

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

eyes of the Jews3565-but to David He is fairer than the children of men.3566 And on the
Mountain He was bright as the lightning, and became more luminous than the sun,3567
initiating us into the mystery of the future.

XX. He was baptized as Man-but He remitted sins as God3568-not because He needed
purificatory rites Himself, but that He might sanctify the element of water. He was tempted
as Man, but He conquered as God; yea, He bids us be of good cheer, for He has overcome
the world.3569 He hungered-but He fed thousands;3570 yea, He is the Bread that giveth
life, and That is of heaven. He thirsted-but He cried, If any man thirst, let him come unto
Me and drink.3571 Yea, He promised that fountains should flow from them that believe. 
He was wearied, but He is the Rest of them that are weary and heavy laden.3572 He was
heavy with sleep, but He walked lightly over the sea.3573 He rebuked the winds, He made
Peter light as he began to sink.3574 He pays tribute, but it is out of a fish;3575 yea, He is the
King of those who demanded it.3576 He is called a Samaritan and a demoniac;3577-but He
saves him that came down from Jerusalem and fell among thieves;3578 the demons acknowledge Him, and He drives out demons and sinks in the sea legions of foul spirits,3579 and
sees the Prince of the demons falling like lightning.3580 He is stoned, but is not taken. He
prays, but He hears prayer. He weeps, but He causes tears to cease. He asks where Lazarus
was laid, for He was Man; but He raises Lazarus, for He was God.3581 He is sold, and very
cheap, for it is only for thirty pieces of silver;3582 but He redeems the world, and that at a

Isa. liii. 2.

Ps. xlv. 2.

3567 Matt. xvii. 2.

3568 Matt. iii. 13; ix. 6.

John xvi. 33.

Ib. vi. 10.

Ib. vii. 37.

3572 Matt. xi. 28.

Ib. viii. 24.

Ib. xiv. 25, 30.

Ib. xvii. 24.

John xix. 19.

Ib. viii. 48.

Luke x. 30, etc.

Luke viii. 28-33.

Ib. x. 18.

John xi. 43.

3582 Matt. xxvi. 15.

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

great price, for the Price was His own blood.3583 As a sheep He is led to the slaughter,3584
but He is the Shepherd of Israel, and now of the whole world also. As a Lamb He is silent,
yet He is the Word, and is proclaimed by the Voice of one crying in the wilderness.3585 He
is bruised and wounded, but He healeth every disease and every infirmity.3586 He is lifted
up and nailed to the Tree, but by the Tree of Life He restoreth us; yea, He saveth even the
Robber crucified with Him;3587 yea, He wrapped the visible world in darkness. He is given
vinegar to drink mingled with gall. Who? He who turned the water into wine3588, who is
the destroyer of the bitter taste, who is Sweetness and altogether desire.3589 He lays down
His life, but He has power to take it again;3590 and the veil is rent, for the mysterious doors
of Heaven are opened; the rocks are cleft, the dead arise.3591 He dies, but He gives life, and
by His death destroys death. He is buried, but He rises again; He goes down into Hell, but
He brings up the souls; He ascends to Heaven, and shall come again to judge the quick and
the dead, and to put to the test such words as yours. If the one give you a starting point for
your error, let the others put an end to it.

XXI. This, then, is our reply to those who would puzzle us; not given willingly indeed
(for light talk and contradictions of words are not agreeable to the faithful, and one Adversary
is enough for us), but of necessity, for the sake of our assailants (for medicines exist because
of diseases), that they may be led to see that they are not all-wise nor invincible in those
superfluous arguments which make void the Gospel. For when we leave off believing, and
protect ourselves by mere strength of argument, and destroy the claim which the Spirit has
upon our faith by questionings, and then our argument is not strong enough for the importance of the subject (and this must necessarily be the case, since it is put in motion by an
organ of so little power as is our mind), what is the result? The weakness of the argument
appears to belong to the mystery, and thus elegance of language makes void the Cross, as
Paul also thought.3592 For faith is that which completes our argument. But may He who
proclaimeth unions and looseth those that are bound, and who putteth into our minds to
solve the knots of their unnatural dogmas, if it may be, change these men and make them

1 Pet. i. 19.

Isa. liii. 7.

John i. 23.

Isa. liii. 23.

Luke xxiii. 43.

John ii. 1-11.

3589 Cant. v. 16.

John x. 18.

3591 Matt. xxvii. 51.

1 Cor. i. 17.

The Third Theological Oration. On the Son.

faithful instead of rhetoricians, Christians instead of that which they now are called. This
indeed we entreat and beg for Christ's sake. Be ye reconciled to God,3593 and quench not
the Spirit;3594 or rather, may Christ be reconciled to you, and may the Spirit enlighten you,
though so late. But if you are too fond of your quarrel, we at any rate will hold fast to the
Trinity, and by the Trinity may we be saved, remaining pure and without offence, until the
more perfect shewing forth of that which we desire, in Him, Christ our Lord, to Whom be
the glory for ever. Amen.

2 Cor. v. 20.

1 Thess. v. 19.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

Oration XXX.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

I. Since I have by the power of the Spirit sufficiently overthrown the subtleties and intricacies of the arguments, and already solved in the mass the objections and oppositions
drawn from Holy Scripture, with which these sacrilegious robbers of the Bible and thieves
of the sense of its contents draw over the multitude to their side, and confuse the way of
truth; and that not without clearness, as I believe all candid persons will say; attributing to
the Deity the higher and diviner expressions, and the lower and more human to Him Who
for us men was the Second Adam, and was God made capable of suffering to strive against
sin; yet we have not yet gone through the passages in detail, because of the haste of our argument. But since you demand of us a brief explanation of each of them, that you may not
be carried away by the plausibilities of their arguments, we will therefore state the explanations summarily, dividing them into numbers for the sake of carrying them more easily in
mind.

II. In their eyes the following is only too ready to hand "The Lord created me at the
beginning of His ways with a view to His works."3595 How shall we meet this? Shall we
bring an accusation against Solomon, or reject his former words because of his fall in afterlife? Shall we say that the words are those of Wisdom herself, as it were of Knowledge and
the Creator-word, in accordance with which all things were made? For Scripture often
personifies many even lifeless objects; as for instance, "The Sea said"3596 so and so; and,
"The Depth saith, It is not in me;"3597 and "The Heavens declare the glory of God;"3598 and

Prov. viii. 22. The A.V. has in the place Possessed, and this has very high authority: but the Hebrew

word in almost every case signifies to Acquire. It is used, says Bp. Wordsworth (ad h. l.), about eighty times in

the O.T., and in only five places is it rendered in our Translation by Possess;-in two of which (Gen. xiv. 10, 22,

and Ps. cxxxix. 13) it might well have the sense of Creating, and in two (Jer. xxxii. 15, and Zech. xi. 5) of Getting. 

In some ancient Versions (LXX. and Syr.) it is rendered by Create. S. Jerome in his Ep. ad Cypr. (ii. 697) says

that the word may here be understood of possession, but in his Comm. on Ephes. ii. (p. 342) he adopts the ren-

dering Create, which he applies to the Incarnation, as in several places does S. Athanasius. But Wordsworth

thinks it better to apply the words to the Eternal Generation, as S. Hilary expounds it (c. Arianos, who argued

from it that Christ was a creature); "quia Filius Dei non corporalis parturitionis est genitus exemplo, sed ex

perfecto Deo perfectus Deus natus; et ideo ait creatam se esse Sapientia; omnem in generatione sua notionem

passionis corporalis excludens."

Is. xxiii. 4.

Job xxviii. 14.

Ps. xix. 1.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

again a command is given to the Sword;3599 and the Mountains and Hills are asked the
reason of their skipping.3600 We do not allege any of these, though some of our predecessors
used them as powerful arguments. But let us grant that the expression is used of our Saviour
Himself, the true Wisdom. Let us consider one small point together. What among all things
that exist is unoriginate? The Godhead. For no one can tell the origin of God, that otherwise
would be older than God. But what is the cause of the Manhood, which for our sake God
assumed? It was surely our Salvation. What else could it be? Since then we find here clearly
both the Created and the Begetteth Me, the argument is simple. Whatever we find joined
with a cause we are to refer to the Manhood, but all that is absolute and unoriginate we are
to reckon to the account of His Godhead. Well, then, is not this "Created" said in connection
with a cause? He created Me, it so says, as the beginning of His ways, with a view to his
works. Now, the Works of His Hands are verity and judgment;3601 for whose sake He was
anointed with Godhead;3602 for this anointing is of the Manhood; but the "He begetteth
Me" is not connected with a cause; or it is for you to shew the adjunct. What argument then
will disprove that Wisdom is called a creature, in connection with the lower generation, but
Begotten in respect of the first and more incomprehensible?

III. Next is the fact of His being called Servant3603 and serving many well, and that it
is a great thing for Him to be called the Child of God. For in truth He was in servitude to
flesh and to birth and to the conditions of our life with a view to our liberation, and to that
of all those whom He has saved, who were in bondage under sin. What greater destiny can
befall man's humility than that he should be intermingled with God, and by this intermingling
should be deified,3604 and that we should be so visited by the Dayspring from on high,3605
that even that Holy Thing that should be born should be called the Son of the Highest,3606
and that there should be bestowed upon Him a Name which is above every name? And
what else can this be than God?-and that every knee should bow to Him That was made
of no reputation for us, and That mingled the Form of God with the form of a servant, and
that all the House of Israel should know that God hath made Him both Lord and Christ?3607 

Zech. xiii. 7.

Ps. cxiv. 6.

Ps. cxi. 7.

Ps. xiv. 7.

Isa. xlix. 6; liii. 11. The LXX. here mistranslates; the Hebrew and the Latin have the same word in all

the passages quoted below, while the LXX. varies, as follows: Isa. xlii. 1. παῖς. 19. παἴδες, δοῦλοι. xliv. 2. παῖς. 

21. παῖς. xlviii. 29. δοῦλον. xlix. 3. δοῦλος. 5. δοῦλον. 6. παῖδα. 7. δοῦλον. lii. 13. παῖς. liii. 11. δοῦλεύοντα.

See Prolegomena, sec. ii. and 2 Pet. i. 4.

Luke i. 78.

Phil. ii. 9.

3607 Acts ii. 36.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

For all this was done by the action of the Begotten, and by the good pleasure of Him That
begat Him.

IV. Well, what is the second of their great irresistible passages? "He must reign,"3608
till such and such a time...and "be received by heaven until the time of restitution,"3609 and
"have the seat at the Right Hand until the overthrow of His enemies."3610 But after this? 
Must He cease to be King, or be removed from Heaven? Why, who shall make Him cease,
or for what cause? What a bold and very anarchical interpreter you are; and yet you have
heard that Of His Kingdom there shall be no end.3611 Your mistake arises from not understanding that Until is not always exclusive of that which comes after, but asserts up to that
time, without denying what comes after it. To take a single instance-how else would you
understand, "Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world?"3612 Does it mean
that He will no longer be so afterwards. And for what reason? But this is not the only cause
of your error; you also fail to distinguish between the things that are signified. He is said
to reign in one sense as the Almighty King, both of the willing and the unwilling; but in
another as producing in us submission, and placing us under His Kingship as willingly acknowledging His Sovereignty. Of His Kingdom, considered in the former sense, there shall
be no end. But in the second sense, what end will there be? His taking us as His servants,
on our entrance into a state of salvation. For what need is there to Work Submission in us
when we have already submitted? After which He arises to judge the earth, and to separate
the saved from the lost. After that He is to stand as God in the midst of gods,3613 that is, of
the saved, distinguishing and deciding of what honour and of what mansion each is worthy.
V. Take, in the next place, the subjection by which you subject the Son to the Father. 
What, you say, is He not now subject, or must He, if He is God, be subject to God?3614 You
are fashioning your argument as if it concerned some robber, or some hostile deity. But
look at it in this manner: that as for my sake He was called a curse,3615 Who destroyed my
curse; and sin,3616 who taketh away the sin of the world; and became a new Adam3617 to

1 Cor. xv. 35.

3609 Acts iii. 21.

Ps. cx. 1.

Luke i. 33. Cf. Nic. Creed.

3612 Matt. xxviii. 20.

Ps. lxxxii. 1.

S. Gregory would here shew that the subjection of Christ of which S. Paul speaks in the passage quoted,

is that of the Head of the Church, representing the members of His body. Cf. S. Ambrose, de Fide V. vi., quoted

by Petavius, de Trin. III. v. 2.

3615 Gal. iii. 13.

2 Cor. v. 21.

1 Cor. xv. 45.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

take the place of the old, just so He makes my disobedience His own as Head of the whole
body. As long then as I am disobedient and rebellious, both by denial of God and by my
passions, so long Christ also is called disobedient on my account. But when all things shall
be subdued unto Him on the one hand by acknowledgment of Him, and on the other by a
reformation, then He Himself also will have fulfilled His submission, bringing me whom
He has saved to God. For this, according to my view, is the subjection of Christ; namely,
the fulfilling of the Father's Will. But as the Son subjects all to the Father, so does the
Father to the Son; the One by His Work, the Other by His good pleasure, as we have already
said. And thus He Who subjects presents to God that which he has subjected, making our
condition His own. Of the same kind, it appears to me, is the expression, "My God, My
God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?"3618 It was not He who was forsaken either by the
Father, or by His own Godhead, as some have thought, as if It were afraid of the Passion,
and therefore withdrew Itself from Him in His Sufferings (for who compelled Him either
to be born on earth at all, or to be lifted up on the Cross?) But as I said, He was in His own
Person representing us. For we were the forsaken and despised before, but now by the
Sufferings of Him Who could not suffer, we were taken up and saved. Similarly, He makes
His own our folly and our transgressions; and says what follows in the Psalm, for it is very
evident that the Twenty-first3619 Psalm refers to Christ.

VI. The same consideration applies to another passage, "He learnt obedience by the
things which He suffered,"3620 and to His "strong crying and tears," and His "Entreaties,"
and His "being heard," and His" Reverence," all of which He wonderfully wrought out, like
a drama whose plot was devised on our behalf. For in His character of the Word He was
neither obedient nor disobedient. For such expressions belong to servants, and inferiors,
and the one applies to the better sort of them, while the other belongs to those who deserve
punishment. But, in the character of the Form of a Servant, He condescends to His fellow
servants, nay, to His servants, and takes upon Him a strange form, bearing all me and mine
in Himself, that in Himself He may exhaust the bad, as fire does wax, or as the sun does the
mists of earth; and that I may partake of His nature by the blending. Thus He honours
obedience by His action, and proves it experimentally by His Passion. For to possess the
disposition is not enough, just as it would not be enough for us, unless we also proved it by
our acts; for action is the proof of disposition.

And perhaps it would not be wrong to assume this also, that by the art3621 of His love
for man He gauges our obedience, and measures all by comparison with His own Sufferings,

Ps. xxii. 1.

I.e. Ps. xxii. A.V.

3620 Heb. v. 8, etc.

Leuvenclavius translates "The art of this lovingkindness gauges," etc.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

so that He may know our condition by His own, and how much is demanded of us, and
how much we yield, taking into the account, along with our environment, our weakness
also. For if the Light shining through the veil3622 upon the darkness, that is upon this life,
was persecuted by the other darkness (I mean, the Evil One and the Tempter), how much
more will the darkness be persecuted, as being weaker than it? And what marvel is it, that
though He entirely escaped, we have been, at any rate in part, overtaken? For it is a more
wonderful thing that He should have been chased than that we should have been captured;-at least to the minds of all who reason aright on the subject. I will add yet another
passage to those I have mentioned, because I think that it clearly tends to the same sense. 
I mean "In that He hath suffered being tempted, He is able to succour them that are tempted."3623 But God will be all in all in the time of restitution; not in the sense that the Father
alone will Be; and the Son be wholly resolved into Him, like a torch into a great pyre, from
which it was reft away for a little space, and then put back (for I would not have even the
Sabellians injured3624 by such an expression); but the entire Godhead...when we shall be
no longer divided (as we now are by movements and passions), and containing nothing at
all of God, or very little, but shall be entirely like.

VII. As your third point you count the Word Greater;3625 and as your fourth, To My
God and your God.3626 And indeed, if He had been called greater, and the word equal had
not occurred, this might perhaps have been a point in their favour. But if we find both
words clearly used what will these gentlemen have to say? How will it strengthen their argument? How will they reconcile the irreconcilable? For that the same thing should be at
once greater than and equal to the same thing is an impossibility; and the evident solution
is that the Greater refers to origination, while the Equal belongs to the Nature; and this we
acknowledge with much good will. But perhaps some one else will back up our attack on
your argument, and assert, that That which is from such a Cause is not inferior to that which
has no Cause; for it would share the glory of the Unoriginate, because it is from the Unoriginate. And there is, besides, the Generation, which is to all men a matter so marvellous
and of such Majesty. For to say that he is greater than the Son considered as man, is true
indeed, but is no great thing. For what marvel is it if God is greater than man? Surely that
is enough to say in answer to their talk about Greater.

3622 The Benedictines render, "In darkness, that is, in this life, because of the veil of the body."

3623 Heb. ii. 18.

3624 The Benedictines take παρα φθειρέσθωσαν in an active sense: "I would not let even the Sabellians wrest

such an expression."

John xiv. 28.

Ib. xx. 17.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

VIII. As to the other passages, My God would be used in respect, not of the Word, but
of the Visible Word. For how could there be a God of Him Who is properly God? In the
same way He is Father, not of the Visible, but of the Word; for our Lord was of two Natures;
so that one expression is used properly, the other improperly in each of the two cases; but
exactly the opposite way to their use in respect of us. For with respect to us God is properly
our God, but not properly our Father. And this is the cause of the error of the Heretics,
namely the joining of these two Names, which are interchanged because of the Union of
the Natures. And an indication of this is found in the fact that wherever the Natures are
distinguished in our thoughts from one another, the Names are also distinguished; as you
hear in Paul's words, "The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory."3627 The God
of Christ, but the Father of glory. For although these two terms express but one Person, yet
this is not by a Unity of Nature, but by a Union of the two. What could be clearer?

IX. Fifthly, let it be alleged that it is said of Him that He receives life,3628 judgment,3629
inheritance of the Gentiles,3630 or power over all flesh,3631 or glory,3632 or disciples, or
whatever else is mentioned. This also belongs to the Manhood; and yet if you were to ascribe
it to the Godhead, it would be no absurdity. For you would not so ascribe it as if it were
newly acquired, but as belonging to Him from the beginning by reason of nature, and not
as an act of favour.

X. Sixthly, let it be asserted that it is written, The Son can do nothing of Himself, but
what He seeth the Father do.3633 The solution of this is as follows:-Can and Cannot are
not words with only one meaning, but have many meanings. On the one hand they are
used sometimes in respect of deficiency of strength, sometimes in respect of time, and
sometimes relatively to a certain object; as for instance, A Child cannot be an Athlete, or,
A Puppy cannot see, or fight with so and so. Perhaps some day the child will be an athlete,
the puppy will see, will fight with that other, though it may still be unable to fight with Any
other. Or again, they may be used of that which is Generally true. For instance,-A city
that is set on a hill cannot be hid;3634 while yet it might possibly be hidden by another
higher hill being in a line with it. Or in another sense they are used of a thing which is not

Ephes. i. 17.

John viii. 54.

John v. 22.

Ps. ii. 8.

John xvii. 2.

2 Pet. i. 17, etc.

John v. 19.

3634 Matt. v. 14.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

reasonable; as, Can the Children of the Bridechamber fast while the Bridegroom is with
them;3635 whether He be considered as visible in bodily form (for the time of His sojourning
among us was not one of mourning, but of gladness), or, as the Word. For why should they
keep a bodily fast who are cleansed by the Word?3636 Or, again, they are used of that which
is contrary to the will; as in, He could do no mighty works there because of their unbelief,3637-i.e. of those who should receive them. For since in order to healing there is need
of both faith in the patient and power in the Healer,3638 when one of the two failed the
other was impossible. But probably this sense also is to be referred to the head of the unreasonable. For healing is not reasonable in the case of those who would afterwards be injured
by unbelief. The sentence The world cannot hate you,3639 comes under the same head, as
does also How can ye, being evil, speak good things?3640 For in what sense is either impossible, except that it is contrary to the will? There is a somewhat similar meaning in the
expressions which imply that a thing impossible by nature is possible to God if He so wills;3641
as that a man cannot be born a second time,3642 or that a needle will not let a camel through
it.3643 For what could prevent either of these things happening, if God so willed?

XI. And besides all this, there is the absolutely impossible and inadmissible, as that
which we are now examining. For as we assert that it is impossible for God to be evil, or
not to exist-for this would be indicative of weakness in God rather than of strength-or
for the non-existent to exist, or for two and two to make both four and ten,3644 so it is impossible and inconceivable that the Son should do anything that the Father doeth not.3645 
For all things that the Father hath are the Son's;3646 and on the other hand, all that belongs
to the Son is the Father's. Nothing then is peculiar, because all things are in common. For
Their Being itself is common and equal, even though the Son receive it from the Father. It
is in respect of this that it is said I live by the Father;3647 not as though His Life and Being

3635 Mark ii. 19.

John xv. 3.

3637 Mark vi. 5.

3638 Note with the Benedictines that S. Gregory is here speaking of our Lord alone, not of ordinary Physicians;

hence he uses the singular.

John vii. 7.

3640 Matt. xii. 34.

3641 Matt. xix. 26.

John iii. 4.

3643 Matt. xix. 24.

3644 One ms. reads "to be fourteen."

John v. 19.

Ib. xvi. 15.

Ib. vi. 57.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

were kept together by the Father, but because He has His Being from Him beyond all time,
and beyond all cause. But how does He see the Father doing, and do likewise? Is it like
those who copy pictures and letters, because they cannot attain the truth unless by looking
at the original, and being led by the hand by it? But how shall Wisdom stand in need of a
teacher, or be incapable of acting unless taught? And in what sense does the Father "Do"
in the present or in the past? Did He make another world before this one, or is He going
to make a world to come? And did the Son look at that and make this? Or will He look at
the other, and make one like it? According to this argument there must be Four worlds,
two made by the Father, and two by the Son. What an absurdity! He cleanses lepers, and
delivers men from evil spirits, and diseases, and quickens the dead, and walks upon the sea,
and does all His other works; but in what case, or when did the Father do these acts before
Him? Is it not clear that the Father impressed the ideas of these same actions, and the Word
brings them to pass, yet not in slavish or unskilful fashion, but with full knowledge and in
a masterly way, or, to speak more properly, like the Father? For in this sense I understand
the words that whatsoever is done by the Father, these things doeth the Son likewise; not,
that is, because of the likeness of the things done, but in respect of the Authority. This might
well also be the meaning of the passage which says that the Father worketh hitherto and the
Son also;3648 and not only so but it refers also to the government and preservation of the
things which He has made; as is shewn by the passage which says that He maketh His Angels
Spirits,3649 and that the earth is founded upon its steadfastness (though once for all these
things were fixed and made) and that the thunder is made firm and the wind created.3650 
Of all these things the Word was given once, but the Action is continuous even now.

XII. Let them quote in the seventh place that The Son came down from Heaven, not
to do His own Will, but the Will of Him That sent Him.3651 Well, if this had not been said
by Himself Who came down, we should say that the phrase was modelled as issuing from
the Human Nature, not from Him who is conceived of in His character as the Saviour, for
His Human Will cannot be opposed to God, seeing it is altogether taken into God; but
conceived of simply as in our nature, inasmuch as the human will does not completely follow
the Divine, but for the most part struggles against and resists it. For we understand in the
same way the words, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from Me; Nevertheless let not
what I will but Thy Will prevail.3652 For it is not likely that He did not know whether it was
possible or not, or that He would oppose will to will. But since, as this is the language of

John v. 17.

Ps. civ. 4, 5, LXX.

cf. Amos iv. 13, where A.V. reads, He That formed the mountains and created the wind.

John vi. 38.

3652 Matt. xxvi. 39.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

Him Who assumed our Nature (for He it was Who came down), and not of the Nature
which He assumed, we must meet the objection in this way, that the passage does not mean
that the Son has a special will of His own, besides that of the Father, but that He has not; so
that the meaning would be, "not to do Mine own Will, for there is none of Mine apart from,
but that which is common to, Me and Thee; for as We have one Godhead, so We have one
Will."3653 For many such expressions are used in relation to this Community, and are expressed not positively but negatively; as, e.g., God giveth not the Spirit by measure,3654 for
as a matter of fact He does not give the Spirit to the Son, nor does He measure It, for God
is not measured by God; or again, Not my transgression nor my sin.3655 The words are not
used because He has these things, but because He has them not. And again, Not for our
righteousness which we have done,3656 for we have not done any. And this meaning is
evident also in the clauses which follow. For what, says He, is the Will of My Father? That
everyone that believeth on the Son should be saved,3657 and obtain the final Resurrection.3658 
Now is this the Will of the Father, but not of the Son? Or does He preach the Gospel, and
receive men's faith against His will? Who could believe that? Moreover, that passage, too,
which says that the Word which is heard is not the Son's3659 but the Father's has the same
force. For I cannot see how that which is common to two can be said to belong to one alone,
however much I consider it, and I do not think any one else can. If then you hold this
opinion concerning the Will, you will be right and reverent in your opinion, as I think, and
as every right-minded person thinks.

XIII. The eighth passage is, That they may know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus
Christ Whom Thou hast sent;3660 and There is none good save one, that is, God.3661 The
solution of this appears to me very easy. For if you attribute this only to the Father, where
will you place the Very Truth? For if you conceive in this manner of the meaning of To the
only wise God,3662 or Who only hath Immortality, Dwelling in the light which no man can

3653 Observe that S. Gregory expressly limits this paraphrase to the Divine Nature of our Lord, and is not in

any way denying to Him a Human Will also;-indeed in the preceding sentence he distinctly asserts it. The

whole passage makes very strongly against the heresy of Apollinarius, which adopted the Arian tenet that in our

Lord the Divine Logos supplied the place of the human soul.

John iii. 34.

Ps. lix. 3.

3656 Dan. ix. 18.

John vi. 40.

3658 V. l. Restoration.

John xiv. 24.

Ib. xvii. 3.

Luke xviii. 19.

1 Tim. i. 17.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

approach unto,3663 or of to the king of the Ages, immortal, invisible, and only wise God,3664
then the Son has vanished under sentence of death, or of darkness, or at any rate condemned
to be neither wise nor king, nor invisible, nor God at all, which sums up all these points. 
And how will you prevent His Goodness, which especially belongs to God alone, from perishing with the rest? I, however, think that the passage That they may know Thee the only
true God, was said to overthrow those gods which are falsely so called, for He would not
have added and Jesus Christ Whom Thou hast sent, if The Only True God were contrasted
with Him, and the sentence did not proceed upon the basis of a common Godhead. The
"None is Good" meets the tempting Lawyer, who was testifying to His Goodness viewed as
Man. For perfect goodness, He says, is God's alone, even if a man is called perfectly good. 
As for instance, A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth good
things.3665 And, I will give the kingdom to one who is good above Thee.3666...Words of
God, speaking to Saul about David. Or again, Do good, O Lord, unto the good3667...and
all other like expressions concerning those of us who are praised, upon whom it is a kind
of effluence from the Supreme Good, and has come to them in a secondary degree. It will
be best of all if we can persuade you of this. But if not, what will you say to the suggestion
on the other side, that on your hypothesis the Son has been called the only God. In what
passage? Why, in this:-This is your God; no other shall be accounted of in comparison
with Him, and a little further on, after this did He shew Himself upon earth, and conversed
with men.3668 This addition proves clearly that the words are not used of the Father, but
of the Son; for it was He Who in bodily form companied with us, and was in this lower
world. Now, if we should determine to take these words as said in contrast with the Father,
and not with the imaginary gods, we lose the Father by the very terms which we were
pressing against the Son. And what could be more disastrous than such a victory?

XIV. Ninthly, they allege, seeing He ever liveth to make intercession for us.3669 O, how
beautiful and mystical and kind. For to intercede does not imply to seek for vengeance, as
is most men's way (for in that there would be something of humiliation), but it is to plead
for us by reason of His Mediatorship, just as the Spirit also is said to make intercession for
us.3670 For there is One God, and One Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ

Ib. vi. 16.

Ib. i. 17.

3665 Mat. xii. 35.

1 Sam. xv. 28.

Ps. cxxv. 4.

Baruch iii. 35, 37.

3669 Heb. vii. 25.

3670 Rom. viii. 26.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

Jesus.3671 For He still pleads even now as Man for my salvation; for He continues to wear
the Body which He assumed, until He make me God by the power of His Incarnation; although He is no longer known after the flesh3672-I mean, the passions of the flesh, the
same, except sin, as ours. Thus too, we have an Advocate,3673 Jesus Christ, not indeed
prostrating Himself for us before the Father, and falling down before Him in slavish fashion...Away with a suspicion so truly slavish and unworthy of the Spirit! For neither is it
seemly for the Father to require this, nor for the Son to submit to it; nor is it just to think it
of God. But by what He suffered as Man, He as the Word and the Counsellor persuades
Him to be patient. I think this is the meaning of His Advocacy.

XV. Their tenth objection is the ignorance, and the statement that Of the last day and
hour knoweth no man, not even the Son Himself, but the Father.3674 And yet how can
Wisdom be ignorant of anything-that is, Wisdom Who made the worlds, Who perfects
them, Who remodels them, Who is the Limit of all things that were made, Who knoweth
the things of God as the spirit of a man knows the things that are in him?3675 For what can
be more perfect than this knowledge? How then can you say that all things before that hour
He knows accurately, and all things that are to happen about the time of the end, but of the
hour itself He is ignorant? For such a thing would be like a riddle; as if one were to say that
he knew accurately all that was in front of the wall, but did not know the wall itself; or that,
knowing the end of the day, he did not know the beginning of the night-where knowledge
of the one necessarily brings in the other. Thus everyone must see that He knows as God,
and knows not as Man;-if one may separate the visible from that which is discerned by
thought alone. For the absolute and unconditioned use of the Name "The Son" in this
passage, without the addition of whose Son, gives us this thought, that we are to understand
the ignorance in the most reverent sense, by attributing it to the Manhood, and not to the
Godhead.

XVI. If then this argument is sufficient, let us stop here, and not enquire further. But
if not, our second argument is as follows:-Just as we do in all other instances, so let us refer
His knowledge of the greatest events, in honour of the Father, to The Cause. And I think
that anyone, even if he did not read it in the way that one of our own Students3676 did,
would soon perceive that not even the Son knows the day or hour otherwise than as the

1 Tim. ii. 5.

2 Cor. v. 16.

1 John ii. 1.

3674 Mark xiii. 32.

1 Cor. ii. 11.

Elias thinks that the great S. Basil is here referred to. Petavius thinks the first argument of c. xvi. forced

and unsatisfactory.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

Father does. For what do we conclude from this? That since the Father knows, therefore
also does the Son, as it is evident that this cannot be known or comprehended by any but
the First Nature. There remains for us to interpret the passage about His receiving commandment,3677 and having kept His Commandments, and done always those things that
please Him; and further concerning His being made perfect,3678 and His exaltation,3679 and
His learning obedience by the things which He suffered; and also His High Priesthood, and
His Oblation, and His Betrayal, and His prayer to Him That was able to save Him from
death, and His Agony and Bloody Sweat and Prayer,3680 and such like things; if it were not
evident to every one that such words are concerned, not with That Nature Which is unchangeable and above all capacity of suffering, but with the passible Humanity. This, then,
is the argument concerning these objections, so far as to be a sort of foundation and
memorandum for the use of those who are better able to conduct the enquiry to a more
complete working out. It may, however, be worth while, and will be consistent with what
has been already said, instead of passing over without remark the actual Titles of the Son
(there are many of them, and they are concerned with many of His Attributes), to set before
you the meaning of each of them, and to point out the mystical meaning of the names.

XVII. We will begin thus. The Deity cannot be expressed in words. And this is proved
to us, not only by argument, but by the wisest and most ancient of the Hebrews, so far as
they have given us reason for conjecture. For they appropriated certain characters to the
honour of the Deity, and would not even allow the name of anything inferior to God to be
written with the same letters as that of God, because to their minds it was improper that the
Deity should even to that extent admit any of His creatures to a share with Himself. How
then could they have admitted that the invisible and separate Nature can be explained by
divisible words? For neither has any one yet breathed the whole air, nor has any mind entirely
comprehended, or speech exhaustively contained the Being of God. But we sketch Him by
His Attributes, and so obtain a certain faint and feeble and partial idea concerning Him,
and our best Theologian is he who has, not indeed discovered the whole, for our present
chain does not allow of our seeing the whole, but conceived of Him to a greater extent than
another, and gathered in himself more of the Likeness or adumbration of the Truth, or
whatever we may call it.

XVIII. As far then as we can reach, He Who Is, and God, are the special names of His
Essence; and of these especially He Who Is, not only because when He spake to Moses in
the mount, and Moses asked what His Name was, this was what He called Himself, bidding

John xii. 49.

3678 Heb. v. 7., etc.

Phil. ii. 9.

Luke xii. 44.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

him say to the people "I Am hath sent me,"3681 but also because we find that this Name is
the more strictly appropriate. For the Name Θεός (God), even if, as those who are skilful
in these matters say, it were derived from Θέειν3682 (to run) or from Αἴθειν (to blaze), from
continual motion, and because He consumes evil conditions of things (from which fact He
is also called A Consuming Fire),3683 would still be one of the Relative Names, and not an
Absolute one; as again is the case with Lord,3684 which also is called a name of God. I am
the Lord Thy God, He says, that is My name;3685 and, The Lord is His name.3686 But we
are enquiring into a Nature Whose Being is absolute and not into Being bound up with
something else. But Being is in its proper sense peculiar to God, and belongs to Him entirely,
and is not limited or cut short by any Before or After, for indeed in him there is no past or
future.

XIX. Of the other titles, some are evidently names of His Authority, others of His
Government of the world, and of this viewed under a twofold aspect, the one before the
other in the Incarnation. For instance the Almighty, the King of Glory, or of The Ages, or
of The Powers, or of The Beloved, or of Kings. Or again the Lord of Sabaoth, that is of
Hosts, or of Powers, or of Lords; these are clearly titles belonging to His Authority. But the
God either of Salvation or of Vengeance, or of Peace, or of Righteousness; or of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and of all the spiritual Israel that seeth God,-these belong to His Government. For since we are governed by these three things, the fear of punishment, the hope of
salvation and of glory besides, and the practice of the virtues by which these are attained,
the Name of the God of Vengeance governs fear, and that of the God of Salvation our hope,
and that of the God of Virtues our practice; that whoever attains to any of these may, as
carrying God in himself, press on yet more unto perfection, and to that affinity which arises
out of virtues. Now these are Names common to the Godhead, but the Proper Name of the

Exod. iii. 14.

3682 The derivation of Θεός from Θέειν (to run) is given by Plato (Crat., 397c). That from Αἴθειν (to blaze)

is found also in S. John Damascene (De Fide Orth., I., 12), who however may have borrowed it from S. Gregory,

or from the source whence the latter took it. S. Athanasius also admits it (De Defin., 11). Other definitions are,

according to Suicer, (1) Θεᾶσθαι (to see), e.g. Greg. Nyss. in Cant. Hom., V. (2) Θεωρεῖν (to contemplate),

Athan. Quaest Misc., Qu. XI. Θεὸς λέγεται ἀπὸ τὸ θεωρεῖν τὰ πάντα, οἱονεὶ θεωρὸς καὶ θεος, ἤγουν θεάτης

πάντων. (3) Τιθέναι (to place), Clem., Al. Strom., l. s. fin., θεὸς παρὰ τὴν θέσιν εἴρηται.

3683 Deut. iv. 24.

Lord (Κύριος) is simply the LXX. rendering of the word which in reading Hebrew is substituted for the

Ineffable Name. Thus in the passages quoted, had the original language been used, the Four-Lettered Name

would have appeared.

Isa. xlii. 8.

3686 Amos ix. 6.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

Unoriginate is Father, and that of the unoriginately Begotten is Son, and that of the unbegottenly Proceeding or going forth is The Holy Ghost. Let us proceed then to the Names
of the Son, which were our starting point in this part of our argument.

XX. In my opinion He is called Son because He is identical with the Father in Essence;
and not only for this reason, but also because He is Of Him. And He is called Only-Begotten,
not because He is the only Son and of the Father alone, and only a Son; but also because the
manner of His Sonship is peculiar to Himself and not shared by bodies. And He is called
the Word, because He is related to the Father as Word to Mind; not only on account of His
passionless Generation, but also because of the Union, and of His declaratory function. 
Perhaps too this relation might be compared to that between the Definition and the Thing
defined3687 since this also is called Λόγος.3688 For, it says, he that hath mental perception
of the Son (for this is the meaning of Hath Seen) hath also perceived the Father;3689 and
the Son is a concise demonstration and easy setting forth of the Father's Nature. For every
thing that is begotten is a silent word of him that begat it. And if any one should say that
this Name was given Him because He exists in all things that are, he would not be wrong. 
For what is there that consists but by the word? He is also called Wisdom, as the Knowledge
of things divine and human. For how is it possible that He Who made all things should be
ignorant of the reasons of what He has made? And Power, as the Sustainer of all created
things, and the Furnisher to them of power to keep themselves together. And Truth, as
being in nature One and not many (for truth is one and falsehood is manifold), and as the
pure Seal of the Father and His most unerring Impress. And the Image as of one substance
with Him, and because He is of the Father, and not the Father of Him. For this is of the
Nature of an Image, to be the reproduction of its Archetype, and of that whose name it
bears; only that there is more here. For in ordinary language an image is a motionless representation of that which has motion; but in this case it is the living reproduction of the
Living One, and is more exactly like than was Seth to Adam,3690 or any son to his father. 
For such is the nature of simple Existences, that it is not correct to say of them that they are
Like in one particular and Unlike in another; but they are a complete resemblance, and
should rather be called Identical than Like. Moreover he is called Light as being the
Brightness of souls cleansed by word and life. For if ignorance and sin be darkness, knowledge and a godly life will be Light....And He is called Life, because He is Light, and is the
constituting and creating Power of every reasonable soul. For in Him we live and move and
have our being,3691 according to the double power of that Breathing into us; for we were

3687 Of the oration on Christmas Day, where He is called ὁ τοῦ Πατρὸς ὅρος καὶ λόγος, and see Note there.

3688 Ratio (relation; sometimes reason) Sermo (discourse) and Verbum (Word) are all renderings of Λόγος.

John xiv. 9.

3690 Gen. v. 3.

3691 Acts xvii. 28.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

all inspired by Him with breath,3692 and as many of us as were capable of it, and in so far
as we open the mouth of our mind, with God the Holy Ghost. He is Righteousness, because
He distributes according to that which we deserve, and is a righteous Arbiter both for those
who are under the Law and for those who are under Grace, for soul and body, so that the
former should rule, and the latter obey, and the higher have supremacy over the lower; that
the worse may not rise in rebellion against the better. He is Sanctification, as being Purity,
that the Pure may be contained by Purity. And Redemption, because He sets us free, who
were held captive under sin, giving Himself a Ransom for us, the Sacrifice to make expiation
for the world. And Resurrection, because He raises up from hence, and brings to life again
us, who were slain by sin.

XXI. These names however are still common to Him Who is above us, and to Him
Who came for our sake. But others are peculiarly our own, and belong to that nature which
He assumed. So He is called Man, not only that through His Body He may be apprehended
by embodied creatures, whereas otherwise this would be impossible because of His incomprehensible nature; but also that by Himself He may sanctify humanity, and be as it were a
leaven to the whole lump; and by uniting to Himself that which was condemned may release
it from all condemnation, becoming for all men all things that we are, except sin;-body,
soul, mind and all through which death reaches-and thus He became Man, who is the
combination of all these; God in visible form, because He retained that which is perceived
by mind alone. He is Son of Man, both on account of Adam, and of the Virgin from Whom
He came; from the one as a forefather, from the other as His Mother, both in accordance
with the law of generation, and apart from it. He is Christ, because of His Godhead. For
this is the Anointing of His Manhood, and does not, as is the case with all other Anointed
Ones, sanctify by its action, but by the Presence in His Fulness of the Anointing One; the
effect of which is that That which anoints is called Man, and makes that which is anointed
God. He is The Way, because He leads us through Himself; The Door, as letting us in; the
Shepherd, as making us dwell in a place of green pastures,3693 and bringing us up by waters
of rest, and leading us there, and protecting us from wild beasts, converting the erring,
bringing back that which was lost, binding up that which was broken, guarding the strong,
and bringing them together in the Fold beyond, with words of pastoral knowledge. The
Sheep, as the Victim: The Lamb, as being perfect: the Highpriest, as the Offerer;
Melchisedec, as without Mother in that Nature which is above us, and without Father in
ours; and without genealogy above (for who, it says, shall declare His generation?) and
moreover, as King of Salem, which means Peace, and King of Righteousness, and as receiving
tithes from Patriarchs, when they prevail over powers of evil. They are the titles of the Son. 

3692 Gen. ii. 7.

Ps. xxiii. 2.

The Fourth Theological Oration, Which is the Second Concerning the Son.

Walk through them, those that are lofty in a godlike manner; those that belong to the body
in a manner suitable to them; or rather, altogether in a godlike manner, that thou mayest
become a god, ascending from below, for His sake Who came down from on high for ours. 
In all and above all keep to this, and thou shalt never err, either in the loftier or the lowlier
names; Jesus Christ is the Same yesterday and to-day in the Incarnation, and in the Spirit
for ever and ever. Amen.

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

The Fifth Theological Oration.

On the Holy Spirit.

I. Such then is the account of the Son, and in this manner He has escaped those who
would stone Him, passing through the midst of them.3694 For the Word is not stoned, but
casts stones when He pleases; and uses a sling against wild beasts-that is, words-approaching the Mount3695 in an unholy way. But, they go on, what have you to say about the Holy
Ghost? From whence are you bringing in upon us this strange God, of Whom Scripture is
silent? And even they who keep within bounds as to the Son speak thus. And just as we
find in the case of roads and rivers, that they split off from one another and join again, so
it happens also in this case, through the superabundance of impiety, that people who differ
in all other respects have here some points of agreement, so that you never can tell for certain
either where they are of one mind, or where they are in conflict.

II. Now the subject of the Holy Spirit presents a special difficulty, not only because
when these men have become weary in their disputations concerning the Son, they struggle
with greater heat against the Spirit (for it seems to be absolutely necessary for them to have
some object on which to give expression to their impiety, or life would appear to them no
longer worth living), but further because we ourselves also, being worn out by the multitude
of their questions, are in something of the same condition with men who have lost their
appetite; who having taken a dislike to some particular kind of food, shrink from all food;
so we in like manner have an aversion from all discussions. Yet may the Spirit grant it to
us, and then the discourse will proceed, and God will be glorified. Well then, we will leave
to others3696 who have worked upon this subject for us as well as for themselves, as we have
worked upon it for them, the task of examining carefully and distinguishing in how many
senses the word Spirit or the word Holy is used and understood in Holy Scripture, with the
evidence suitable to such an enquiry; and of shewing how besides these the combination of
the two words-I mean, Holy Spirit-is used in a peculiar sense; but we will apply ourselves
to the remainder of the subject.

III. They then who are angry with us on the ground that we are bringing in a strange
or interpolated God, viz.:-the Holy Ghost, and who fight so very hard for the letter, should
know that they are afraid where no fear is;3697 and I would have them clearly understand
that their love for the letter is but a cloak for their impiety, as shall be shewn later on, when
we refute their objections to the utmost of our power. But we have so much confidence in

Luke iv. 29, 30.

Exod. xix. 13.

E.g. S. Basil and S. Gregory of Nyssa.

Ps. liii. 5.

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

the Deity of the Spirit Whom we adore,3698 that we will begin our teaching concerning His
Godhead by fitting to Him the Names which belong to the Trinity, even though some persons
may think us too bold. The Father was the True Light which lighteneth every man coming
into the world. The Son was the True Light which lighteneth every man coming into the
world. The Other Comforter was the True Light which lighteneth every man coming into
the world.3699 Was and Was and Was, but Was One Thing. Light thrice repeated; but One
Light and One God. This was what David represented to himself long before when he said,
In Thy Light shall we see Light.3700 And now we have both seen and proclaim concisely
and simply the doctrine3701 of God the Trinity, comprehending out of Light (the Father),
Light (the Son), in Light (the Holy Ghost). He that rejects it, let him reject it;3702 and he
that doeth iniquity, let him do iniquity; we proclaim that which we have understood. We
will get us up into a high mountain,3703 and will shout, if we be not heard, below; we will
exalt the Spirit; we will not be afraid; or if we are afraid, it shall be of keeping silence, not of
proclaiming.

IV. If ever there was a time when the Father was not, then there was a time when the
Son was not. If ever there was a time when the Son was not, then there was a time when
the Spirit was not. If the One was from the beginning, then the Three were so too. If you
throw down the One, I am bold to assert that you do not set up the other Two. For what
profit is there in an imperfect Godhead? Or rather, what Godhead can there be if It is not
perfect? And how can that be perfect which lacks something of perfection? And surely
there is something lacking if it hath not the Holy, and how would it have this if it were
without the Spirit? For either holiness is something different from Him, and if so let some
one tell me what it is conceived to be; or if it is the same, how is it not from the beginning,
as if it were better for God to be at one time imperfect and apart from the Spirit? If He is
not from the beginning, He is in the same rank with myself, even though a little before me;
for we are both parted from Godhead by time. If He is in the same rank with myself, how
can He make me God, or join me with Godhead?

πρεσβεύειν is not commonly used in this sense, but there are classical instances of it (e.g. Aesch. Choeph.,

488; Soph., Trach., 1065, and it occurs also in Plato), and this is the sense in which it is here rendered by Billius;

but a V. L. of some mss. gives the meaning, whose cause we are pleading, which is more frequent use of the

word.

John i. 9.

Ps. xxxvi. 9.

3701 Al. The Confession.

Isa. xxi. 2.

Ib. xl. 9.

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

V. Or rather, let me reason with you about Him from a somewhat earlier point, for we
have already discussed the Trinity. The Sadducees altogether denied the existence of the
Holy Spirit, just as they did that of Angels and the Resurrection; rejecting, I know not upon
what ground, the important testimonies concerning Him in the Old Testament. And of the
Greeks those who are more inclined to speak of God, and who approach nearest to us, have
formed some conception of Him, as it seems to me, though they have differed as to His
Name, and have addressed Him as the Mind of the World, or the External Mind, and the
like. But of the wise men amongst ourselves, some have conceived of him as an Activity,
some as a Creature, some as God; and some have been uncertain which to call Him, out of
reverence for Scripture, they say, as though it did not make the matter clear either way. 
And therefore they neither worship Him nor treat Him with dishonour, but take up a
neutral position, or rather a very miserable one, with respect to Him. And of those who
consider Him to be God, some are orthodox in mind only, while others venture to be so
with the lips also. And I have heard of some who are even more clever, and measure Deity;
and these agree with us that there are Three Conceptions; but they have separated these
from one another so completely as to make one of them infinite both in essence and power,
and the second in power but not in essence, and the third circumscribed in both; thus imitating in another way those who call them the Creator, the Co-operator, and the Minister,
and consider that the same order and dignity which belongs to these names is also a sequence
in the facts.

VI. But we cannot enter into any discussion with those who do not even believe in His
existence, nor with the Greek babblers (for we would not be enriched in our argument with
the oil of sinners).3704 With the others, however, we will argue thus. The Holy Ghost must
certainly be conceived of either as in the category of the Self-existent, or as in that of the
things which are contemplated in another; of which classes those who are skilled in such
matters call the one Substance and the other Accident. Now if He were an Accident, He
would be an Activity of God, for what else, or of whom else, could He be, for surely this is
what most avoids composition? And if He is an Activity, He will be effected, but will not
effect and will cease to exist as soon as He has been effected, for this is the nature of an
Activity. How is it then that He acts and says such and such things, and defines, and is
grieved, and is angered, and has all the qualities which belong clearly to one that moves,
and not to movement? But if He is a Substance and not an attribute of Substance, He will
be conceived of either as a Creature of God, or as God. For anything between these two,
whether having nothing in common with either, or a compound of both, not even they who
invented the goat-stag could imagine. Now, if He is a creature, how do we believe in Him,
how are we made perfect in Him? For it is not the same thing to believe IN a thing and to

Ps. cxli. 5.

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

believe About it. The one belongs to Deity, the other to-any thing. But if He is God, then
He is neither a creature, nor a thing made, nor a fellow servant, nor any of these lowly appellations.

VII. There-the word is with you. Let the slings be let go; let the syllogism be woven. 
Either He is altogether Unbegotten, or else He is Begotten. If He is Unbegotten, there are
two Unoriginates. If he is Begotten, you must make a further subdivision. He is so either
by the Father or by the Son. And if by the Father, there are two Sons, and they are Brothers. 
And you may make them twins if you like, or the one older and the other younger, since
you are so very fond of the bodily conceptions. But if by the Son, then such a one will say,
we get a glimpse of a Grandson God, than which nothing could be more absurd. For my
part however, if I saw the necessity of the distinction, I should have acknowledged the facts
without fear of the names. For it does not follow that because the Son is the Son in some
higher relation (inasmuch as we could not in any other way than this point out that He is
of God and Consubstantial), it would also be necessary to think that all the names of this
lower world and of our kindred should be transferred to the Godhead. Or may be you would
consider our God to be a male, according to the same arguments, because he is called God
and Father, and that Deity is feminine, from the gender of the word, and Spirit neuter, because It has nothing to do with generation; But if you would be silly enough to say, with the
old myths and fables, that God begat the Son by a marriage with His own Will, we should
be introduced3705 to the Hermaphrodite god of Marcion and Valentinus3706 who imagined
these newfangled Aeons.

VIII. But since we do not admit your first division, which declares that there is no mean
between Begotten and Unbegotten, at once, along with your magnificent division, away go
your Brothers and your Grandsons, as when the first link of an intricate chain is broken
they are broken with it, and disappear from your system of divinity. For, tell me, what position will you assign to that which Proceeds, which has started up between the two terms of
your division, and is introduced by a better Theologian than you, our Saviour Himself? Or
perhaps you have taken that word out of your Gospels for the sake of your Third Testament,
The Holy Ghost, which proceedeth from the Father;3707 Who, inasmuch as He proceedeth

Irenaeus. I., 6.

It would seem that S. Gregory commonly confused Marcion with Marcus, one of the leaders of the

Gnostic School of Valentinus. In another place he speaks of the Aeons of Marcion and Valentinus, evidently

meaning Marcus; for the system of Marcion is characterized by an entire absence of any theory of Emanations

(Aeons). Similarly there is no trace in Marcion of this notion of a hermaphrodite Deity, but there is something

very like it in the account of Marcus given by S. Irenaeus.

John xv. 26. "It did not fall within this Father's (Greg. Naz.) province to develop the doctrine of the

Procession. He is content to shew that the Spirit was not Generated, seeing that according to Christ's own

teaching He Proceeds from the Father. The question of His relation to the Son is alien to S. Gregory Nazianzen's

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

from That Source, is no Creature; and inasmuch as He is not Begotten is no Son; and inasmuch as He is between the Unbegotten and the Begotten is God. And thus escaping the
toils of your syllogisms, He has manifested himself as God, stronger than your divisions. 
What then is Procession? Do you tell me what is the Unbegottenness of the Father, and I
will explain to you the physiology of the Generation of the Son and the Procession of the
Spirit, and we shall both of us be frenzy-stricken for prying into the mystery of God.3708 
And who are we to do these things, we who cannot even see what lies at our feet, or number
the sand of the sea, or the drops of rain, or the days of Eternity, much less enter into the
Depths of God, and supply an account of that Nature which is so unspeakable and transcending all words?

IX. What then, say they, is there lacking to the Spirit which prevents His being a Son,
for if there were not something lacking He would be a Son? We assert that there is nothing
lacking-for God has no deficiency. But the difference of manifestation, if I may so express
myself, or rather of their mutual relations one to another, has caused the difference of their
Names. For indeed it is not some deficiency in the Son which prevents His being Father
(for Sonship is not a deficiency), and yet He is not Father. According to this line of argument
there must be some deficiency in the Father, in respect of His not being Son. For the Father
is not Son, and yet this is not due to either deficiency or subjection of Essence; but the very
fact of being Unbegotten or Begotten, or Proceeding has given the name of Father to the
First, of the Son to the Second, and of the Third, Him of Whom we are speaking, of the Holy
Ghost that the distinction of the Three Persons may be preserved in the one nature and
dignity of the Godhead. For neither is the Son Father, for the Father is One, but He is what
the Father is; nor is the Spirit Son because He is of God, for the Only-begotten is One, but
He is what the Son is. The Three are One in Godhead, and the One Three in properties; so
that neither is the Unity a Sabellian one,3709 nor does the Trinity countenance the present
evil distinction.

purpose; nor does it seem to have once been raised in the great battle between Arianism and Catholicity which

was fought out at Constantinople during Gregory's Episcopate" (Swete on the Procession, p. 107).

Ecclus. i. 2.

Sabellius, who taught at Rome during the Pontificate of Callistus, was by far the most important heresiarch

of his period, and his opinions by far the most dangerous. While strongly emphasizing the fundamental doctrine

of the Divine Unity, he also admitted in terms a Trinity, but his Trinity was not that of the Catholic dogma, for

he represented it as only a threefold manifestation of the one Divine Essence. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost

are in his view only temporary phaenomena, which fulfil their mission, and then return into the abstract Monad. 

Dr. Schaff (Hist. of the Church, Ante-Nicene Period, p. 582) gives the following concise account of his teaching:

"The unity of God, without distinction in itself, unfolds or extends itself in the course of the word's development

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

X. What then? Is the Spirit God? Most certainly. Well then, is He Consubstantial? 
Yes, if He is God. Grant me, says my opponent, that there spring from the same Source
One who is a Son, and One who is not a Son, and these of One Substance with the Source,
and I admit a God and a God. Nay, if you will grant me that there is another God and another nature of God I will give you the same Trinity with the same name and facts. But
since God is One and the Supreme Nature is One, how can I present to you the Likeness? 
Or will you seek it again in lower regions and in your own surroundings? It is very shameful,
and not only shameful, but very foolish, to take from things below a guess at things above,
and from a fluctuating nature at the things that are unchanging, and as Isaiah says, to seek
the Living among the dead.3710 But yet I will try, for your sake, to give you some assistance
for your argument, even from that source. I think I will pass over other points, though I
might bring forward many from animal history, some generally known, others only known
to a few, of what nature has contrived with wonderful art in connection with the generation
of animals. For not only are likes said to beget likes, and things diverse to beget things diverse,
but also likes to be begotten by things diverse, and things diverse by likes. And if we may
believe the story, there is yet another mode of generation, when an animal is self-consumed
and self-begotten.3711 There are also creatures which depart in some sort from their true
natures, and undergo change and transformation from one creature into another, by a
magnificence of nature. And indeed sometimes in the same species part may be generated
and part not; and yet all of one substance; which is more like our present subject. I will just
mention one fact of our own nature which every one knows, and then I will pass on to another part of the subject.

in three different forms and periods of revelation, and after the completion of redemption returns into Unity. 

The Father reveals Himself in the giving of the Law or the Old Testament Economy (not in the creation also,

which in his view precedes the Trinitarian revelation); the Son in the Incarnation; the Holy Ghost in inspiration;

the revelation of the Son ends with the Ascension; that of the Spirit goes on in generation and sanctification. 

He illustrates the Trinitarian revelation by comparing the Father to the disc of the sun, the Son to its enlightening

power, the Spirit to its warming influence. He is also said to have likened the Father to the body, the Son to the

soul, the Holy Ghost to the spirit of man: but this is unworthy of his evident speculative discrimination. His

view of the Logos too is peculiar. The Logos is not identical with the Son, but is the Monad itself in its transition

to Triad; that is, God conceived as vital motion and creating principle; the Speaking God, as distinguished from

the Silent God. Each Person (or Aspect-the word is ambiguous) is another Uttering; and the Three Persons

together are only successive evolutions of the Logos, or world-ward aspect of the Divine Nature. As the Logos

proceeded from God, so He at last returns into Him, and the process of Trinitarian development closes."

Isa. viii. 19.

i.e. the Phoenix. Hdt., ii. 37.

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

XI. What was Adam? A creature of God. What then was Eve? A fragment of the
creature. And what was Seth? The begotten of both. Does it then seem to you that Creature
and Fragment and Begotten are the same thing? Of course it does not. But were not these
persons consubstantial? Of course they were. Well then, here it is an acknowledged fact
that different persons may have the same substance. I say this, not that I would attribute
creation or fraction or any property of body to the Godhead (let none of your contenders
for a word be down upon me again), but that I may contemplate in these, as on a stage,
things which are objects of thought alone. For it is not possible to trace out any image exactly
to the whole extent of the truth. But, they say, what is the meaning of all this? For is not
the one an offspring, and the other a something else of the One? Did not both Eve and Seth
come from the one Adam? And were they both begotten by him? No; but the one was a
fragment of him, and the other was begotten by him. And yet the two were one and the
same thing; both were human beings; no one will deny that. Will you then give up your
contention against the Spirit, that He must be either altogether begotten, or else cannot be
consubstantial, or be God; and admit from human examples the possibility of our position? 
I think it will be well for you, unless you are determined to be very quarrelsome, and to fight
against what is proved to demonstration.

XII. But, he says, who in ancient or modern times ever worshipped the Spirit? Who
ever prayed to Him? Where is it written that we ought to worship Him, or to pray to Him,
and whence have you derived this tenet of yours? We will give the more perfect reason
hereafter, when we discuss the question of the unwritten; for the present it will suffice to
say that it is the Spirit in Whom we worship, and in Whom we pray. For Scripture says,
God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him must worship Him in Spirit and in truth.3712 
And again,-We know not what we should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit Itself maketh
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered;3713 and I will pray with the
Spirit and I will pray with the understanding also;3714-that is, in the mind and in the
Spirit. Therefore to adore or to pray to the Spirit seems to me to be simply Himself offering
prayer or adoration to Himself. And what godly or learned man would disapprove of this,
because in fact the adoration of One is the adoration of the Three, because of the equality
of honour and Deity between the Three? So I will not be frightened by the argument that
all things are said to have been made by the Son;3715 as if the Holy Spirit also were one of

John iv. 24.

3713 Rom. viii. 26.

1 Cor. xiv. 15.

John i. 2.

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

these things. For it says all things that were made, and not simply all things. For the Father
was not, nor were any of the things that were not made. Prove that He was made, and then
give Him to the Son, and number Him among the creatures; but until you can prove this
you will gain nothing for your impiety from this comprehensive phrase. For if He was made,
it was certainly through Christ; I myself would not deny that. But if He was not made, how
can He be either one of the All, or through Christ? Cease then to dishonour the Father in
your opposition to the Only-begotten (for it is no real honour, by presenting to Him a
creature to rob Him of what is more valuable, a Son), and to dishonour the Son in your
opposition to the Spirit. For He is not the Maker of a Fellow servant, but He is glorified
with One of co-equal honour. Rank no part of the Trinity with thyself, lest thou fall away
from the Trinity; cut not off from Either the One and equally august Nature; because if thou
overthrow any of the Three thou wilt have overthrown the whole. Better to take a meagre
view of the Unity than to venture on a complete impiety.

XIII. Our argument has now come to its principal point; and I am grieved that a problem
that was long dead, and that had given way to faith, is now stirred up afresh; yet it is necessary
to stand against these praters, and not to let judgment go by default, when we have the Word
on our side, and are pleading the cause of the Spirit. If, say they, there is God and God and
God, how is it that there are not Three Gods, or how is it that what is glorified is not a
plurality of Principles? Who is it who say this? Those who have reached a more complete
ungodliness, or even those who have taken the secondary part; I mean who are moderate
in a sense in respect of the Son. For my argument is partly against both in common, partly
against these latter in particular. What I have to say in answer to these is as follows:-What
right have you who worship the Son, even though you have revolted from the Spirit, to call
us Tritheists? Are not you Ditheists? For if you deny also the worship of the Only Begotten,
you have clearly ranged yourself among our adversaries. And why should we deal kindly
with you as not quite dead? But if you do worship Him, and are so far in the way of salvation,
we will ask you what reasons you have to give for your ditheism, if you are charged with it? 
If there is in you a word of wisdom answer, and open to us also a way to an answer. For the
very same reason with which you will repel a charge of Ditheism will prove sufficient for us
against one of Tritheism. And thus we shall win the day by making use of you our accusers
as our Advocates, than which nothing can be more generous.

XIV. What is our quarrel and dispute with both? To us there is One God, for the
Godhead is One, and all that proceedeth from Him is referred to One, though we believe
in Three Persons. For one is not more and another less God; nor is One before and another
after; nor are They divided in will or parted in power; nor can you find here any of the
qualities of divisible things; but the Godhead is, to speak concisely, undivided in separate
Persons; and there is one mingling of Light, as it were of three suns joined to each other. 
When then we look at the Godhead, or the First Cause, or the Monarchia, that which we

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

conceive is One; but when we look at the Persons in Whom the Godhead dwells, and at
Those Who timelessly and with equal glory have their Being from the First Cause-there
are Three Whom we worship.

XV. What of that, they will say perhaps; do not the Greeks also believe in one Godhead,
as their more advanced philosophers declare? And with us Humanity is one, namely the
entire race; but yet they have many gods, not One, just as there are many men. But in this
case the common nature has a unity which is only conceivable in thought; and the individuals
are parted from one another very far indeed, both by time and by dispositions and by power. 
For we are not only compound beings, but also contrasted beings, both with one another
and with ourselves; nor do we remain entirely the same for a single day, to say nothing of
a whole lifetime, but both in body and in soul are in a perpetual state of flow and change. 
And perhaps the same may be said of the Angels3716 and the whole of that superior nature
which is second to the Trinity alone; although they are simple in some measure and more
fixed in good, owing to their nearness to the highest Good.

XVI. Nor do those whom the Greeks worship as gods, and (to use their own expression)
daemons, need us in any respect for their accusers, but are convicted upon the testimony of
their own theologians, some as subject to passion, some as given to faction, and full of innumerable evils and changes, and in a state of opposition, not only to one another, but even
to their first causes, whom they call Oceani and Tethyes and Phanetes, and by several other
names; and last of all a certain god who hated his children through his lust of rule, and
swallowed up all the rest through his greediness that he might become the father of all men
and gods whom he miserably devoured, and then vomited forth again. And if these are but
myths and fables, as they say in order to escape the shamefulness of the story, what will they
say in reference to the dictum that all things are divided into three parts,3717 and that each
god presides over a different part of the Universe, having a distinct province as well as a
distinct rank? But our faith is not like this, nor is this the portion of Jacob, says my Theologian.3718 But each of these Persons possesses Unity, not less with that which is United to
it than with itself, by reason of the identity of Essence and Power.3719 And this is the account
of the Unity, so far as we have apprehended it. If then this account is the true one, let us
thank God for the glimpse He has granted us; if it is not let us seek for a better.

"Similarly it is clear concerning the Angels, that they have a being incapable of change, so far as pertains

to their nature, with a capacity of change as to choice, and of intelligence and affections and places, in their own

manner" (S. Thomas Aq., Summa, I., x., 5).

3717 Homer, Il., xiv., 189.

Jer. x. 16.

Petavius praises this dictum, De Trin., IV., xiii., 9.

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

XVII. As for the arguments with which you would overthrow the Union which we
support, I know not whether we should say you are jesting or in earnest. For what is this
argument? "Things of one essence, you say, are counted together," and by this "counted
together," you mean that they are collected into one number.3720 But things which are not
of one essence are not thus counted...so that you cannot avoid speaking of three gods, according to this account, while we do not run any risk at all of it, inasmuch as we assert that
they are not consubstantial. And so by a single word you have freed yourselves from trouble,
and have gained a pernicious victory, for in fact you have done something like what men
do when they hang themselves for fear of death. For to save yourselves trouble in your
championship of the Monarchia you have denied the Godhead, and abandoned the question
to your opponents. But for my part, even if labor should be necessary, I will not abandon
the Object of my adoration. And yet on this point I cannot see where the difficulty is.

XVIII. You say, Things of one essence are counted together, but those which are not
consubstantial are reckoned one by one. Where did you get this from? From what teachers
of dogma or mythology? Do you not know that every number expresses the quantity of
what is included under it, and not the nature of the things? But I am so old fashioned, or
perhaps I should say so unlearned, as to use the word Three of that number of things, even
if they are of a different nature, and to use One and One and One in a different way of so
many units, even if they are united in essence, looking not so much at the things themselves
as at the quantity of the things in respect of which the enumeration is made. But since you
hold so very close to the letter (although you are contending against the letter), pray take
your demonstrations from this source. There are in the Book of Proverbs three things which
go well, a lion, a goat, and a cock; and to these is added a fourth;-a King making a speech
before the people,3721 to pass over the other sets of four which are there counted up, although
things of various natures. And I find in Moses two Cherubim3722 counted singly. But now,
in your technology, could either the former things be called three, when they differ so greatly
in their nature, or the latter be treated as units when they are so closely connected and of
one nature? For if I were to speak of God and Mammon, as two masters, reckoned under
one head, when they are so very different from each other, I should probably be still more
laughed at for such a connumeration.

XIX. But to my mind, he says, those things are said to be connumerated and of the
same essence of which the names also correspond, as Three Men, or Three gods, but not

συναριθμεῖται, as when you say Three Gods, or Three Men, and the like, as you do when you reckon

up things of the same sort. On the other hand, you must use the plural number in reckoning up things which

differ in kind.

Prov. xxx. 29, 30. 31.

Exod. xxxvii. 7.

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

Three this and that. What does this concession amount to? It is suitable to one laying down
the law as to names, not to one who is asserting the truth. For I also will assert that Peter
and James and John are not three or consubstantial, so long as I cannot say Three Peters,
or Three Jameses, or Three Johns; for what you have reserved for common names we demand
also for proper names, in accordance with your arrangement; or else you will be unfair in
not conceding to others what you assume for yourself. What about John then, when in his
Catholic Epistle he says that there are Three that bear witness,3723 the Spirit and the Water
and the Blood? Do you think he is talking nonsense? First, because he has ventured to
reckon under one numeral things which are not consubstantial, though you say this ought
to be done only in the case of things which are consubstantial. For who would assert that
these are consubstantial? Secondly, because he has not been consistent in the way he has
happened upon his terms; for after using Three in the masculine gender he adds three words
which are neuter, contrary to the definitions and laws which you and your grammarians
have laid down. For what is the difference between putting a masculine Three first, and
then adding One and One and One in the neuter, or after a masculine One and One and
One to use the Three not in the masculine but in the neuter, which you yourself disclaim
in the case of Deity? What have you to say about the Crab, which may mean either an animal, or an instrument, or a constellation? And what about the Dog, now terrestrial, now
aquatic, now celestial? Do you not see that three crabs or dogs are spoken of? Why of course
it is so. Well then, are they therefore of one substance? None but a fool would say that. So
you see how completely your argument from connumeration has broken down, and is refuted
by all these instances. For if things that are of one substance are not always counted under
one numeral, and things not of one substance are thus counted, and the pronunciation of
the name3724 once for all is used in both cases, what advantage do you gain towards your
doctrine?

XX. I will look also at this further point, which is not without its bearing on the subject. 
One and One added together make Two; and Two resolved again becomes One and One,
as is perfectly evident. If, however, elements which are added together must, as your theory

3723 This is the famous passage of the Witnesses in 1 John v. 8. In some few later codices of the Vulgate are

found the words which form verse 7 of our A.V. But neither verse 7 nor these words are to be found in any

Greek ms. earlier than the Fifteenth Century; nor are they quoted by any Greek Father, and by very few and late

Latin ones. They have been thought to be cited by S. Cyprian in his work on the Unity of the Church; and this

citation, if a fact, would be a most important one, as it would throw back their reception to an early date. But

Tischendorf (Gk. Test., Ed. viii., ad. loc.) gives reasons for believing that the quotation is only apparent, and is

really of the last clause of verse 8.

i.e. Though the things referred to many differ essentially, yet if the name by which they are known is

the same, one utterance of it with one numeral is enough to express a collection of them all.

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

requires, be consubstantial, and those which are separate be heterogeneous, then it will follow
that the same things must be both consubstantial and heterogeneous. No: I laugh at your
Counting Before and your Counting After, of which you are so proud, as if the facts themselves depended upon the order of their names. If this were so, according to the same law,
since the same things are in consequence of the equality of their nature counted in Holy
Scripture, sometimes in an earlier, sometimes in a later place, what prevents them from
being at once more honourable and less honourable than themselves? I say the same of the
names God and Lord, and of the prepositions Of Whom, and By Whom, and In Whom, by
which you describe the Deity according to the rules of art for us, attributing the first to the
Father, the second to the Son, and the third to the Holy Ghost. For what would you have
done, if each of these expressions were constantly allotted to Each Person, when, the fact
being that they are used of all the Persons, as is evident to those who have studied the
question, you even so make them the ground of such inequality both of nature and dignity. 
This is sufficient for all who are not altogether wanting in sense. But since it is a matter of
difficulty for you after you have once made an assault upon the Spirit, to check your rush,
and not rather like a furious boar to push your quarrel to the bitter end, and to thrust
yourself upon the knife until you have received the whole wound in your own breast; let us
go on to see what further argument remains to you.

XXI. Over and over again you turn upon us the silence of Scripture. But that it is not
a strange doctrine, nor an afterthought, but acknowledged and plainly set forth both by the
ancients and many of our own day, is already demonstrated by many persons who have
treated of this subject, and who have handled the Holy Scriptures, not with indifference or
as a mere pastime, but have gone beneath the letter and looked into the inner meaning, and
have been deemed worthy to see the hidden beauty, and have been irradiated by the light
of knowledge. We, however in our turn will briefly prove it as far as may be, in order not
to seem to be over-curious or improperly ambitious, building on another's foundation. But
since the fact, that Scripture does not very clearly or very often write Him God in express
words (as it does first the Father and afterwards the Son), becomes to you an occasion of
blasphemy and of this excessive wordiness and impiety, we will release you from this inconvenience by a short discussion of things and names, and especially of their use in Holy
Scripture.

XXII. Some things have no existence, but are spoken of; others which do exist are not
spoken of; some neither exist nor are spoken of, and some both exist and are spoken of. Do
you ask me for proof of this? I am ready to give it. According to Scripture God sleeps and
is awake, is angry, walks, has the Cherubim for His Throne. And yet when did He become

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

liable to passion, and have you ever heard that God has a body? This then is, though not
really fact, a figure of speech. For we have given names according to our own comprehension
from our own attributes to those of God. His remaining silent apart from us, and as it were
not caring for us, for reasons known to Himself, is what we call His sleeping; for our own
sleep is such a state of inactivity. And again, His sudden turning to do us good is the waking
up; for waking is the dissolution of sleep, as visitation is of turning away. And when He
punishes, we say He is angry; for so it is with us, punishment is the result of anger. And His
working, now here now there, we call walking; for walking is change from one place to another. His resting among the Holy Hosts, and as it were loving to dwell among them, is His
sitting and being enthroned; this, too, from ourselves, for God resteth nowhere as He doth
upon the Saints. His swiftness of moving is called flying, and His watchful care is called His
Face, and his giving and bestowing3725 is His hand; and, in a word, every other of the powers
or activities of God has depicted for us some other corporeal one.

XXIII. Again, where do you get your Unbegotten and Unoriginate, those two citadels
of your position, or we our Immortal? Show me these in so many words, or we shall either
set them aside, or erase them as not contained in Scripture; and you are slain by your own
principle, the names you rely on being overthrown, and therewith the wall of refuge in which
you trusted. Is it not evident that they are due to passages which imply them, though the
words do not actually occur? What are these passages?-I am the first, and I am the last,3726
and before Me there was no God, neither shall there be after Me.3727 For all that depends
on that Am makes for my side, for it has neither beginning nor ending. When you accept
this, that nothing is before Him, and that He has not an older Cause, you have implicitly
given Him the titles Unbegotten and Unoriginate. And to say that He has no end of Being
is to call Him Immortal and Indestructible. The first pairs, then, that I referred to are accounted for thus. But what are the things which neither exist in fact nor are said? That God
is evil; that a sphere is square; that the past is present; that man is not a compound being. 
Have you ever known a man of such stupidity as to venture either to think or to assert any
such thing? It remains to shew what are the things which exist, both in fact and in language. 
God, Man, Angel, Judgment, Vanity (viz., such arguments as yours), and the subversion of
faith and emptying of the mystery.

XXIV. Since, then, there is so much difference in terms and things, why are you such
a slave to the letter, and a partisan of the Jewish wisdom, and a follower of syllables at the
expense of facts? But if, when you said twice five or twice seven, I concluded from your
words that you meant Ten or Fourteen; or if, when you spoke of a rational and mortal an-

var. lect., receiving.

Isa. xli. 4.

Ib. xliii. 10.

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

imal, that you meant Man, should you think me to be talking nonsense? Surely not, because
I should be merely repeating your own meaning; for words do not belong more to the
speaker of them than to him who called them forth. As, then, in this case, I should have
been looking, not so much at the terms used, as at the thoughts they were meant to convey;
so neither, if I found something else either not at all or not clearly expressed in the Words
of Scripture to be included in the meaning, should I avoid giving it utterance, out of fear of
your sophistical trick about terms. In this way, then, we shall hold our own against the
semi-orthodox-among whom I may not count you. For since you deny the Titles of the
Son, which are so many and so clear, it is quite evident that even if you learnt a great many
more and clearer ones you would not be moved to reverence. But now I will take up the
argument again a little way further back, and shew you, though you are so clever, the reason
for this entire system of secresy.

XXV. There have been in the whole period of the duration of the world two conspicuous
changes of men's lives, which are also called two Testaments,3728 or, on account of the wide
fame of the matter, two Earthquakes; the one from idols to the Law, the other from the Law
to the Gospel. And we are taught in the Gospel of a third earthquake, namely, from this
Earth to that which cannot be shaken or moved.3729 Now the two Testaments are alike in
this respect, that the change was not made on a sudden, nor at the first movement of the
endeavour. Why not (for this is a point on which we must have information)? That no violence might be done to us, but that we might be moved by persuasion. For nothing that
is involuntary is durable; like streams or trees which are kept back by force. But that which
is voluntary is more durable and safe. The former is due to one who uses force, the latter
is ours; the one is due to the gentleness of God, the other to a tyrannical authority. Wherefore
God did not think it behoved Him to benefit the unwilling, but to do good to the willing. 
And therefore like a Tutor or Physician He partly removes and partly condones ancestral
habits, conceding some little of what tended to pleasure, just as medical men do with their
patients, that their medicine may be taken, being artfully blended with what is nice. For it
is no very easy matter to change from those habits which custom and use have made honourable. For instance, the first cut off the idol, but left the sacrifices; the second, while it
destroyed the sacrifices did not forbid circumcision.3730 Then, when once men had submitted
to the curtailment, they also yielded that which had been conceded to them;3731 in the first

3728 Heb. xii. 26.

Referring to the earthquake at the giving of the Law on Mt. Sinai (Heb. xiii.), and to the prophesy of

Haggai (ii. 6), with reference to the Incarnation. The third great earthquake is that of the end of the world (Heb.

xii. 26).

3730 Acts xvi. 3.

Ib. xxi. 26.

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

instance the sacrifices, in the second circumcision; and became instead of Gentiles, Jews,
and instead of Jews, Christians, being beguiled into the Gospel by gradual changes. Paul is
a proof of this; for having at one time administered circumcision, and submitted to legal
purification, he advanced till he could say, and I, brethren, if I yet preach circumcision, why
do I yet suffer persecution?3732 His former conduct belonged to the temporary dispensation,
his latter to maturity.

XXVI. To this I may compare the case of Theology3733 except that it proceeds the reverse
way. For in the case by which I have illustrated it the change is made by successive subtractions; whereas here perfection is reached by additions. For the matter stands thus. The Old
Testament proclaimed the Father openly, and the Son more obscurely. The New manifested
the Son, and suggested the Deity of the Spirit. Now the Spirit Himself dwells among us,
and supplies us with a clearer demonstration of Himself. For it was not safe, when the
Godhead of the Father was not yet acknowledged, plainly to proclaim the Son; nor when
that of the Son was not yet received to burden us further (if I may use so bold an expression)
with the Holy Ghost; lest perhaps people might, like men loaded with food beyond their
strength, and presenting eyes as yet too weak to bear it to the sun's light, risk the loss even
of that which was within the reach of their powers; but that by gradual additions, and, as
David says, Goings up, and advances and progress from glory to glory,3734 the Light of the
Trinity might shine upon the more illuminated. For this reason it was, I think, that He
gradually came to dwell in the Disciples, measuring Himself out to them according to their
capacity to receive Him, at the beginning of the Gospel, after the Passion, after the Ascension,
making perfect their powers, being breathed upon them, and appearing in fiery tongues. 
And indeed it is by little and little that He is declared by Jesus, as you will learn for yourself
if you will read more carefully. I will ask the Father, He says, and He will send you another
Comforter, even the spirit of Truth.3735 This He said that He might not seem to be a rival
God, or to make His discourses to them by another authority. Again, He shall send Him,
but it is in My Name. He leaves out the I will ask, but He keeps the Shall send,3736 then
again, I will send,-His own dignity. Then shall come,3737 the authority of the Spirit.

3732 Galat. vii. 7-17.

Theology is here used in a restricted sense, as denoting simply the doctrine of the Deity of the Son or

Logos. It is very frequently used in this limited sense; examples of which may readily be found in Gregory of

Nyssa, Basil, Chrysostom, and others. A similar use occurs in Orat. XXXVIII., c. 8, in which passage θεολογία

is contrasted with οἰκονομία, the doctrine of our Lord's Divinity with that of the Incarnation.

Ps. lxxxiv. 7, and 2 Cor. iii. 18.

John xiv. 16, 17.

John xvi. 7.

Ib. xvi. 8.

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

XXVII. You see lights breaking upon us, gradually; and the order of Theology, which
it is better for us to keep, neither proclaiming things too suddenly, nor yet keeping them
hidden to the end. For the former course would be unscientific, the latter atheistical; and
the former would be calculated to startle outsiders, the latter to alienate our own people. I
will add another point to what I have said; one which may readily have come into the mind
of some others, but which I think a fruit of my own thought. Our Saviour had some things
which, He said, could not be borne at that time by His disciples3738 (though they were filled
with many teachings), perhaps for the reasons I have mentioned; and therefore they were
hidden. And again He said that all things should be taught us by the Spirit when He should
come to dwell amongst us.3739 Of these things one, I take it, was the Deity of the Spirit
Himself, made clear later on when such knowledge should be seasonable and capable of
being received after our Saviour's restoration, when it would no longer be received with
incredulity because of its marvellous character. For what greater thing than this did either
He promise, or the Spirit teach. If indeed anything is to be considered great and worthy of
the Majesty of God, which was either promised or taught.

XXVIII. This, then, is my position with regard to these things, and I hope it may be always my position, and that of whosoever is dear to me; to worship God the Father, God the
Son, and God the Holy Ghost, Three Persons, One Godhead, undivided in honour and glory
and substance and kingdom, as one of our own inspired philosophers3740 not long departed
shewed. Let him not see the rising of the Morning Star, as Scripture saith,3741 nor the glory
of its brightness, who is otherwise minded, or who follows the temper of the times, at one
time being of one mind and of another at another time, and thinking unsoundly in the
highest matters. For if He is not to be worshipped, how can He deify me by Baptism? but
if He is to be worshipped, surely He is an Object of adoration, and if an Object of adoration
He must be God; the one is linked to the other, a truly golden and saving chain. And indeed
from the Spirit comes our New Birth, and from the New Birth our new creation, and from
the new creation our deeper knowledge of the dignity of Him from Whom it is derived.

Ib. xvi. 12.

Ib. xiv. 26.

Perhaps S. Gregory Thaumaturgus is meant. He was born about a.d. 210. The date of his death is un-

certain, but was probably not before 270. He was Bishop of Neocaesarea in Pontus. Amongst his works was an

Exposition of the Faith, which he is said to have received by direct revelation, and in it the words in the text

were contained. S. Gregory in another Oration refers to the closing sentences as the substance of the Formula

itself: "There is nothing created or servile in the Trinity, nor anything superinduced, as though previously non-

existing and introduced afterwards. Never therefore, was the Son wanting to the Father, nor the Spirit to the

Son; but there is ever the same Trinity, unchangeable and unalterable"(Reynolds, in Dict. Biog.).

Job iii. 9.

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

XXIX. This, then, is what may be said by one who admits the silence of Scripture. But
now the swarm of testimonies shall burst upon you from which the Deity of the Holy
Ghost3742 shall be shewn to all who are not excessively stupid, or else altogether enemies
to the Spirit, to be most clearly recognized in Scripture. Look at these facts:-Christ is born;
the Spirit is His Forerunner. He is baptized; the Spirit bears witness. He is tempted; the
Spirit leads Him up.3743 He works miracles; the Spirit accompanies them. He ascends; the
Spirit takes His place. What great things are there in the idea of God which are not in His
power?3744 What titles which belong to God are not applied to Him, except only Unbegotten
and Begotten? For it was needful that the distinctive properties of the Father and the Son
should remain peculiar to Them, lest there should be confusion in the Godhead Which
brings all things, even disorder3745 itself, into due arrangement and good order. Indeed I
tremble when I think of the abundance of the titles, and how many Names they outrage
who fall foul of the Spirit. He is called the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Christ, the Mind of
Christ, the Spirit of The Lord, and Himself The Lord, the Spirit of Adoption, of Truth, of
Liberty; the Spirit of Wisdom, of Understanding, of Counsel, of Might, of Knowledge, of
Godliness, of the Fear of God. For He is the Maker of all these, filling all with His Essence,
containing all things, filling the world in His Essence, yet incapable of being comprehended
in His power by the world; good, upright, princely, by nature not by adoption; sanctifying,
not sanctified; measuring, not measured; shared, not sharing; filling, not filled; containing,
not contained; inherited, glorified, reckoned with the Father and the Son; held out as a
threat;3746 the Finger of God; fire like God; to manifest, as I take it, His consubstantiality);
the Creator-Spirit, Who by Baptism and by Resurrection creates anew; the Spirit That
knoweth all things, That teacheth, That bloweth where and to what extent He listeth; That
guideth, talketh, sendeth forth, separateth, is angry or tempted; That revealeth, illumineth,
quickeneth, or rather is the very Light and Life; That maketh Temples; That deifieth; That
perfecteth so as even to anticipate Baptism,3747 yet after Baptism to be sought as a separate
gift;3748 That doeth all things that God doeth; divided into fiery tongues; dividing gifts;
making Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers; understanding manifold,
clear, piercing, undefiled, unhindered, which is the same thing as Most wise and varied in
His actions; and making all things clear and plain; and of independent power, unchangeable,

Luke i. 35; iii. 22; iv. 1.

Luke iv. 1, 18.

3744 Acts ii. 4.

v. l. Yea, even disorder.

3746 Viz.:-where we are told that Blasphemy against Him hath never forgiveness.

3747 As in the case of the Centurion Cornelius, Acts x. 9.

i.e. in Confirmation.

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

Almighty, all-seeing, penetrating all spirits that are intelligent, pure, most subtle (the Angel
Hosts I think); and also all prophetic spirits and apostolic in the same manner and not in
the same places; for they lived in different places; thus showing that He is uncircumscript.
XXX. They who say and teach these things, and moreover call Him another Paraclete
in the sense of another God, who know that blasphemy against Him alone cannot be forgiven,3749 and who branded with such fearful infamy Ananias and Sapphira for having lied to
the Holy Ghost, what do you think of these men?3750 Do they proclaim the Spirit God, or
something else? Now really, you must be extraordinarily dull and far from the Spirit if you
have any doubt about this and need some one to teach you. So important then, and so vivid
are His Names. Why is it necessary to lay before you the testimony contained in the very
words? And whatever in this case also3751 is said in more lowly fashion, as that He is Given,
Sent, Divided; that He is the Gift, the Bounty, the Inspiration, the Promise, the Intercession
for us, and, not to go into any further detail, any other expressions of the sort, is to be referred
to the First Cause, that it may be shewn from Whom He is, and that men may not in heathen
fashion admit Three Principles. For it is equally impious to confuse the Persons with the
Sabellians, or to divide the Natures with the Arians.

XXXI. I have very carefully considered this matter in my own mind, and have looked
at it in every point of view, in order to find some illustration of this most important subject,
but I have been unable to discover any thing on earth with which to compare the nature of
the Godhead. For even if I did happen upon some tiny likeness it escaped me for the most
part, and left me down below with my example. I picture to myself an eye,3752 a fountain,
a river, as others have done before, to see if the first might be analogous to the Father, the
second to the Son, and the third to the Holy Ghost. For in these there is no distinction in
time, nor are they torn away from their connexion with each other, though they seem to be
parted by three personalities. But I was afraid in the first place that I should present a flow
in the Godhead, incapable of standing still; and secondly that by this figure a numerical
unity would be introduced. For the eye and the spring and the river are numerically one,
though in different forms.

XXXII. Again I thought of the sun and a ray and light. But here again there was a fear
lest people should get an idea of composition in the Uncompounded Nature, such as there
is in the Sun and the things that are in the Sun. And in the second place lest we should give
Essence to the Father but deny Personality to the Others, and make Them only Powers of

3749 Matt. xii. 31.

3750 Acts v. 3, etc.

3751 As before in the case of the Son. See above, Theol., iii. 18.

Elias Cretensis says that the Eye in this passage is not to be understood of the member of the body so

called, but as the Eye or the centre of a spring, the point from which the water flows.

The Fifth Theological Oration. On the Holy Spirit.

God, existing in Him and not Personal. For neither the ray nor the light is another sun, but
they are only effulgences from the Sun, and qualities of His essence. And lest we should
thus, as far as the illustration goes, attribute both Being and Not-being to God, which is
even more monstrous. I have also heard that some one has suggested an illustration of the
following kind. A ray of the Sun flashing upon a wall and trembling with the movement of
the moisture which the beam has taken up in mid air, and then, being checked by the hard
body, has set up a strange quivering. For it quivers with many rapid movements, and is not
one rather than it is many, nor yet many rather than one; because by the swiftness of its
union and separating it escapes before the eye can see it.

XXXIII. But it is not possible for me to make use of even this; because it is very evident
what gives the ray its motion; but there is nothing prior to God which could set Him in
motion; for He is Himself the Cause of all things, and He has no prior Cause. And secondly
because in this case also there is a suggestion of such things as composition, diffusion, and
an unsettled and unstable nature...none of which we can suppose in the Godhead. In a
word, there is nothing which presents a standing point to my mind in these illustrations
from which to consider the Object which I am trying to represent to myself, unless one may
indulgently accept one point of the image while rejecting the rest. Finally, then, it seems
best to me to let the images and the shadows go, as being deceitful and very far short of the
truth; and clinging myself to the more reverent conception, and resting upon few words,
using the guidance of the Holy Ghost, keeping to the end as my genuine comrade and
companion the enlightenment which I have received from Him, and passing through this
world to persuade all others also to the best of my power to worship Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, the One Godhead and Power. To Him belongs all glory and honour and might for
ever and ever. Amen.

Against The Arians, and Concerning Himself.

Against The Arians, and Concerning Himself.

Oration XXXIII.

Against The Arians, and Concerning Himself.

Delivered at Constantinople about the middle of the year 380.

I. Where are they who reproach us with our poverty, and boast themselves of their own
riches; who define the Church by numbers,3753 and scorn the little flock; and who measure
Godhead,3754 and weigh the people in the balance, who honour the sand, and despise the
luminaries of heaven; who treasure pebbles and overlook pearls; for they know not that sand
is not in a greater degree more abundant than stars, and pebbles than lustrous stones-that
the former are purer and more precious than the latter? Are you again indignant? Do you
again arm yourselves? Do you again insult us?3755 Is this a new faith? Restrain your threats
a little while that I may speak. We will not insult you, but we will convict you; we will not
threaten, but we will reproach you; we will not strike, but we will heal. This too appears an
insult! What pride! Do you here also regard your equal as your slave? If not, permit me
to speak openly; for even a brother chides his brother if he has been defrauded by him.

II. Would you like me to utter to you the words of God to Israel, stiff-necked and
hardened? "O my people what have I done unto thee, or wherein have I injured thee, or
wherein have I wearied thee?"3756 This language indeed is fitter from me to you who insult
me. It is a sad thing that we watch for opportunities against each other, and having destroyed
our fellowship of spirit by diversities of opinion have become almost more inhuman and
savage to one another than even the barbarians who are now engaged in war against us,
banded together against us by the Trinity whom we have separated; with this difference that
we are not foreigners making forays and raids upon foreigners, nor nations of different
language, which is some little consolation in the calamity, but are making war upon one
another, and almost upon those of the same household; or if you will, we the members of
the same body are consuming and being consumed by one another. Nor is this, bad though
it be, the extent of our calamity, for we even regard our diminution as a gain. But since we
are in such a condition, and regulate our faith by the times, let us compare the times with
one another; you your Emperor,3757 and I my Sovereigns;3758 you Ahab and I Josias. Tell

Shewing the absurdity of defining the Church by counting heads.

3754 This refers to the distinction drawn by the Arians in degree as to the Godhead, asserting the Spirit to be

great, the Son greater, and the Father greatest (cf. Or. xlii., 16).

3755 The beginning of the Oration was apparently disturbed by hostile demonstrations on the part of Arian

hearers.

3756 Mic. vi. 3.

3757 Valens.

3758 Theodosius and Gratian.

Against The Arians, and Concerning Himself.

me of your moderation, and I will proclaim my violence. But indeed yours is proclaimed
by many books and tongues, which I think future ages will accept as an immortal pillory
for your actions and I will declare my own.

III. What tumultuous mob have I led against you? What soldiers have I armed? What
general boiling with rage, and more savage than his employers, and not even a Christian,
but one who offers his impiety against us as his private worship to his own gods?3759 Whom
have I besieged while engaged in prayer and lifting up their hands to God? When have I
put a stop to psalmody with trumpets? or mingled the Sacramental Blood with blood of
massacre? What spiritual sighs have I put an end to by cries of death, or tears of penitence
by tears of tragedy? What House of prayer have I made a burialplace? What liturgical vessels
which the multitude may not touch have I given over to the hands of the wicked, of a Nebuzaradan,3760 chief of the cooks, or of a Belshazzar, who wickedly used the sacred vessels
for his revels,3761 and then paid a worthy penalty for his madness? "Altars beloved" as Holy
Scripture saith, but "now defiled."3762 And what licentious youth has insulted you for our
sake with shameful writhings and contortions? O precious Throne, seat and rest of precious
men, which hast been occupied by a succession of pious Priests, who from ancient times
have taught the divine Mysteries, what heathen popular speaker and evil tongue hath
mounted thee to inveigh against the Christian's faith? O modesty and majesty of Virgins,
that cannot endure the looks of even virtuous men, which of us hath shamed thee, and
outraged thee by the exposure of what may not be seen, and showed to the eyes of the impious
a pitiable sight, worthy of the fires of Sodom? I say nothing of deaths, which were more
endurable than this shame.

3759 Dr. Ullmann makes this passage refer to outrages perpetrated in Constantinople itself on Gregory, by

his Arian opponents. On one occasion, he says, in the night time the meetingplace of the Orthodox was assailed;

a mob of Arians, and in particular women of the lowest stamp, set on by monks, armed themselves with sticks

and stones, and forced an entrance into the peaceful place of holy worship. The champion of orthodoxy well

nigh became a martyr to his convictions; the Altar was profaned, the consecrated wine was mixed with blood;

the house of prayer was made a scene of outrage and unbridled licentiousness. The Benedictine Editors, however,

whom Benoit follows, think the reference is to the disturbances in Alexandria when the Arian Lucius was forcibly

intruded into the Chair of Athanasius by the Prefect Palladius. A full account of the atrocities by which his in-

stallation was marked is to be found in a letter of Peter, the expelled or orthodox Patriarch, preserved in Theodoret

(H. E. IV. 22). This Lucius was living in Constantinople and abetting the Arian party there at the time when

Gregory pronounced this Oration.

2 Kings xxv. 11.

3761 Dan. v. 3.

3762 Hos. viii. 11 (LXX.).

Against The Arians, and Concerning Himself.

IV. What wild beasts have we let loose upon the bodies of Saints,-like some who have
prostituted human nature,-on one single accusation, that of not consenting to their impiety;
or defiled ourselves by communion with them, which we avoid like the poison of a snake,
not because it injures the body, but because it blackens the depths of the soul? Against
whom have we made it a matter of criminal accusation that they buried the dead, whom
the very beasts reverenced? And what a charge, worthy of another theatre and of other
beasts! What Bishop's aged flesh have we carded with hooks in the presence of their disciples,
impotent to help them save by tears, hung up with Christ, conquering by suffering, and
sprinkling the people with their precious blood, and at last carried away to death, to be both
crucified and buried and glorified with Christ; with Christ Who conquered the world by
such victims and sacrifices? What priests have those contrary elements fire and water divided,
raising a strange beacon over the sea, and set on fire together with the ship in which they
put to sea?3763 Who (to cover the more numerous part of our woes with a veil of silence)
have been accused of inhumanity by the very magistrates who conferred such favour on
them? For even if they did obey the lusts of those men, yet at any rate they hated the cruelty
of their purpose. The one was opportunism, the other calculation; the one came of the
lawlessness of the Emperor, the other of a consciousness of the laws by which they had to
judge.

V. And to speak of older things, for they too belong to the same fraternity; whose hands
living or dead have I cut off-to bring a lying accusation against Saints,3764 and to triumph
over the faith by bluster? Whose exiles have I numbered as benefits, and failed to reverence
even the sacred colleges of sacred philosophers, whence I sought their suppliants? Nay the
very contrary is the case; I have reckoned as Martyrs those who incurred anger for the truth. 
Upon whom have I, whom you accuse of licentiousness of language, brought harlots when
they were almost fleshless and bloodless? Which of the faithful have I exiled from their
country and given over to the hands of lawless men, that they might be kept like wild beasts
in rooms without light, and (for this is the saddest part of the tragedy) left separated from
each other to endure the hardships of hunger and thirst, with food measured out to them,

Socrates (H. E. IV. 16) gives an account of the murder of eighty Priests by order of Valens. The Prefect

of Nicomedia, being afraid to execute the Emperor's commands by a public action, put these men on board a

ship, as if to send them into exile, but gave orders to the crew to set the vessel on fire on the high seas, and leave

the prisoners to their fate. Billius, however, thinks that the reference is to the martyrdom of a single Priest, whose

death in this way is described by S. Gregory in his panegyric on Maximus (Or. xxv. 10, p. 461, 462).

S. Athanasius was accused by the Arians of having murdered a Meletian Bishop named Arsenius, and

cut off his hand to use for magical purposes; and at a Synod held at Tyre in 334 they produced the alleged hand

in a box. Athanasius, however, was able to produce Arsenius alive and unmutilated; but even so his accusers

were not satisfied.

Against The Arians, and Concerning Himself.

which they had to receive through narrow openings, so that they might not be permitted
even to see their companions in misery. And what were they who suffered thus? Men of
whom the world was not worthy.3765 Is it thus that you honour faith? Is this your kind
treatment of it? Ye know not the greater part of these things, and that reasonably, because
of the number of these facts and the pleasure of the action. But he who suffers has a better
memory. There have been even some more cruel than the times themselves, like wild boars
hurled against a fence. I demand your victim of yesterday3766 the old man, the Abrahamlike Father, whom on his return from exile you greeted with stones in the middle of the day
and in the middle of the city. But we, if it is not invidious to say so, begged off even our
murderers from their danger. God says somewhere in Scripture, How shall I pardon thee
for this?3767 Which of these things shall I praise; or rather for which shall I bind a wreath
upon you?

VI. Now since your antecedents are such, I should be glad if you too will tell me of my
crimes, that I may either amend my life or be put to shame. My greatest wish is that I may
be found free from wrong altogether; but if this may not be, at least to be converted from
my crime; for this is the second best portion of the prudent. For if like the just man I do
not become my own accuser in the first instance,3768 yet at any rate I gladly receive healing
from another. "Your City, you say to me, is a little one, or rather is no city at all, but only
a village, arid, without beauty, and with few inhabitants." But, my good friend, this is my
misfortune, rather than my fault;-if indeed it be a misfortune; and if it is against my will,
I am to be pitied for my bad luck, if I may put it so; but if it be willingly, I am a philosopher. 
Which of these is a crime? Would anyone abuse a dolphin for not being a land animal, or
an ox because it is not aquatic, or a lamprey because it is amphibious? But we, you go on,
have walls and theatres and racecourses and palaces, and beautiful great Porticoes, and that
marvellous work the underground and overhead river,3769 and the splendid and admired
column,3770 and the crowded marketplace and a restless people, and a famous senate of
highborn men.

VII. Why do you not also mention the convenience of the site, and what I may call the
contest between land and sea as to which owns the City, and which adorns our Royal City

3765 Heb. xi. 38.

The reference is perhaps to Eusebius of Samosata, who was killed by a tile thrown at him by an Arian

woman. In dying he bound his friends by an oath not to allow the murderess to be punished.

Jer. v. 7.

Prov. xviii. 17.

3769 Valens had constructed an Aqueduct, partly subterranean, partly raised on arches, for the supply of

water to the Capital.

3770 A magnificent column on which stood an equestrian statue of Constantine the Great.

Against The Arians, and Concerning Himself.

with all their good things? This then is our crime, that while you are great and splendid,
we are small and come from a small place? Many others do you this wrong, indeed all those
whom you excel; and must we die because we have not reared a city, nor built walls around
it, nor can boast of our racecourse, or our stadia, and pack of hounds, and all the follies that
are connected with these things; nor have to boast of the beauty and splendour of our baths,
and the costliness of their marbles and pictures and golden embroideries of all sorts of species,
almost rivalling nature? Nor have we yet rounded off the sea for ourselves, or mingled the
seasons, as of course you, the new Creators, have done, that we may live in what is at once
the pleasantest and the safest way. Add if you like other charges, you who say, The silver is
mine and the gold is mine,3771 those words of God. We neither think much of riches, on
which, if they increase, our Law forbids us to set our hearts, nor do we count up yearly and
daily revenues; nor do we rival one another in loading our tables with enchantments for
our senseless belly. For neither do we highly esteem those things which after we have
swallowed them are all of the same worth, or rather I should say worthlessness, and are rejected. But we live so simply and from hand to mouth, as to differ but little from beasts
whose sustenance is without apparatus and inartificial.

VIII. Do you also find fault with the raggedness of my dress, and the want of elegance
in the disposition of my face? for these are the points upon which I see that some persons
who are very insignificant pride themselves. Will you leave my head alone, and not jeer at
it, as the children did at Elissaeus? What followed I will not mention. And will you leave
out of your allegations my want of education, and what seems to you the roughness and
rusticity of my elocution? And where will you put the fact that I am not full of small talk,
nor a jester popular with company, nor great hunter of the marketplace, nor given to chatter
and gossip with any chance people upon all sorts of subjects, so as to make even conversation
grievous; nor a frequenter of Zeuxippus, that new Jerusalem;3772 nor one who strolls from
house to house flattering and stuffing himself; but for the most part staying at home, of low
spirits and with a melancholy cast of countenance, quietly associating with myself, the
genuine critic of my actions; and perhaps worthy of imprisonment for my uselessness? 
How is it that you pardon me for all this, and do not blame me for it? How sweet and kind
you are.

IX. But I am so old fashioned and such a philosopher as to believe that one heaven is
common to all; and that so is the revolution of the sun and the moon, and the order and
arrangement of the stars; and that all have in Common an equal share and profit in day and
night, and also change of seasons, rains, fruits, and quickening power of the air; and that

3771 Hagg. ii. 8.

It is not certain what is the allusion here. Some think a great Circus or Hippodrome for chariot races;

others say an institution in which were heretical schools; others again, the great baths of Zeuxippus.

Against The Arians, and Concerning Himself.

the flowing rivers are a common and abundant wealth to all; and that one and the same is
the Earth, the mother and the tomb, from which we were taken, and to which we shall return,
none having a greater share than another. And further, above this, we have in common
reason, the Law, the Prophets, the very Sufferings of Christ, by which we were all without
exception created anew, who partake of the same Adam, and were led astray by the serpent
and slain by sin, and are saved by the heavenly Adam and brought back by the tree of shame
to the tree of life from whence we had fallen.

X. I was deceived too by the Ramah of Samuel, that little fatherland of the great man;
which was no dishonour to the Prophet, for it drew its honour not so much from itself as
from him; nor was he hindered on its account from being given to God before his birth, or
from uttering oracles, and foreseeing the future; nor only so, but also anointing Kings and
Priests, and judging the men of illustrious cities. I heard also of Saul, how while seeking his
father's asses he found a kingdom. And even David himself was taken from the sheepfolds
to be the shepherd of Israel. What of Amos? Was he not, while a goatherd and scraper of
sycamore fruit entrusted with the gifts of prophecy? How is it that I have passed over Joseph,
who was both a slave and the giver of corn to Egypt, and the father of many myriads who
were promised before to Abraham? Aye and I was deceived by the Carmel of Elias, who
received the car of fire; and by the sheepskin of Elissaeus that had more power than a silken
web or than gold forced into garments. I was deceived by the desert of John, which held
the greatest among them that are born of women, with that clothing, that food, that girdle,
which we know. And I ventured even beyond these, and found God Himself the Patron of
my rusticity. I will range myself with Bethlehem, and will share the ignominy of the Manger;
for since you refuse on this account honour to God, it is no wonder that on the same account
you despise His herald also. And I will bring up to you the Fishermen, and the poor to
whom the Gospel is preached, as preferred before many rich. Will you ever leave off priding
yourselves upon your cities? Will you ever revere that wilderness which you abominate and
despise? I do not yet say that gold has its birthplace in sand; nor that translucent stones are
the product and gifts of rocks; for if to these I should oppose all that is dishonourable in
cities perhaps it would be to no good end that I should use my freedom of speech.

XI. But perhaps some one who is very circumscribed and carnally minded will say, "But
our herald is a stranger and a foreigner." What of the Apostles? Were not they strangers
to the many nations and cities among whom they were divided, that the Gospel might have
free course everywhere, that nothing might miss the illumination of the Threefold Light, or
be unenlightened by the Truth; but that the night of ignorance might be dissolved for those
who sat in darkness and the shadow of death? You have heard the words of Paul, "that we
might go the Gentiles, and they to the Circumcision."3773 Be it that Judaea is Peter's home;

3773 Galat. ii. 9.

Against The Arians, and Concerning Himself.

what has Paul in common with the Gentiles, Luke with Achaia, Andrew with Epirus, John
with Ephesus, Thomas with India, Marc with Italy, or the rest, not to go into particulars,
with those to whom they went? So that you must either blame them or excuse me, or else
prove that you, the ambassadors of the true Gospel, are being insulted by trifling. But since
I have argued with you in a petty way about these matters, I will now proceed to take a larger
and more philosophic view of them.

XII. My friend, every one that is of high mind has one Country, the Heavenly Jerusalem,
in which we store up our Citizenship. All have one family-if you look at what is here below
the dust-or if you look higher, that Inbreathing of which we are partakers, and which we
were bidden to keep, and with which I must stand before my Judge to give an account of
my heavenly nobility, and of the Divine Image. Everyone then is noble who has guarded
this through virtue and consent to his Archetype. On the other hand, everyone is ignoble
who has mingled with evil, and put upon himself another form, that of the serpent. And
these earthly countries and families are the playthings of this our temporary life and scene. 
For our country is whatever each may have first occupied, either as tyrant, or in misfortune;
and in this we are all alike strangers and pilgrims, however much we may play with names. 
And the family is accounted noble which is either rich from old days, or is recently raised;
and of ignoble birth that which is of poor parents, either owing to misfortune or to want of
ambition. For how can a nobility be given from above which is at one time beginning and
at another coming to an end; and which is not given to some, but is bestowed on others by
letters patent? Such is my mind on this matter. Therefore I leave it to you to pride yourself
on tombs or in myths, and I endeavour as far as I can, to purify myself from deceits, that I
may keep if possible my nobility, or else may recover it.

XIII. It is thus then and for these reasons that I, who am small and of a country without
repute, have come upon you, and that not of my own accord, nor self-sent, like many of
those who now seize upon the chief places; but because I was invited, and compelled, and
have followed the scruples of my conscience and the Call of the Spirit. If it be otherwise,
may I continue to fight here to no purpose, and deliver no one from his error, but may they
obtain their desire who seek the barrenness of my soul, if I lie. But since I am come, and
perchance with no contemptible power (if I may boast myself a little of my folly), which of
those who are insatiable have I copied, what have I emulated of opportunism, although I
have such examples, even apart from which it is hard and rare not to be bad? Concerning
what churches or property have I disputed with you; though you have more than enough
of both, and the others too little? What imperial edict have we rejected and emulated? What
rulers have we fawned upon against you? Whose boldness have we denounced? And what
has been done on the other side against me? "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge," even

Against The Arians, and Concerning Himself.

then I said, for I remembered in season the words of Stephen,3774 and so I pray now. Being
reviled, we bless: being blasphemed we retreat.3775

XIV. And if I am doing wrong in this, that when tyrannized over I endure it, forgive
me this wrong; I have borne to be tyrannized over by others too; and I am thankful that my
moderation has brought upon me the charge of folly. For I reckon thus, using considerations
altogether higher than any of yours; what a mere fraction are these trials of the spittings and
blows which Christ, for Whom and by Whose aid we encounter these dangers, endured. I
do not count them, taken altogether, worth the one crown of thorns which robbed our
conqueror of his crown, for whose sake also I learn that I am crowned for the hardness of
life. I do not reckon them worth the one reed by which the rotten empire was destroyed;
of the gall alone, the vinegar alone, by which we were cured of the bitter taste; of the gentleness alone which He shewed in His Passion. Was He betrayed with a kiss? He reproves
with a kiss, but smites not. Is he suddenly arrested? He reproaches indeed, but follows; and
if through zeal thou cuttest off the ear of Malchus with the sword, He will be angry, and will
restore it. And if one flee in a linen sheet,3776 he will defend him. And if you ask for the
fire of Sodom upon his captors, he will not pour it forth; and if he take a thief hanging upon
the cross for his crime he will bring him into Paradise through His Goodness. Let all the
acts of one that loves men be loving, as were all the sufferings of Christ, to which we could
add nothing greater than, when God even died for us, to refuse on our part to forgive even
the smallest wrongs of our fellowmen.

XV. Moreover this also I reckoned and still reckon with myself; and do you see if it is
not quite correct. I have often discussed it with you before. These men have the houses,
but we the Dweller in the house; they the Temples, we the God; and besides it is ours to be
living temples of the Living God, lively sacrifices, reasonable burnt-offerings, perfect sacrifices, yea, gods through the adoration of the Trinity. They have the people, we the Angels;
they rash boldness, we faith; they threatenings, we prayer; they smiting, we endurance; they
gold and silver, we the pure word. "Thou hast built for thyself a wide house and large
chambers (recognize the words of Scripture), a house celled and pierced with windows."3777 
But not yet is this loftier than my faith, and than the heavens to which I am being borne
onwards. Is mine a little flock? But it is not being carried over a precipice. Is mine a narrow
fold? But it is unapproachable by wolves; it cannot be entered by a robber, nor climbed by
thieves and strangers. I shall yet see it, I know well, wider. And many of those who are now
wolves, I must reckon among my sheep, and perhaps even amongst the shepherds. This is

3774 Acts vii. 59.

1 Cor. iv. 12.

3776 Mark xiv. 51.

Jer. xxii. 14.

Against The Arians, and Concerning Himself.

the glad tidings brought me by the Good Shepherd, for Whose sake I lay down my life for
the sheep. I fear not for the little flock; for it is seen at a glance. I know my sheep and am
known of mine. Such are they that know God and are known of God. My sheep hear my
voice, which I have heard from the oracles of God, which I have been taught by the Holy
Fathers, which I have taught alike on all occasions, not conforming myself to the fortune,
and which I will never cease to teach; in which I was born, and in which I will depart.

XVI. These I call by name (for they are not nameless like the stars which are numbered
and have names),3778 and they follow me, for I rear them up beside the waters of rest; and
they follow every such shepherd, whose voice they love to hear, as you see; but a stranger
they will not follow, but will flee from him, because they have a habit of distinguishing the
voice of their own from that of strangers. They will flee from Valentinus3779 with his division
of one into two, refusing to believe that the Creator is other than the Good. They will flee
from Depth and Silence, and the mythical Aeons, that are verily worthy of Depth and Silence. 
They will flee from Marcion's3780 god, compounded of elements and numbers; from
Montanus'3781 evil and feminine spirit; from the matter and darkness of Manes;3782 from

Ps. cxlvii. 4.

3779 Valentinus, a celebrated Gnostic leader of the Second Century, was one of the first Gnostics who taught

in Rome. He was probably of Aegypto-Jewish descent, and was educated at Alexandria. He died in Cyprus about

160. His system is a very curious one, giving the reins to the wildest vagaries of the imagination. The original

eternal Being, or Absolute Existence, he called Bythos or Depth; and to this he assigned as a wife Sige or Silence. 

From this union there sprang thirty Aeons or Emanations, who unfolded the Attributes of the Deity and created

the world.

3780 Marcion was a contemporary of Valentinus. He was a native of Sinope in Pontus, of which city his

father was Bishop. He supposed Three Principles, the Good God, Who was first revealed by Christ; the Just

Creator, Who is the "hot tempered and imperfect" God of the Jews; and the intrinsically evil Hyle or Matter,

which is ruled by the Devil. He also distinguished two Messiahs; one a mere warrior prince sent by the Jewish

God to restore Israel; the other sent by the Good God for the delivery of the whole human race.

3781 Montanus, a Phrygian enthusiast of the middle of the Second Century, imagined himself the inspired

Organ of the Paraclete. Connected with him were two Prophetesses, Priscilla and Maximilla, who left their

husbands to follow him. His heresy, or rather his schism, spread to Rome and Northern Africa, and threw the

whole Church into confusion. He was very early anathematized by Bishops and Synods of Asia, but he carried

the great African, Tertullian, away by his frenzy.

3782 Manes or Mani, a Persia philosopher, astronomer, and painter of the Third Century, who introduced

into Christianity some elements drawn from the religion of Zoroaster, especially its πρῶτον ψεὺδος. Dualism,

the co-eternity of two contradictory principles, Light and Darkness, Spirit and Matter, Good and Evil. This

heresy flourished till the Sixth Century, S. Augustine himself having been for nine years led away by it. It is

believed not to be wholly extinct even now in some parts of Eastern Christendom.

Against The Arians, and Concerning Himself.

Novatus'3783 boasting and wordy assumption of purity; from the analysis and confusion of
Sabellius,3784 and if I may use the expression, his absorption, contracting the Three into
One, instead of defining the One in Three Personalities; from the difference of natures
taught by Arius3785 and his followers, and their new Judaism, confining the Godhead to the
Unbegotten; from Photinus3786 earthly Christ, who took his beginning from Mary. But
they worship the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, One Godhead; God the Father,
God the Son and (do not be angry) God the Holy Ghost, One Nature in Three Personalities,
intellectual, perfect, Self-existent, numerically separate, but not separate in Godhead.

XVII. These words let everyone who threatens me to-day concede to me; the rest let
whoever will claim. The Father will not endure to be deprived of the Son, nor the Son of
the Holy Ghost. Yet that must happen if They are confined to time, and are created Beings...for that which is created is not God. Neither will I bear to be deprived of my consecration; One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism. If this be cancelled, from whom shall I get a
second? What say you, you who destroy Baptism or repeat it? Can a man be spiritual
without the Spirit? Has he a share in the Spirit who does not honour the Spirit? Can he
honour Him who is baptized into a creature and a fellow-servant? It is not so; it is not so;
for all your talk. I will not play Thee false, O Unoriginate Father, or Thee O Only-begotten
Word, or Thee O Holy Ghost. I know Whom I have confessed, and whom I have renounced,
and to Whom I have joined myself. I will not allow myself, after having been taught the
words of the faithful, to learn also those of the unfaithful; to confess the truth, and then
range myself with falsehood; to come down for consecration and to go back even less hallowed; having been baptised that I might live, to be killed by the water, like infants who die
in the very birthpangs, and receive death simultaneously with birth. Why make me at once
blessed and wretched, newly enlightened and unenlightened, Divine and godless, that I may

3783 Novatus was a Carthaginian Priest, who at first rebelled against his Bishop, S. Cyprian, on account of

his severity in the treatment of persons who had lapsed in the Decian persecution. At Rome, however, this same

Novatus, either out of simple antagonism to constituted authority, or because he had really changed his views,

adopted the extremest rigorism, and became one of the most violent partisans of the Priest Novatian, whom his

followers contrived to get consecrated as a rival Bishop of Rome, in opposition to Cornelius, the reigning Pope. 

They set up a new "church," and arrogated to themselves an exclusive claim to the title of Cathari, the Pure.

Sabellius, a native of the Libyan Pentapolis, rejected the Catholic Faith of the Trinity of Persons in God,

and would only allow a Trinity of manifestations.

It is hardly necessary here to dwell on the Arian tenets; cf. Prolegomena to the Theological Oration.

3786 Photinus was a n by birth, and flourished in the fourth century, a little earlier than S. Gregory. He seems

to have taught that our Lord Jesus Christ was a mere man, and had no existence previous to His Birth of the

Virgin Mary. He made Jesus rise on the basis of His human nature, by a course of moral improvement, to the

divine dignity, so that the Divine in Him is a thing of growth: cf. Schaff, H. E. Nicene Period, vol. ii. p. 653.

Against The Arians, and Concerning Himself.

make shipwreck even of the hope of regeneration? A few words will suffice. Remember
your confession. Into what were you baptised? The Father? Good but Jewish still. The
Son?...good...but not yet perfect. The Holy Ghost?...Very good...this is perfect. Now was
it into these simply, or some common name of Them? The latter. And what was the common
Name? Why, God. In this common Name believe, and ride on prosperously and reign,3787
and pass on from hence into the Bliss of Heaven. And that is, as I think, the more distinct
apprehension of These; to which may we all come, in the same Christ our God, to Whom
be the glory and the might, with the Unoriginate Father, and the Lifegiving Spirit, now and
for ever and to ages of ages. Amen.

Ps. xlv. 4.

On the Arrival of the Egyptians.

On the Arrival of the Egyptians.

Oration XXXIV.

On the Arrival of the Egyptians.

This Oration was preached at Constantinople in 380, under the following circumstances: 
Peter, Patriarch of Alexandria, had sent a mission of five of his Suffragans to consecrate the
impostor Maximus to the Throne occupied by Gregory. This had led to much trouble, but in
the end the intruder had been expelled and banished. Shortly afterwards an Egyptian fleet,
probably the regular corn ships, had arrived at Constantinople, apparently on the day before
a Festival. The crews of the ships, landing next day to go to Church, passed by the numerous
Churches held by the Arians, and betook themselves to the little Anastasia. S. Gregory felt
himself moved to congratulate them specially on such an act, after what had recently passed,
and accordingly pronounced the following discourse.

I. I will address myself as is right to those who have come from Egypt; for they have
come here eagerly, having overcome illwill by zeal, from that Egypt which is enriched by
the River, raining out of the earth, and like the sea in its season,-if I too may follow in my
small measure those who have so eloquently spoken of these matters; and which is also enriched by Christ my Lord, Who once was a fugitive into Egypt, and now is supplied by Egypt;
the first, when He fled from Herod's massacre of the children;3788 and now by the love of
the fathers for their children, by Christ the new Food of those who hunger after good;3789
the greatest alms of corn of which history speaks and men believe; the Bread which came
down from heaven and giveth life to the world, that life which is indestructible and indissoluble, concerning Whom I now seem to hear the Father saying, Out of Egypt have I called
My Son.3790

II. For from you hath sounded forth the Word to all men; healthfully believed and
preached; and you are the best bringers of fruit of all men, specially of those who now hold
the right faith, as far as I know, who am not only a lover of such food, but also its distributor,
and not at home only but also abroad. For you indeed supply bodily food to peoples and
cities so far as your lovingkindness reaches; and you supply spiritual food also, not to a
particular people, nor to this or that city, circumscribed by narrow boundaries, though its
people may think it very illustrious, but to almost the whole world. And you bring the
remedy not for famine of bread or thirst of water,3791 which is no very terrible famine-and
to avoid it is easy; but to a famine of hearing the Word of the Lord, which it is most miserable

3788 Matt. ii. 13.

John vi. 33.

3790 Hos. xi. 1.

3791 Amos viii. 11.

On the Arrival of the Egyptians.

to suffer, and a most laborious matter to cure at the present time, because iniquity hath
abounded,3792 and scarce anywhere do I find its genuine healers.

III. Such was Joseph your Superintendent of corn measures, whom I may call ours also;
who by his surpassing wisdom was able both to foresee the famine and to cure it by decrees
of government, healing the ill-favoured and starving kine by means of the fair and fat.3793 
And indeed you may understand by Joseph which you will, either the great lover and creator
and namesake of immortality or his successor in throne and word and hoary hair, our new
Peter,3794 not inferior in virtue or fame to him by whom the middle course was destroyed
and crushed, though it still wriggles a little weakly, like the tail of a snake after it is cut off;
the one of whom, after having departed this life in a good old age after many conflicts and
wrestlings, looks upon us from above, I well know, and reaches a hand to those who are labouring for the right: and this the more, in proportion as he is freed from his bonds; and
the other is hastening to the same end or dissolution of life, and is already drawing near the
dwellers in heaven, but is still so far in the flesh as is needed to give the last aids to the Word,
and to take his journey with richer provision.

IV. Of these great men and doctors and soldiers of the truth and victors, you are the
nurslings and offspring; of these neither times nor tyrants, reason nor envy, nor fear, nor
accuser, nor slanderer, whether waging open war against them, or plotting secretly; nor any
who appeared to be of our side, nor any stranger, nor gold-that hidden tyrant, through
which now almost everything is turned upside down and made to depend on the hazard of
a die; nor flatteries nor threats, nor long and distant exiles (for they only could not be affected
by confiscation, because of their great riches, which were-to possess nothing) nor anything
else, whether absent or present or expected, could induce to take the worse part, and to be
anywise traitor to the Trinity, or to suffer loss of the Godhead. On the contrary indeed,
they grew strong by dangers, and became more zealous for true religion. For to suffer thus
for Christ adds to one's love, and is as it were an earnest to high-souled men of further
conflicts. These, O Egypt, are thy present tales and wonders.

V. Once thou didst praise me thy Mendesian Goats, and thy Memphite Apis, a fatted
and fleshy calf, and the rites of Isis, and the mutilations of Osiris, and thy venerable Serapis,
a log that was honoured by myths and ages and the madness of its worshippers, as some
unknown and heavenly matter, however it may have been aided by falsehood; and things
yet more shameful than these, multiform images of monstrous beasts and creeping things,
all of which Christ and the heralds of Christ have conquered, both the others who have been
illustrious in their own times, and also the Fathers whom I have named just now; by whom,

3792 Matt. xxiv. 12.

3793 Gen. xli. 29 sq.

3794 Athanasius.

On the Arrival of the Egyptians.

O admirable country, thou art more famous today than all others put together, whether in
ancient or modern history.

VI. Wherefore I embrace and salute thee, O noblest of peoples and most Christian, and
of warmest piety, and worthy of thy leaders; for I can find nothing greater to say of thee
than this, nor anything by which better to welcome thee. And I greet thee, to a small extent
with my tongue, but very heartily with the movements of my affections.3795 O my people,
for I call you mine, as of one mind and one faith, instructed by the same Fathers, and adoring
the same Trinity. My people, for mine thou art, though it seem not so to those who envy
me. And that they who are in this case may be the deeper wounded, see, I give the right
hand of fellowship before so many witnesses, seen and unseen. And I put away the old
calumny by this new act of kindness. O my people, for mine thou art, though in saying so
I, who am least of all men, am claiming for myself that which is greatest. For such is the
grace of the Spirit that it makes of equal honour those who are of one mind. O my people,
for mine thou art, though it be afar, because we are divinely joined together,3796 and in a
manner wholly different to the unions of carnal people; for bodies are united in place, but
souls are fitted together by the Spirit. O my people, who didst formerly study how to suffer
for Christ, but now if thou wilt hearken unto me, wilt study not to do aught, but to consider
the power of doing to be a sufficient gain, and to deem that thou art offering a sacrifice to
Christ, as in those days of thy endurance so in these of meekness. O people to whom the
Lord hath prepared Himself to do good, as to do evil to thine enemies.3797 O people, whom
the Lord hath chosen to Himself out of all peoples; O people who art graven upon the hands
of the Lord, to whom saith the Lord, Thou art My Will; and, Thy gates are carved work, and
all the rest that is said to them that are being saved. O people;-nay, marvel not at my insatiability that I repeat your name so often; for I delight in this continual naming of you, like
those who can never have enough of their enjoyment of certain spectacles or sounds.

VII. But, O people of God and mine, beautiful also was your yesterday's assembly,
which you held upon the sea, and pleasant, if any sight ever was, to the eyes, when I saw the
sea like a forest, and hidden by a cloud made with hands, and the beauty and speed of your
ships, as though ordered for a procession, and the slight breeze astern, as though purposely
escorting you, and wafting to the City your city of the Sea. Yet the present assembly which
we now behold is more beautiful and more magnificent. For you have not hastened to
mingle with the larger number, nor have you reckoned religion by numbers, nor endured
to be a mere unorganized rabble, rather than a people purified by the Word of God; but
having, as is right, rendered to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, ye have offered besides to

3795 Galat. ii. 9.

Isa. lxii. 4.

Isai. lxiv. 12, etc.

On the Arrival of the Egyptians.

God the things that are God's; to the former Custom, to the latter Fear; and after feeding
the people with your cargoes, you yourselves have come to be fed by us. For we also distribute
corn, and our distribution is perhaps not worth less than yours. Come eat of my Bread and
drink of the Wine which I have mingled for you.3798 I join with Wisdom in bidding you
to my table. For I commend your good feeling, and I hasten to meet your ready mind, because ye came to us as to your own harbour, running to your like; and ye valued the kindred
Faith, and thought it monstrous that, while they who insult higher things are in harmony
with each other and think alike, and think to make good each man's individual falsehood
by their common conspiracy, like ropes which get strength from being twisted together; yet
you should not meet nor combine with those who are of the same mind, with whom it is
more reasonable that you should associate, for we gather in the Godhead also. And that
you may see that not in vain have you come to us, and that you have not brought up in a
port among strangers and foreigners, but amongst your own people, and have been well
guided by the Holy Ghost; we will discourse to you briefly concerning God; and do you recognize your own, like those who distinguish their kindred by the ensigns of their arms.

VIII. I find two highest differences in things that exist, viz.:-Rule, and Service; not
such as among us either tyranny has cut or poverty has severed, but which nature has distinguished, if any like to use this word. For That which is First is also above nature. Of
these the former is creative, and originating, and unchangeable; but the other is created,
and subject and changing; or to speak yet more plainly, the one is above time, and the other
subject to time. The Former is called God, and subsists in Three Greatest, namely, the Cause,
the Creator, and the Perfecter; I mean the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, who are
neither so separated from one another as to be divided in nature, nor so contracted as to be
circumscribed by a single person; the one alternative being that of the Arian madness, the
other that of the Sabellian heresy; but they are on the one hand more single than what is
altogether divided, and on the other more abundant than what is altogether singular. The
other division is with us, and is called Creation, though one may be exalted above another
according to the proportion of their nearness to God.

IX. This being so, if any be on the Lord's side let him come with us,3799 and let us adore
the One Godhead in the Three; not ascribing any name of humiliation to the unapproachable
Glory, but having the exaltations of the Triune God continually in our mouth.3800 For since
we cannot properly describe even the greatness of Its Nature, on account of Its infinity and
undefinableness, how can we assert of It humiliation? But if any one be estranged from
God, and therefore divideth the One Supreme Substance into an inequality of Natures, it

Prov. ix. 5.

Exod. xxxii. 26.

Ps. cxlix. 6.

On the Arrival of the Egyptians.

were marvellous if such an one were not cut in sunder by the sword, and his portion appointed with the unbelievers,3801 reaping any evil fruit of his evil thought both now and hereafter.
X. What must we say of the Father, Whom by common consent all who have been
preoccupied with natural conceptions share, although He hath endured the beginnings of
dishonour, having been first divided by ancient innovation into the Good and the Creator. 
And of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, see how simply and concisely we shall discourse. If
any one could say of Either that He was mutable or subject to change; or that either in time,
or place, or power, or energy He could be measured; or that He was not naturally good, or
not Self-moved, or not a free agent, or a Minister, or a Hymnsinger; or that He feared, or
was a recipient of freedom, or was not counted with God; let him prove this and we will
acquiesce, and will be glorified by the Majesty of our Fellow Servants, though we lose our
God. But if all that the Father has belongs likewise to the Son, except Causality; and all that
is the Son's belongs also to the Spirit, except His Sonship, and whatsoever is spoken of Him
as to Incarnation for me a man, and for my salvation, that, taking of mine, He may impart
His own by this new commingling; then cease your babbling, though so late, O ye sophists
of vain talk that falls at once to the ground; for why will ye die O House of Israel?3802-if I
may mourn for you in the words of Scripture.

XI. For my part I revere also the Titles of the Word, which are so many, and so high
and great, which even the demons respect. And I revere also the Equal Rank of the Holy
Ghost; and I fear the threat pronounced against those who blaspheme Him. And blasphemy
is not the reckoning Him God, but the severing Him from the Godhead. And here you
must remark that That which is blasphemed is Lord, and That which is avenged is the Holy
Ghost, evidently as Lord. I cannot bear to be unenlightened after my Enlightenment, by
marking with a different stamp any of the Three into Whom I was baptized; and thus to be
indeed buried in the water, and initiated not into Regeneration, but into death.

XII. I dare to utter something, O Trinity; and may pardon be granted to my folly, for
the risk is to my soul. I too am an Image of God, of the Heavenly Glory, though I be placed
on earth. I cannot believe that I am saved by one who is my equal. If the Holy Ghost is not
God, let Him first be made God, and then let Him deify me His equal. But now what deceit
this is on the part of grace, or rather of the givers of grace, to believe in God and to come
away godless; by one set of questions and confessions leading to another set of conclusions. 
Alas for this fair fame, if after the Laver I am blackened, if I am to see those who are not yet
cleansed brighter than myself; if I am cheated by the heresy of my Baptizer; if I seek for the
stronger Spirit and find Him not. Give me a second Font before you think evil of the first. 
Why do you grudge me a complete regeneration? Why do you make me, who am the Temple

Luke xii. 46.

Ezek. xviii. 31.

On the Arrival of the Egyptians.

of the Holy Ghost as of God, the habitation of a creature? Why do you honour part of what
belongs to me, and dishonour part, judging falsely of the Godhead, to cut me off from the
Gift, or rather to cut me in two by the gift? Either honour the Whole, or dishonour the
Whole, O new Theologian, that, if you are wicked, you may at any rate be consistent with
yourself, and not judge unequally of an equal nature.

XIII. To sum up my discourse:-Glorify Him with the Cherubim, who unite the Three
Holies into One Lord,3803 and so far indicate the Primal Substance as their wings open to
the diligent. With David be enlightened, who said to the Light, In Thy Light shall we see
Light,3804 that is, in the Spirit we shall see the Son; and what can be of further reaching ray? 
With John thunder, sounding forth nothing that is low or earthly concerning God, but what
is high and heavenly, Who is in the beginning, and is with God, and is God the Word,3805
and true God of the true Father, and not a good fellow-servant honoured only with the title
of Son; and the Other Comforter (other, that is, from the Speaker, Who was the Word of
God). And when you read, I and the Father are One,3806 keep before your eyes the Unity
of Substance; but when you see, "We will come to him, and make Our abode with him,"3807
remember the distinction of Persons; and when you see the Names, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, think of the Three Personalities.

XIV. With Luke be inspired as you study the Acts of the Apostles. Why do you range
yourself with Ananias and Sapphira, those vain embezzlers (if indeed the theft of one's own
property be a vain thing) and that by appropriating, not silver nor any other cheap and
worthless thing, like a wedge of gold,3808 or a didrachma, as did of old a rapacious soldier;
but stealing the Godhead Itself, and lying, not to men but to God, as you have heard. What? 
Will you not reverence even the authority of the Spirit Who breathes upon whom, and
when, and as He wills? He comes upon Cornelius and his companions before Baptism, to
others after Baptism, by the hands of the Apostles; so that from both sides, both from the
fact that He comes in the guise of a Master and not of a Servant, and from the fact of His
being sought to make perfect, the Godhead of the Spirit is testified.

XV. Speak of God with Paul, who was caught up to the third Heaven,3809 and who
sometimes counts up the Three Persons, and that in varied order, not keeping the same
order, but reckoning one and the same Person now first, now second, now third; and for

Isai. vi. 3.

Ps. xxxvi. 9.

John i. 1.

Ib. x. 30.

John xiv. 23.

Josh. vii. 21.

2 Cor. xii. 2.

On the Arrival of the Egyptians.

what purpose? Why, to shew the equality of the Nature. And sometimes he mentions Three,
sometimes Two or One, became That which is not mentioned is included. And sometimes
he attributes the operation of God to the Spirit, as in no respect different from Him, and
sometimes instead of the Spirit he brings in Christ; and at times he separates the Persons
saying, "One God, of whom are all things, and we in Him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom are all things, and we by Him;"3810 at other times he brings together the one Godhead,
"For of Him and through Him and in Him are all things;"3811 that is, through the Holy
Ghost, as is shown by many places in Scripture. To Him be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

1 Cor. viii. 6.

3811 Rom. xi. 36.

On the Words of the Gospel, 'When Jesus Had Finished These Sayings,' Etc.--S. Matt. xix. 1.

On the Words of the Gospel, 'When Jesus Had Finished These Sayings,' Etc.--S....

Oration XXXVII.

On the Words of the Gospel, "When Jesus Had Finished These Sayings," Etc.-S.

Matt. xix. 1

I. Jesus Who Chose The Fishermen, Himself also useth a net, and changeth place for
place. Why? Not only that He may gain more of those who love God by His visitation; but
also, as it seems to me, that He may hallow more places. To the Jews He becomes as a Jew
that He may gain the Jews; to them that are under the Law as under the Law, that He may
redeem them that are under the Law; to the weak as weak, that He may save the weak. He
is made all things to all men that He may gain all. Why do I say, All things to all men? For
even that which Paul could not endure to say of himself I find that the Saviour suffered. 
For He is made not only a Jew, and not only doth He take to Himself all monstrous and vile
names, but even that which is most monstrous of all, even very sin and very curse; not that
He is such, but He is called so. For how can He be sin, Who setteth us free from sin; and
how can He be a curse, Who redeemeth us from the curse of the Law?3812 But it is in order
that He may carry His display of humility even to this extent, and form us to that humility
which is the producer of exaltation. As I said then, He is made a Fisherman; He condescendeth to all; He casteth the net; He endureth all things, that He may draw up the fish from
the depths, that is, Man who is swimming in the unsettled and bitter waves of life.

II. Therefore now also, when He had finished these sayings He departed from Galilee
and came into the coasts of Judea beyond Jordan; He dwelleth well in Galilee, in order that
the people which sat in darkness may see great Light.3813 He removeth to Judea in order
that He may persuade people to rise up from the Letter and to follow the Spirit. He teacheth,
now on a mountain; now He discourseth on a plain; now He passeth over into a ship; now
He rebuketh the surges. And perhaps He goes to sleep, in order that He may bless sleep
also; perhaps He is tired that He may hallow weariness also; perhaps He weeps that He may
make tears blessed. He removeth from place to place, Who is not contained in any place;
the timeless, the bodiless, the uncircumscript, the same Who was and is; Who was both
above time, and came under time, and was invisible and is seen. He was in the beginning
and was with God, and was God.3814 The word Was occurs the third time to be confirmed
by number. What He was He laid aside; what He was not He assumed; not that He became
two, but He deigned to be One made out of the two. For both are God, that which assumed,
and that which was assumed; two Natures meeting in One, not two Sons (let us not give a
false account of the blending). He who is such and so great-but what has befallen me? I

3812 Gal. iii. 10, 13.

Isa. ix. 1.

John i. 1.

On the Words of the Gospel, 'When Jesus Had Finished These Sayings,' Etc.--S....

have fallen into human language. For how can So Great be said of the Absolute, and how
can That which is without quantity be called Such? But pardon the word, for I am speaking
of the greatest things with a limited instrument. And That great and long-suffering and
formless and bodiless Nature will endure this, namely, my words as if of a body, and weaker
than the truth. For if He condescended to Flesh, He will also endure such language.

III. And great multitudes followed Him, and He healed them there, where the multitude
was greater. If He had abode upon His own eminence, if He had not condescended to infirmity, if He had remained what He was, keeping Himself unapproachable and incomprehensible, a few perhaps would have followed Him-perhaps not even a few, possibly only
Moses-and He only so far as to see with difficulty the Back Parts of God.3815 For He
penetrated the cloud, either being placed outside the weight of the body or being withdrawn
from his senses; for how could he have gazed upon the subtlety, or the incorporeity, or I
know not how one should call it, of God, being incorporate and using material eyes? But
inasmuch as He strips Himself for us, inasmuch as He comes down (and speak of an exinanition, as it were, a laying aside and a diminution of His glory), He becomes by this comprehensible.

IV. And pardon me meanwhile that I again suffer a human affection. I am filled with
indignation and grief for my Christ (and would that you might sympathize with me) when
I see my Christ dishonoured on this account on which He most merited honour. Is He on
this account to be dishonoured, tell me, that for you He was humble? Is He therefore a
Creature, because He careth for the creature? Is He therefore subject to time, because He
watches over those who are subject to time? Nay, He beareth all things, He endureth all
things.3816 And what marvel? He put up with blows, He bore spittings, He tasted gall for
my taste. And even now He bears to be stoned, not only by those who deal despitefully with
Him, but also by ourselves who seem to reverence Him. For to use corporeal names when
discoursing of the incorporeal is perhaps the part of those who deal despitefully and stone
Him; but pardon, I say again to our infirmity, for I do not willingly stone Him; but having
no other words to use, we use what we have. Thou art called the Word, and Thou art above
Word; Thou art above Light, yet art named Light; Thou art called Fire not as perceptible to
sense, but because Thou purgest light and worthless matter; a Sword, because Thou severest
the worse from the better; a Fan, because Thou purgest the threshing-floor, and blowest
away all that is light and windy, and layest up in the garner above all that is weighty and
full; an Axe, because Thou cuttest down the worthless fig-tree, after long patience, because
Thou cuttest away the roots of wickedness; the Door, because Thou bringest in; the Way,
because we go straight; the Sheep, because Thou art the Sacrifice; the High Priest, because

Exod. xx. 21; xxxiii. 20, 23.

1 Cor. xiii. 7.

On the Words of the Gospel, 'When Jesus Had Finished These Sayings,' Etc.--S....

Thou offerest the Body the Son, because Thou art of the Father. Again I stir men's tongues;
again some men rave against Christ, or rather against me, who have been deemed worthy
to be a herald of the Word. I am like John, The Voice of one crying in the wilderness3817-a
wilderness that once was dry, but now is only too populous.

V. But, as I was saying, to return to my argument; for this reason great multitudes followed Him, because He condescended to our infirmities. What next? The Pharisees also,
it says, came unto Him, tempting Him, and saying unto Him, is it lawful for a man to put
away his wife for every cause? Again the Pharisees tempt Him; again they who read the Law
do not know the Law; again they who are expounders of the Law need others to teach them. 
It was not enough that Sadducees should tempt Him concerning the Resurrection, and
Lawyers question Him about perfection, and the Herodians about the poll-tax, and others
about authority; but some one must also ask about Marriage at Him who cannot be tempted,
the Creator of wedlock, Him who from the First Cause made this whole race of mankind. 
And He answered and said unto them, Have ye not read that He which made them at the
beginning made them male and female? He knoweth how to solve some of their questions
and to bridle others. When He is asked, By what authority doest thou these things? He
Himself, because of the utter ignorance of those who asked Him, replies with another
question; The baptism of John, was it from Heaven or of men? He on both sides entangles
His questioners, so that we also are able, following the example of Christ, sometimes to
check those who argue with us over-officiously, and with still more absurd questions to
solve the absurdity of their questions. For we too are wise in vanity at times, if I may boast
of the things of folly. But when He sees a question that calls for reasoning, then He does
not deem His questioners unworthy of prudent answers.

VI. The question which you have put seems to me to do honour to chastity, and to demand a kind reply. Chastity, in respect of which I see that the majority of men are ill-disposed, and that their laws are unequal and irregular. For what was the reason why they restrained the woman, but indulged the man, and that a woman who practises evil against her
husband's bed is an adulteress, and the penalties of the law for this are very severe; but if
the husband commits fornication against his wife, he has no account to give? I do not accept
this legislation; I do not approve this custom. They who made the Law were men, and
therefore their legislation is hard on women, since they have placed children also under the
authority of their fathers, while leaving the weaker sex uncared for. God doth not so; but
saith Honour thy father and thy mother, which is the first commandment with promise;
that it may be well with thee; and, He that curseth father or mother, let him die the death. 
Similarly He gave honour to good and punishment to evil. And, The blessing of a father
strengtheneth the houses of children, but the curse of a mother uprooteth the founda-

3817 Matt. iii. 3.

On the Words of the Gospel, 'When Jesus Had Finished These Sayings,' Etc.--S....

tions.3818 See the equality of the legislation. There is one Maker of man and woman; one
debt is owed by children to both their parents.

VII. How then dost thou demand Chastity, while thou dost not thyself observe it? How
dost thou demand that which thou dost not give? How, though thou art equally a body,
dost thou legislate unequally? If thou enquire into the worse-The Woman Sinned, and so
did Adam.3819 The serpent deceived them both; and one was not found to be the stronger
and the other the weaker. But dost thou consider the better? Christ saves both by His Passion. Was He made flesh for the Man? So He was also for the woman. Did He die for the
Man? The Woman also is saved by His death. He is called of the seed of David;3820 and so
perhaps you think the Man is honoured; but He is born of a Virgin, and this is on the Woman's side. They two, He says, shall be one Flesh; so let the one flesh have equal honour. 
And Paul legislates for chastity by His example. How, and in what way? This Sacrament is
great, he says, But I speak concerning Christ and the Church.3821 It is well for the wife to
reverence Christ through her husband: and it is well for the husband not to dishonor the
Church through his wife. Let the wife, he says, see that she reverence her husband, for so
she does Christ; but also he bids the husband cherish his wife, for so Christ does the
Church.3822 Let us, then, give further consideration to this saying.

VIII. Churn milk and it will be butter;3823 examine this and perhaps you may find
something more nourishing in it. For I think that the Word here seems to deprecate second
marriage. For, if there were two Christs, there may be two husbands or two wives; but if
Christ is One, one Head of the Church, let there be also one flesh, and let a second be rejected;
and if it hinder the second what is to be said for a third? The first is law, the second is indulgence, the third is transgression, and anything beyond this is swinish, such as has not even
many examples of its wickedness. Now the Law grants divorce for every cause; but Christ
not for every cause; but He allows only separation from the whore; and in all other things
He commands patience. He allows to put away the fornicatress, because she corrupts the
offspring; but in all other matters let us be patient and endure; or rather be ye3824 enduring
and patient, as many as have received the yoke of matrimony. If you see lines or marks
upon her, take away her ornaments; if a hasty tongue, restrain it; if a meretricious laugh,
make it modest; if immoderate expenditure or drink, reduce it; if unseasonable going out,

Ecclus. iii. 11.

3819 Gen. iii. 6.

3820 Rom. i. 3.

Ephes. v. 32.

Ib. v. 22 seq.

Prov. xxx. 33.

3824 An indication that S. Gregory was himself unmarried.

On the Words of the Gospel, 'When Jesus Had Finished These Sayings,' Etc.--S....

shackle it; if a lofty eye, chastise it. It is uncertain which is in danger, the separator or the
separated. Let thy fountain of water, it says, be only thine own, and let no stranger share it
with thee;3825 and, let the colt of thy favours and the stag of thy love company with thee;
do thou then take care not to be a strange river, nor to please others better than thine own
wife. But if thou be carried elsewhere, then thou makest a law of lewdness for thy partner
also. Thus saith the Saviour.

IX. But what of the Pharisees? To them this word seems harsh. Yes, for they are also
displeased at other noble words-both the older Pharisees, and the Pharisees of the present
day. For it is not only race, but disposition also that makes a Pharisee. Thus also I reckon
as an Assyrian or an Egyptian him who is ranged among these by his character. What then
say the Pharisees? If the case of the man be so with his wife, it is not good to marry. Is it
only now, O Pharisee, that thou understandest this, It is not good to marry?3826 Didst thou
not know it before when thou sawest widowhoods, and orphanhoods, and untimely deaths,
and mourning succeeding to shouting, and funerals coming upon weddings, and childlessness, and all the comedy or tragedy that is connected with this? Either is most appropriate
language. It is good to marry; I too admit it, for marriage is honourable in all, and the bed
undefiled.3827 It is good for the temperate, not for those who are insatiable, and who desire
to give more than due honour to the flesh. When marriage is only marriage and conjunction
and the desire for a succession of children, marriage is honourable, for it brings into the
world more to please God. But when it kindles matter, and surrounds us with thorns, and
as it were discovers the way of vice, then I too say, It is not good to marry.

X. Marriage is honourable; but I cannot say that it is more lofty than virginity; for virginity were no great thing if it were not better than a good thing. Do not however be angry,
ye women that are subject to the yoke. We must obey God rather than man. But be ye
bound together, both virgins and wives, and be one in the Lord, and each others' adornment. 
There would be no celibate if there were no marriage. For whence would the virgin have
passed into this life? Marriage would not have been venerable unless it had borne virgin
fruit to God and to life. Honour thou also thy mother, of whom thou wast born. Honour
thou also her who is of a mother and is a mother.3828 A mother she is not, but a Bride of
Christ she is. The visible beauty is not hidden, but that which is unseen is visible to God. 
All the glory of the King's Daughter is within,3829 clothed with golden fringes, embroidered
whether by actions or by contemplation. And she who is under the yoke, let her also in

Prov. v. 17.

3826 Matt. xix. 10.

3827 Heb. xiii. 4.

3828 The passage is obscure. Combefis reads, "Though she be not a mother" but the mss are against him.

Ps. xlv. 14.

On the Words of the Gospel, 'When Jesus Had Finished These Sayings,' Etc.--S....

some degree be Christ's; and the virgin altogether Christ's. Let the one be not entirely
chained to the world,3830 and let the other not belong to the world at all. For that which is
a part to the yoked, is to the virgin all in all. Hast thou chosen the life of Angels? Art thou
ranked among the unyoked? Sink not down to the flesh; sink not down to matter; be not
wedded to matter, while otherwise thou remainest unwedded. A lascivious eye guardeth
not virginity; a meretricious tongue mingles with the Evil One; feet that walk disorderly
accuse of disease or danger. Let the mind also be virgin; let it not rove about; let it not
wander; let it not carry in itself forms of evil things (for the form is a part of harlotry); let it
not make idols in its soul of hateful things.

XI. But He said unto them, All men cannot receive this saying, save they to whom it is
given. Do you see the sublimity of the matter? It is found to be nearly incomprehensible. 
For surely it is more than carnal that that which is born of flesh should not beget to the
flesh. Surely it is Angelic that she who is bound to flesh should live not according to flesh,
but be loftier than her nature. The flesh bound her to the world, but reason led her up to
God. The flesh weighed her down, but reason gave her wings; the flesh bound her, but desire
loosed her. With thy whole soul, O Virgin, be intent upon God (I give this same injunction
to men and to women); and do not take the same view in other respects of what is honourable
as the mass of men do; of family, of wealth, of throne, of dynasty, of that beauty which shews
itself in complexion and composition of members, the plaything of time and disease. If
thou hast poured out upon God the whole of thy love; if thou hast not two objects of desire,
both the passing and the abiding, both the visible and the invisible, then thou hast been so
pierced by the arrow of election, and hast so learned the beauty of the Bridegroom, that
thou too canst say with the bridal drama and song, thou art sweetness and altogether loveliness.

XII. You see how streams confined in lead pipes, through being much compressed and
carried to one point, often so far depart from the nature of water that that which is pushed
from behind will often flow constantly upwards. So if thou confine thy desire, and be wholly
joined to God, thou wilt not fall downward; thou wilt not be dissipated; thou wilt remain
entirely Christ's, until thou see Christ thy Bridegroom. Keep thyself unapproachable, both
in word and work and life, and thought and action. From all sides the Evil One interferes
with thee; he spies thee everywhere, where he may strike, where wound thee; let him not
find anything bared and ready to his stroke. The purer he sees thee, the more he strives to
stain thee, for the stains on a shining garment are more conspicuous. Let not eye draw eye,
nor laughter, nor familiarity night, lest night bring destruction. For that which is gradually
drawn away and stolen, works a mischief which is unperceived at the time, but yet attains
to the consummation of wickedness.

Luke viii. 14.

On the Words of the Gospel, 'When Jesus Had Finished These Sayings,' Etc.--S....

XIII. All men, He saith, cannot receive this saying, but they to whom it is given. When
you hear this, It is given, do not understand it in a heretical fashion, and bring in differences
of nature, the earthly and the spiritual and the mixed. For there are people so evilly disposed
as to think that some men are of an utterly ruined nature, and some of a nature which is
saved, and that others are of such a disposition as their will may lead them to, either to the
better, or to the worse. For that men may have a certain aptitude, one more, another less,
I too admit; but not that this aptitude alone suffices for perfection, but that it is reason which
calls this out, that nature may proceed to action, just as fire is produced when a flint is struck
with iron. When you hear To whom it is given, add, And it is given to those who are called
and to those who incline that way. For when you hear, Not of him that willeth, nor of him
that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy,3831 I counsel you to think the same. For since
there are some who are so proud of their successes that they attribute all to themselves and
nothing to Him that made them and gave them wisdom and supplied them with good; such
are taught by this word that even to wish well needs help from God; or rather that even to
choose what is right is divine and a gift of the mercy of God. For it is necessary both that
we should be our own masters and also that our salvation should be of God. This is why
He saith not of him that willeth; that is, not of him that willeth only, nor of him that runneth
only, but also of God. That sheweth mercy. Next; since to will also is from God, he has attributed the whole to God with reason. However much you may run, however much you
may wrestle, yet you need one to give the crown. Except the Lord build the house, they laboured in vain that built it: Except the Lord keep the city, in vain they watched that keep
it.3832 I know, He says, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong,3833 nor
the victory to the fighters, nor the harbours to the good sailors; but to God it belongs both
to work victory, and to bring the barque safe to port.

XIV. In another place it is also said and understood, and perhaps it is necessary that I
should add it as follows to what has already been said, in order that I may impart to you
also my wealth. The Mother of the Sons of Zebedee, in an impulse of parental affection,
asked a thing in ignorance of the measure of what she was asking,3834 but pardonably,
through the excess of her love and of the kindness due to her children. For there is nothing
more affectionate than a Mother,-and I speak of this that I may lay down a law for honouring Mothers. Their mother, then, asked Jesus that they might sit, the one on His right hand,
the other on his left. But what saith the Saviour? He first asks if they can drink the Cup
Which He Himself was about to drink; and when this was professed, and the Saviour accepted

3831 Rom. ix. 16.

Ps. cxxvii. 1.

Eccles. ix. 11.

3834 Matt. xx. 20, etc.

On the Words of the Gospel, 'When Jesus Had Finished These Sayings,' Etc.--S....

the profession (for He knew that they were being perfected by the same, or rather that they
would be perfected thereby); what saith He? "They shall drink the cup; but to sit on My
right hand and on My left-it is not Mine, He saith, to give this, but to whom it hath been
given." Is then the ruling mind nothing? Nothing the labour? Nothing the reasoning? 
Nothing the philosophy? Nothing the fasting? Nothing the vigils, the sleeping on the
ground, the shedding floods of tears? Is it for nothing of these, but in accordance with some
election by lot, that a Jeremias is sanctified, and others are estranged from the womb?

XV. I fear lest some monstrous reasoning may come in, as of the soul having lived
elsewhere, and then having been bound to this body, and that it is from that other life that
some receive the gift of prophecy, and others are condemned, namely, those who lived
badly. But since such a conception is too absurd, and contrary to the traditions of the Church
(others if they like may play with such doctrines, but it is unsafe for us to play with them);
we must in this place too add to the words "To whom it hath been given," this, "who are
worthy;" who have not only received this character from the Father, but have given it to
themselves.

XVI. For there are eunuchs which were made eunuchs from their mother's womb, etc. 
I should very much like to be able to say something bold about eunuchs. Be not proud, ye
who are eunuchs by nature. For, in point of self-restraint, this is perhaps unwilling. For it
has not come to the test, nor has your self-restraint been proved by trial. For the good which
is by nature is not a subject of merit; that which is the result of purpose is laudable. What
merit has fire for burning, for it is its nature to burn? What merit has water for falling, a
property given to it by its Maker? What thanks does the snow get for its coldness, or the
sun for its shining?-It shines even if it does not wish. Claim merit if you please by willing
the better things. You will claim it if, being carnal, you make yourself spiritual; if, while
drawn down by the leaden flesh, you receive wings from reason; if though lowly born, you
are found to be heavenly; if while chained down to the flesh, you shew yourself superior to
the flesh.

XVII. Since then, natural chastity is not meritorious, I demand something else from
the eunuchs. Do not go a whoring in respect of the Godhead. Having been wedded to
Christ, do not dishonour Christ. Being perfected by the spirit, do not make the Spirit your
own equal. If I yet pleased men, says Paul, I should not be the servant of Christ.3835 If I
worshipped a creature, I should not be called a Christian. For why is Christianity precious? 
Is it not that Christ is God, unless my mingling with Him in love is a mere human passion? 
And yet I honour Peter, but I am not called a Petrine; and Paul, but have never been called
a Pauline. I cannot allow myself to be named after a man, who am born of God. So then,
if it is because you believe Him to be God that you are called a Christian, may you ever be

3835 Galat. i. 10.

On the Words of the Gospel, 'When Jesus Had Finished These Sayings,' Etc.--S....

so called, and may you remain in both the name and the thing; but if you are called from
Christ only because you have an affection for Him, you attribute no more to him than other
names which are given from some practice or fact.

XVIII. Consider those men who are devoted to horse racing. They are named after the
colours and the sides on which they have placed themselves. You know the names without
my mentioning them. If it is thus that you have got the name of Christian, the mere title is
a very small thing even though you pride yourself upon it. But if it is because you believe
Him to be God, shew your faith by your works. If the Son is a creature, even now also you
are worshipping the creature instead of the Creator. If the Holy Ghost is a creature, you
are baptized in vain, and are only sound on two sides, or rather not even on them; but on
one you are altogether in danger. Imagine the Trinity to be a single pearl, alike on all sides
and equally glistening. If any part of the pearl be injured; the whole beauty of the stone is
gone. So when you dishonour the Son in order to honour the Father, He does not accept
your honour. The Father doth not glory in the dishonour of the Son. If a wise Son maketh
a glad Father,3836 how much more doth the honour of the Son become that of the Father! 
And if you also accept this saying, My Son, glory not in the dishonour of thy Father,3837
similarly the Father doth not glory in the Son's dishonour. If you dishonour the Holy Ghost,
the Son receiveth not your honour. For though He be not of the Father in the same way as
the Son, yet He is of the same Father. Either honour the whole or dishonour the whole, so
as to have a consistent mind. I cannot accept your half piety. I would have you altogether
pious, but in the way that I desire. Pardon my affection: I am grieved even for those who
hate me. You were one of my members, even though you are now cut off: perhaps you will
again become a member; and therefore I speak kindly. Thus much for the sake of the Eunuchs, that they may be chaste in respect of the Godhead.

XIX. For it is not only bodily sin which is called fornication and adultery, but any sin
you have committed, and especially transgression against that which is divine. Perhaps you
ask how we can prove this:-They went a whoring, it says, with their own inventions.3838 
Do you see an impudent act of fornication? And again, They committed adultery in the
wood.3839 See you a kind of adulterous religion? Do not then commit spiritual adultery,
while keeping your bodies chaste. Do not shew that it is unwillingly you are chaste in body,
by not being chaste where you can commit fornication. Why have you done your impiety? 
Why are you hurried to vice, so that it is all one to call a man a Eunuch or a villain? Place
yourselves on the side of men, and, even though so late, have some manly thoughts. Avoid

Prov. x. 1.

Ecclus. iii. 10.

Ps. cvi. 39.

Jer. iii. 9 (Libere).

On the Words of the Gospel, 'When Jesus Had Finished These Sayings,' Etc.--S....

the women's apartments; do not let the disgrace of proclamation be added to the disgrace
of the name. Would you have us persevere a little longer in this discourse, or are you tired
with what we have said? Nay, by what follows let even the eunuchs be honoured. For the
word is one of praise.

XX. There are, He says, some eunuchs which were so born from their mother's womb;
and there are some eunuchs which were made eunuchs of men; and there be eunuchs which
have made themselves eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven's sake. He that is able to receive
it, let him receive it. I think that the discourse would sever itself from the body, and represent
higher things by bodily figures; for to stop the meaning at bodily eunuchs would be small
and very weak, and unworthy of the Word; and we must understand in addition something
worthy of the Spirit. Some, then, seem by nature to incline to good. And when I speak of
nature, I am not slighting free will, but supposing both-an aptitude for good, and that
which brings the natural aptitude to effect. And there are others whom reason cleanses, by
cutting them off from the passions. These I imagine to be meant by those whom men have
made Eunuchs, when the word of teaching distinguishing the better from the worse and
rejecting the one and commanding the other (like the verse, Depart from evil and do
good),3840 works spiritual chastity. This sort of making eunuchs I approve; and I highly
praise both teachers and taught, that the one have nobly effected, and the other still more
nobly endured, the cutting off.

XXI. And there be eunuchs which have made themselves eunuchs for the Kingdom of
Heaven's sake. Others, too, who have not met with teachers, have been laudable teachers
to themselves. No father nor mother, no Priest or Bishop, nor any of those commissioned
to teach, taught you your duty; but by moving reason in yourself and by kindling the spark
of good by your free will, you made yourself a eunuch, and acquired such a habit of virtue
that impulse to vice became almost an impossibility to you. Therefore I praise this kind of
Eunuch-making also, and perhaps even above the others. He that is able to receive it let
him receive it. Choose which part you will; either follow the Teacher or be your own
teacher. One thing alone is shameful-that the passions be not extirpated. It matters not
how they are extirpated. The teacher is God's creature; and you also have the same origin;
and whether the teacher grasp this grace, or the good be your own-it is equally good.

XXII. Only let us cut ourselves off from passion, lest any root of bitterness springing
up trouble us;3841 only let us follow the image; only let us reverence our Archetype. Cut off
the bodily passions; cut off also the spiritual. For by how much the soul is more precious
than the body, by so much more precious is it to cleanse the soul than the body. And if
cleansing of the body be a praiseworthy act, see, I pray you, how much greater and higher

Ps. xxxvii. 27.

3841 Heb. xii. 15.

On the Words of the Gospel, 'When Jesus Had Finished These Sayings,' Etc.--S....

is that of the soul. Cut away the Arian impiety; cut away the false opinion of Sabellius; do
not join more than is right, or wrongly sever; do not either confuse the Three Persons into
One, or make Three diversities of Nature. The One is praiseworthy if rightly understood;
and the Three when rightly divided, when the division is of Persons, not of Godhead.

XXIII. I enact this for Laymen too, and I enjoin it also upon all Priests, and upon those
commissioned to rule. Come to the aid of the Word, all of you to whom God has given
power to aid. It is a great thing to check murder, to punish adultery, to chastise theft; much
more to establish piety by law, and to bestow sound doctrine. My word will not be able to
do as much in fighting for the Holy Trinity as your Edict, if you will bridle the ill disposed,
if you will help the persecuted, if you will check the slayers, and prevent people from being
slain. I am speaking not merely of bodily but of spiritual slaughter. For all sin is the death
of the soul. Here let my discourse end.

XXIV. But it remains that I speak a prayer for those who are assembled. Husbands
alike and wives, rulers and ruled, old men, and young men, and maidens, every sort of age,
bear ye every loss whether of money or of body, but one thing alone do not endure-to lose
the Godhead. I adore the Father, I adore the Son, I adore the Holy Ghost; or rather We
adore them; I, who am speaking, before all and after all and with all, in the same Christ our
Lord, to whom be the glory and the might for ever. Amen.

On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.

On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.

Oration XXXVIII.

On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.

The Title of this Oration has given rise to a doubt whether it was preached on Dec.
25, 380, or on Jan. 6, 381. The word Theophania is well known as a name for the Epiphany;
which, however, according to Schaff,3842 was originally a celebration both of the Nativity
and the Baptism of our Lord. The two words seem both to have been used in the simplest
sense of the Manifestation of God, and certainly were applied to Christmas Day. Thus
Suidas, "The Epiphany is the Incarnation of the Saviour;" and Epiphanius (Haer., 53),
"The Day of the Epiphany is the day on which Christ was born according to the flesh." 
But S. Jerome applies the word to the Baptism of Christ; "The day of the Epiphany is still
venerable; not, as some think, on account of His Birth in the flesh; for then He was hidden,
not manifested; but it agrees with the time at which it was said, This is My beloved Son
(In Ezech. I.). There is also a Sermon, attributed to S. Chrysostom, "On the Baptism of
Christ," in which it is expressly denied that the name Theophany applies to Christmas. 
The Oration itself, however, contains evidence to shew that the Festival of our Lord's Birth
was kept at the earlier date; for in c. 16 the Preacher says, "A little later you shall see Jesus
submitting to be purified in the river Jordan for my purification." And another piece of
evidence occurs in the oration In Sancta Lumina, c. 14, "At His Birth we duly kept festival,
both I the leader of the feast, and you. Now we are come to another action of Christ and
another Mystery."

The Oration is thus analysed by Abbe Benoît:
"After an exordium which is full of the enthusiasm and joy which such a subject
naturally inspires the Orator recommends his hearers to celebrate the Festival by a
pious gladness, and by hearing the Word of God; and not as the heathen celebrated
their feasts, by profane amusements and all kinds of excess. He will try to satisfy their
desires by speaking to them of God. God is infinite, ineffable, eternal, the Sovereign
Good. He created the Angels in the beginning out of goodness. The fall of the Angels
was followed by the creation of the material world. Man too fell, and God shewed
His mercy even in the punishment. He used various means to raise him again; and
at length He came Himself. Then the speaker forcibly argues against those who misuse
the infinite condescension of the Word to contest His Godhead; he rapidly traces the
principal features of His Life-at once human and Divine; and ends with a recommendation to his hearers to imitate in all things the Life of Christ, so that they may
have a share in His Kingdom in Heaven."

3842 H. E., Nic. Per., p. 399.

On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.

It is considered one of the best of Gregory's discourses. "By the grandeur of the
plan," says Benoît, "the elevation of the ideas, and the rich fund of doctrine, this discourse is incontestably one of S. Gregory's most remarkable efforts."

I. Christ is born, glorify ye Him. Christ from heaven, go ye out to meet Him. Christ
on earth; be ye exalted. Sing unto the Lord all the whole earth;3843 and that I may join both
in one word, Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad, for Him Who is of heaven
and then of earth. Christ in the flesh, rejoice with trembling and with joy; with trembling
because of your sins, with joy because of your hope. Christ of a Virgin; O ye Matrons live
as Virgins, that ye may be Mothers of Christ. Who doth not worship Him That is from the
beginning? Who doth not glorify Him That is the Last?

II. Again the darkness is past; again Light is made; again Egypt is punished with darkness;
again Israel is enlightened by a pillar.3844 The people that sat in the darkness of ignorance,
let it see the Great Light of full knowledge.3845 Old things are passed away, behold all things
are become new.3846 The letter gives way, the Spirit comes to the front. The shadows flee
away, the Truth comes in upon them. Melchisedec is concluded.3847 He that was without
Mother becomes without Father (without Mother of His former state, without Father of
His second). The laws of nature are upset; the world above must be filled. Christ commands
it, let us not set ourselves against Him. O clap your hands together all ye people,3848 because
unto us a Child is born, and a Son given unto us, Whose Government is upon His shoulder
(for with the Cross it is raised up), and His Name is called The Angel of the Great Counsel
of the Father.3849 Let John cry, Prepare ye the way of the Lord:3850 I too will cry the power
of this Day. He Who is not carnal is Incarnate; the Son of God becomes the Son of Man,
Jesus Christ the Same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever.3851 Let the Jews be offended, let

Ps. xcvi. 1, 11.

Exod. xiv. 20.

Isa. ix. 6.

1 Cor. v. 17.

The meaning clearly is that the type presented by Melchisedec (Heb. vii. 3) is fulfilled in Christ. The

explanation here given by S. Gregory is the ordinary one found in the Fathers. Thus, e.g., Theodoret says, "Christ

our Lord is without Mother as God, for He was begotten of the Father alone; and without Father as Man, for

He was born of a pure Virgin." Oecumenius has almost the exact words of Gregory. So also S. Augustine (Tract

in Joann, 8), "Christ was singularly born of a Father without a Mother, of a Mother without a Father; without

Mother as God, without Father as Man."

Ps. xlvii. 1.

Isa. ix. 6.

3850 Matt. iii. 3.

3851 Heb. xiii. 8.

On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.

the Greeks deride;3852 let heretics talk till their tongues ache. Then shall they believe, when
they see Him ascending up into heaven; and if not then, yet when they see Him coming out
of heaven and sitting as Judge.

III. Of these on a future occasion; for the present the Festival is the Theophany or Birthday, for it is called both, two titles being given to the one thing. For God was manifested to
man by birth. On the one hand Being, and eternally Being, of the Eternal Being, above cause
and word, for there was no word before The Word; and on the other hand for our sakes
also Becoming, that He Who gives us our being might also give us our Well-being, or rather
might restore us by His Incarnation, when we had by wickedness fallen from wellbeing. 
The name Theophany is given to it in reference to the Manifestation, and that of Birthday
in respect of His Birth.

IV. This is our present Festival; it is this which we are celebrating to-day, the Coming
of God to Man, that we might go forth,3853 or rather (for this is the more proper expression)
that we might go back to God-that putting off the old man, we might put on the New; and
that as we died in Adam, so we might live in Christ,3854 being born with Christ and crucified
with Him and buried with Him and rising with Him.3855 For I must undergo the beautiful
conversion, and as the painful succeeded the more blissful, so must the more blissful come
out of the painful. For where sin abounded Grace did much more abound;3856 and if a taste
condemned us, how much more doth the Passion of Christ justify us? Therefore let us keep
the Feast, not after the manner of a heathen festival, but after a godly sort; not after the way
of the world, but in a fashion above the world; not as our own but as belonging to Him Who
is ours, or rather as our Master's; not as of weakness, but as of healing; not as of creation,
but of re-creation.

V. And how shall this be? Let us not adorn our porches, nor arrange dances, nor decorate the streets; let us not feast the eye, nor enchant the ear with music, nor enervate the
nostrils with perfume, nor prostitute the taste, nor indulge the touch, those roads that are
so prone to evil and entrances for sin; let us not be effeminate in clothing soft and flowing,
whose beauty consists in its uselessness, nor with the glittering of gems or the sheen of
gold3857 or the tricks of colour, belying the beauty of nature, and invented to do despite
unto the image of God; Not in rioting and drunkenness, with which are mingled, I know
well, chambering and wantonness, since the lessons which evil teachers give are evil; or

1 Cor. i. 23.

Ephes. iv. 22, 24.

1 Cor. xv. 22.

3855 Col. ii. 11.

3856 Rom. v. 20.

3857 Rom. xiii. 13.

On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.

rather the harvests of worthless seeds are worthless. Let us not set up high beds of leaves,
making tabernacles for the belly of what belongs to debauchery. Let us not appraise the
bouquet of wines, the kickshaws of cooks, the great expense of unguents. Let not sea and
land bring us as a gift their precious dung, for it is thus that I have learnt to estimate luxury;
and let us not strive to outdo each other in intemperance (for to my mind every superfluity
is intemperance, and all which is beyond absolute need),-and this while others are hungry
and in want, who are made of the same clay and in the same manner.

VI. Let us leave all these to the Greeks and to the pomps and festivals of the Greeks,
who call by the name of gods beings who rejoice in the reek of sacrifices, and who consistently
worship with their belly; evil inventors and worshippers of evil demons. But we, the Object
of whose adoration is the Word, if we must in some way have luxury, let us seek it in word,
and in the Divine Law, and in histories; especially such as are the origin of this Feast; that
our luxury may be akin to and not far removed from Him Who hath called us together. Or
do you desire (for to-day I am your entertainer) that I should set before you, my good Guests,
the story of these things as abundantly and as nobly as I can, that ye may know how a foreigner can feed3858 the natives of the land, and a rustic the people of the town, and one who
cares not for luxury those who delight in it, and one who is poor and homeless those who
are eminent for wealth?

We will begin from this point; and let me ask of you who delight in such matters to
cleanse your mind and your ears and your thoughts, since our discourse is to be of God and
Divine; that when you depart, you may have had the enjoyment of delights that really fade
not away. And this same discourse shall be at once both very full and very concise, that you
may neither be displeased at its deficiencies, nor find it unpleasant through satiety.

VII. God always was,3859 and always is, and always will be. Or rather, God always Is. 
For Was and Will be are fragments of our time, and of changeable nature, but He is Eternal
Being. And this is the Name that He gives to Himself when giving the Oracle to Moses in
the Mount. For in Himself He sums up and contains all Being, having neither beginning
in the past nor end in the future; like some great Sea of Being, limitless and unbounded,
transcending all conception of time and nature, only adumbrated by the mind, and that
very dimly and scantily...not by His Essentials, but by His Environment; one image being
got from one source and another from another, and combined into some sort of presentation
of the truth, which escapes us before we have caught it, and takes to flight before we have
conceived it, blazing forth upon our Master-part, even when that is cleansed, as the lightning
flash which will not stay its course, does upon our sight...in order as I conceive by that part

3858 Alluding to his own recent arrival at Constantinople, after a life spent in the distant country of Cappadocia,

and in ministering in small and insignificant places like Nazianzus.

3859 The whole of this passage occurs again verbatim in the second Oration for Easter Day, cc. iii.-ix.

On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.

of it which we can comprehend to draw us to itself (for that which is altogether incomprehensible is outside the bounds of hope, and not within the compass of endeavour), and by
that part of It which we cannot comprehend to move our wonder, and as an object of wonder
to become more an object of desire, and being desired to purify, and by purifying to make
us like God;3860 so that when we have thus become like Himself, God may, to use a bold
expression, hold converse with us as Gods, being united to us, and that perhaps to the same
extent as He already knows those who are known to Him. The Divine Nature then is
boundless and hard to understand; and all that we can comprehend of Him is His boundlessness; even though one may conceive that because He is of a simple nature He is therefore
either wholly incomprehensible, or perfectly comprehensible. For let us further enquire
what is implied by "is of a simple nature." For it is quite certain that this simplicity is not
itself its nature, just as composition is not by itself the essence of compound beings.

VIII. And when Infinity is considered from two points of view, beginning and end (for
that which is beyond these and not limited by them is Infinity), when the mind looks to the
depth above, not having where to stand, and leans upon phenomena to form an idea of God,
it calls the Infinite and Unapproachable which it finds there by the name of Unoriginate. 
And when it looks into the depths below, and at the future, it calls Him Undying and Imperishable. And when it draws a conclusion from the whole it calls Him Eternal (αἴωνιος). 
For Eternity (αἵων) is neither time nor part of time; for it cannot be measured. But what
time, measured by the course of the sun, is to us, that Eternity is to the Everlasting, namely,
a sort of time-like movement and interval co-extensive with their existence. This, however,
is all I must now say about God; for the present is not a suitable time, as my present subject
is not the doctrine of God, but that of the Incarnation. But when I say God, I mean Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. For Godhead is neither diffused beyond these, so as to bring in a mob
of gods; nor yet is it bounded by a smaller compass than these, so as to condemn us for a
poverty-stricken conception of Deity; either Judaizing to save the Monarchia, or falling into
heathenism by the multitude of our gods. For the evil on either side is the same, though
found in contrary directions. This then is the Holy of Holies,3861 which is hidden even from
the Seraphim, and is glorified with a thrice repeated Holy,3862 meeting in one ascription of

John x. 15.

3861 The Holy of Holies here means the Holy Trinity.

3862 The reference is to the Ter Sanctus or Triumphal Hymn, which is found in every Liturgy. The previous

writer referred to is thought by some to be S. Athanasius, but by others S. Dionysius the Areopagite, who has

some words on this point in his treatise De Coelest. Hier., c. 7. But the most competent scholars deny the au-

thenticity of the works attributed to S. Dionysius, and place them from one hundred to one hundred and fifty

years later than S. Gregory's time.

On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.

the Title Lord and God, as one of our predecessors has most beautifully and loftily pointed
out.

IX. But since this movement of self-contemplation alone could not satisfy Goodness,
but Good must be poured out and go forth beyond Itself to multiply the objects of Its beneficence, for this was essential to the highest Goodness, He first conceived the Heavenly and
Angelic Powers. And this conception was a work fulfilled by His Word, and perfected by
His Spirit. And so the secondary Splendours came into being, as the Ministers of the Primary
Splendour; whether we are to conceive of them as intelligent Spirits, or as Fire of an immaterial and incorruptible kind, or as some other nature approaching this as near as may be. 
I should like to say that they were incapable of movement in the direction of evil, and susceptible only of the movement of good, as being about God, and illumined with the first
rays from God-for earthly beings have but the second illumination; but I am obliged to
stop short of saying that, and to conceive and speak of them only as difficult to move because
of him,3863 who for his splendour was called Lucifer, but became and is called Darkness
through his pride; and the apostate hosts who are subject to him, creators of evil3864 by their
revolt against good and our inciters.

X. Thus, then, and for these reasons, He gave being to the world of thought, as far as I
can reason upon these matters, and estimate great things in my own poor language. Then
when His first creation was in good order, He conceives a second world, material and visible;
and this a system and compound of earth and sky, and all that is in the midst of them-an
admirable creation indeed, when we look at the fair form of every part, but yet more worthy
of admiration when we consider the harmony and the unison of the whole, and how each
part fits in with every other, in fair order, and all with the whole, tending to the perfect
completion of the world as a Unit. This was to shew that He could call into being, not only
a Nature akin to Himself, but also one altogether alien to Himself. For akin to Deity are
those natures which are intellectual, and only to be comprehended by mind; but all of which
sense can take cognisance are utterly alien to It; and of these the furthest removed are all
those which are entirely destitute of soul and of power of motion. But perhaps some one
of those who are too festive and impetuous may say, What has all this to do with us? Spur

S. Thomas Aquinas (Summa I., qu. 63, art. 7) gives reasons for thinking that Satan was originally the

highest of all the angelic hosts. This, however, is an opinion in which many high authorities differ from him. 

At any rate, Satan as Lucifer must have held a very high place.

Evil, says Nicetas here, has no positive existence, but is the negation of good. "The faculties of mind

and body which are used in a sinful action are indeed things, and are the creatures of God; but the sin itself is

not a thing, and consequently not a creature. God is indeed the Author of all that is, of every substance; but sin

is not a substance, and is not. It is a declination from substance and from being, and not a part of it." (Mozley,

Treatise on the Augustinian doctrine of predestination.)

On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.

your horse to the goal. Talk to us about the Festival, and the reasons for our being here today. Yes, this is what I am about to do, although I have begun at a somewhat previous point,
being compelled to do so by love, and by the needs of my argument.

XI. Mind, then, and sense, thus distinguished from each other, had remained within
their own boundaries, and bore in themselves the magnificence of the Creator-Word, silent
praisers3865 and thrilling heralds of His mighty work. Not yet was there any mingling of
both, nor any mixtures of these opposites, tokens of a greater Wisdom and Generosity in
the creation of natures; nor as yet were the whole riches of Goodness made known. Now
the Creator-Word, determining to exhibit this, and to produce a single living being out of
both-the visible and the invisible creations, I mean-fashions Man; and taking a body from
already existing matter, and placing in it a Breath taken from Himself3866 which the Word
knew to be an intelligent soul and the Image of God, as a sort of second world. He placed
him, great in littleness3867 on the earth; a new Angel, a mingled worshipper, fully initiated
into the visible creation, but only partially into the intellectual; King of all upon earth, but
subject to the King above; earthly and heavenly; temporal and yet immortal; visible and yet
intellectual; half-way between greatness and lowliness; in one person combining spirit and
flesh; spirit, because of the favour bestowed on him; flesh, because of the height to which
he had been raised; the one that he might continue to live and praise his Benefactor, the
other that he might suffer, and by suffering be put in remembrance, and corrected if he became proud of his greatness. A living creature trained here, and then moved elsewhere;
and, to complete the mystery, deified by its inclination to God. For to this, I think, tends
that Light of Truth which we here possess but in measure, that we should both see and experience the Splendour of God, which is worthy of Him Who made us, and will remake us
again after a loftier fashion.

XII. This being He placed in Paradise, whatever the Paradise may have been, having
honoured him with the gift of Free Will (in order that God might belong to him as the result
of his choice, no less than to Him who had implanted the seeds of it), to till the immortal
plants, by which is meant perhaps the Divine Conceptions, both the simpler and the more
perfect; naked in his simplicity and inartificial life, and without any covering or screen; for
it was fitting that he who was from the beginning should be such. Also He gave him a Law,
as a material for his Free Will to act upon. This Law was a Commandment as to what plants
he might partake of, and which one he might not touch. This latter was the Tree of Knowledge; not, however, because it was evil from the beginning when planted; nor was it forbidden
because God grudged it to us...Let not the enemies of God wag their tongues in that direction,

Ps. xix. 1, 3.

3866 Gen. ii. 7.

Sc. a microcosm.

On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.

or imitate the Serpent...But it would have been good if partaken of at the proper time, for
the tree was, according to my theory, Contemplation, upon which it is only safe for those
who have reached maturity of habit to enter; but which is not good for those who are still
somewhat simple and greedy in their habit; just as solid food is not good for those who are
yet tender, and have need of milk.3868 But when through the Devil's malice and the woman's
caprice, to which she succumbed as the more tender, and which she brought to bear upon
the man, as she was the more apt to persuade, alas for my weakness! (for that of my first
father was mine), he forgot the Commandment which had been given to him;3869 he yielded
to the baleful fruit; and for his sin he was banished, at once from the Tree of Life, and from
Paradise, and from God; and put on the coats of skins...that is, perhaps, the coarser flesh,
both mortal and contradictory. This was the first thing that he learnt-his own shame;3870
and he hid himself from God. Yet here too he makes a gain, namely death, and the cutting
off of sin, in order that evil may not be immortal. Thus his punishment is changed into a
mercy; for it is in mercy, I am persuaded, that God inflicts punishment.

XIII. And having been first chastened by many means (because his sins were many,
whose root of evil sprang up through divers causes and at sundry times), by word, by law,
by prophets, by benefits, by threats, by plagues, by waters, by fires, by wars, by victories, by
defeats, by signs in heaven and signs in the air and in the earth and in the sea, by unexpected
changes of men, of cities, of nations (the object of which was the destruction of wickedness),
at last he needed a stronger remedy, for his diseases were growing worse; mutual slaughters,
adulteries, perjuries, unnatural crimes, and that first and last of all evils, idolatry and the
transfer of worship from the Creator to the Creatures. As these required a greater aid, so
also they obtained a greater. And that was that the Word of God Himself-Who is before
all worlds, the Invisible, the Incomprehensible, the Bodiless, Beginning of Beginning,3871
the Light of Light, the Source of Life and Immortality, the Image of the Archetypal Beauty,
the immovable Seal, the unchangeable Image, the Father's Definition3872 and Word, came

3868 Heb. v. 12.

3869 Gen. iii. 5.

3870 Rom. i. 22-31.

3871 Cf. Light of Light begotten. Christ our Lord is called "The Beginning of the Creation of God, because

by Him all things were made; and He is of the Beginning, inasmuch as God the Father is the Unoriginate Principle

of all, and the Origin and Fount of Godhead. The Scholiast here refers to Ps. cx. 3, which in the Vulgate and

LXX. runs "With Thee is the Beginning in the day of Thy Power."

3872 Cf. Theol.: IV. xx., where S. Gregory says "Perhaps this Relation might be compared to that between

the Definition and the thing defined." Nicetas remarks that, just as the definition declares the nature of the

defined, so the Personal Word shows forth the Nature of the Father. Suidas (in voce ὃρος) says that the phrase

is used to show the Unity of Nature between the Father and the Son. It is not, however, of frequent occurrence.

On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.

to His own Image, and took on Him flesh for the sake of our flesh, and mingled Himself
with an intelligent soul for my soul's sake, purifying like by like; and in all points except sin
was made man. Conceived by the Virgin,3873 who first in body and soul was purified by
the Holy Ghost3874 (for it was needful both that Childbearing should be honoured, and that
Virginity should receive a higher honour), He came forth then as God with that which He
had assumed, One Person in two Natures, Flesh and Spirit, of which the latter deified the
former.3875 O new commingling; O strange conjunction; the Self-Existent comes into being,
the Uncreate is created, That which cannot be contained is contained, by the intervention
of an intellectual soul, mediating between the Deity and the corporeity of the flesh. And
He Who gives riches becomes poor, for He assumes the poverty of my flesh, that I may assume the richness of His Godhead. He that is full empties Himself, for He empties Himself
of His glory for a short while, that I may have a share in His Fulness. What is the riches of
His Goodness? What is this mystery that is around me? I had a share in the image; I did
not keep it; He partakes of my flesh that He may both save the image and make the flesh
immortal. He communicates a second Communion far more marvellous than the first,
inasmuch as then He imparted the better Nature, whereas now Himself partakes of the
worse. This is more godlike than the former action, this is loftier in the eyes of all men of
understanding.

XIV. To this what have those cavillers to say, those bitter reasoners about Godhead,
those detractors of all that is praiseworthy, those darkeners of light, uncultured in respect
of wisdom, for whom Christ died in vain, those unthankful creatures, the work of the Evil
One? Do you turn this benefit into a reproach to God? Wilt thou deem Him little on this
account, that He humbled Himself for thee; because the Good Shepherd,3876 He who lays
down His life for His sheep, came to seek for that which had strayed upon the mountains
and the hills, on which thou wast then sacrificing, and found the wanderer; and having
found it,3877 took it upon His shoulders-on which He also took the Wood of the Cross;
and having taken it, brought it back to the higher life; and having carried it back, numbered
it amongst those who had never strayed. Because He lighted a candle-His own Flesh-and
swept the house, cleansing the world from sin; and sought the piece of money, the Royal
Image that was covered up by passions. And He calls together His Angel friends on the
finding of the coin, and makes them sharers in His joy,3878 whom He had made to share

Luke i. 35.

S. Gregory does not seem to have been aware of the doctrine of the "Immaculate Conception."

See note on In Sancta Lumina, c. xiv.

John x. 11.

Luke xv. 4, sq.

Ib. xv. 8, 10.

On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.

also the secret of the Incarnation? Because on the candle of the Forerunner there follows
the light that exceeds in brightness; and to the Voice the Word succeeds; and to the Bridegroom's friend the Bridegroom; to him that prepared for the Lord a peculiar people,
cleansing them by water in preparation for the Spirit? Dost thou reproach God with all
this? Dost thou on this account deem Him lessened, because He girds Himself with a towel
and washes His disciples' feet, and shows that humiliation is the best road to exaltation? 
Because for the soul that was bent to the ground He humbles Himself, that He may raise up
with Himself the soul that was tottering to a fall under a weight of sin? Why dost thou not
also charge upon Him as a crime the fact that He eats with Publicans and at Publicans'
tables,3879 and that He makes disciples of Publicans, that He too may gain somewhat...and
what?...the salvation of sinners. If so, we must blame the physician for stooping over sufferings, and enduring evil odours that he may give health to the sick; or one who as the Law
commands bent down into a ditch to save a beast that had fallen into it.3880

XV. He was sent, but as man, for He was of a twofold Nature; for He was wearied, and
hungered, and was thirsty, and was in an agony, and shed tears, according to the nature of
a corporeal being. And if the expression be also used of Him as God, the meaning is that
the Father's good pleasure is to be considered a Mission, for to this He refers all that concerns
Himself; both that He may honour the Eternal Principle, and because He will not be taken
to be an antagonistic God. And whereas it is written both that He was betrayed, and also
that He gave Himself up3881 and that He was raised up by the Father, and taken up into
heaven; and on the other hand, that He raised Himself and went up; the former statement
of each pair refers to the good pleasure of the Father, the latter to His own Power. Are you
then to be allowed to dwell upon all that humiliates Him, while passing over all that exalts
Him, and to count on your side the fact that He suffered, but to leave out of the account the
fact that it was of His own will? See what even now the Word has to suffer. By one set He

Luke v. 29.

S. Gregory is referring to the provision of the Law, which orders a man, if he see his friend's or his enemy's

ox or ass fallen under a burden or going astray, to lend assistance; but the terms of his reference are rather to

the reasoning of our Lord with the Pharisees about the Sabbath. Luke xiii. 15 and xiv. 5.

3881 Cf. ἐν τῇ νυκτὶ ἐν ᾗ παρεδίδοτο, μᾶλλον δε ἑαυτὸν παρεδίδου. Canon of Liturgy of S. Mark (Swainson

p. 517). Ea nocte qua tradidit seipsum. Lit. Copt. S. Basil (Ib.). Cum statuisset se tradere. Coptic S. Basil

(Hammond, p. 209) Rot. Vatic. and Cod. Ross. of S. Mark, has only τ. ν. ᾗ ἑαυτ, παρεδ. (Swainson, 50); so too

S. Basil (Ib., 81) in Cod. B. M., 22749 and Barberini of S. Chrys. (Ib., 91); but the whole expression is in Chrys.

(cent. xi., ib., 129) and Greek S. James (78. 272-3), but Syriac S. James has "in qua nocte tradendus erat." 

(Canon Univ., Aethiop. Hammond, 258). Pridie quam patereturis the form in the Canon of the Roman, Ambro-

sian, and Sarum Missals; but the Mozarabic, which is largely of an Eastern character, has in qua nocte tradebatur. 

(Hammond, 333).

On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.

is honoured as God, but is confused with the Father,3882 by another He is dishonoured as
mere flesh3883 and severed from the Godhead. With which of them will He be most angry,

The Sabellian heresy may be briefly described as the doctrine of One God exercising three offices, as

opposed to the Catholic Faith of One God in three Persons. Sabellius himself was a Priest of the Libyan Penta-

polis, who at Rome in the time of Pope Zephyrinus embraced the heresy of Notus, which maintained that God

the Father suffered for us on the cross in the form of Christ. His followers, who openly declared themselves

first about a.d. 357, thought that God, to Whom as the Source of all things the name of Father is given, is called

the Son when He united Himself to the humanity of Jesus for the work of our redemption; and in like manner

He is the Holy Spirit when manifested for the work of sanctification. Sabellius was condemned by a Council

held at Rome, probably in 258; again at Nicaea, and again at Constantinople, where Sabellian Baptism was pro-

nounced invalid.

3883 Arianism was the result of a strong opposition to Sabellianism, coupled with a misunderstanding of the

argument against it. There was, no doubt, a danger of falling into the opposite error of Tritheism, to avoid

which Arianism "divided the Substance" and virtually-and in the end explicity-denied the Godhead of our

Lord Jesus Christ. Arius was a Priest of Alexandria, and it was there that he began to publish his opinions, in

the early years of the Fourth Century (318); but Newman traces the origin of the heresy to Antioch and its

Judaizing tendency. At a meeting of the clergy in Alexandria the Bishop, S. Alexander, gave an address on the

coeternity, and coequality of the Father and the Son, and used the expression τὴν αὐτὴν οὐσίαν ἔχειν, that They

had the same Substance. Arius protested against this as a Sabellian statement, and used the words κτίσμα

(creature) and ποίημα (a thing made) of the Son, adding the sentence which became so famous, ἦν ὅτε οὐκ

ἦν,-there was a time when the Son did not exist. Having ineffectually tried private remonstrance, S. Alexander

brought the matter in 321 before his Provincial Synod, in which were present about 100 Egyptian and Pentapol-

itan Bishops, who after giving the matter a patient hearing, excommunicated Arius and his principal adherents. 

But it was too late to undo the mischief. The heresy spread widely, and the whole Eastern Church was stirred

by the controversy. At last a great Council of the whole Church met at Nicaea in 325, summoned by the Emperor;

and there the heresy was unequivocally condemned, and the great Creed propounded with its watchword, the

Homoousion. The false teaching had however struck its roots deep and wide; and though now banned by the

anathema of the Church, it was long in dying; and indeed at one time, it seemed as if-humanly speaking-it

must swamp the whole Catholic Church. Under various forms the Semi-Arians who claimed to differ from the

faith of Nicaea only by a single letter, the Aetians and Eunomians, who went to the furthest extreme of the

Falsehood (Anomoeans), and many others, the heresy spread far and wide: and when S. Gregory came to Con-

stantinople there was not one Catholic Church or Priest to be found in the place, and only a few scattered folk

who still held to the Faith of the Consubstantial. Gregory's wonderful discourses however came to their aid,

and partly under his presidency was held the Second Oecumenical Synod, which condemned the heresy of

Macedonius, a still further development of Arianism, which denied also the Deity of the Holy Ghost. Arianism

survived for another two centuries among the Goths and Vandals, the Burgundians and Lombards; but it never

rose again as a power in the Church.

On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.

or rather, which shall He forgive, those who injuriously confound Him or those who divide
Him? For the former ought to have distinguished, and the latter to have united Him; the
one in number, the other in Godhead. Stumblest Thou at His flesh? So did the Jews. Or
dost thou call Him a Samaritan, and...I will not say the rest. Dost thou disbelieve in His
Godhead? This did not even the demons, O thou who art less believing than demons and
more stupid than Jews. Those did perceive that the name of Son implies equality of rank;
these did know that He who drove them out was God, for they were convinced of it by their
own experience. But you will admit neither the equality nor the Godhead. It would have
been better for you to have been either a Jew or a demoniac (if I may utter an absurdity),
than in uncircumcision and in sound health to be so wicked and ungodly in your attitude
of mind.

XVI. A little later on you will see Jesus submitting to be purified in the River Jordan
for my Purification, or rather, sanctifying the waters by His Purification (for indeed He had
no need of purification Who taketh away the sin of the world) and the heavens cleft asunder,
and witness borne to him by the Spirit That is of one nature with Him;3884 you shall see
Him tempted and conquering and served by Angels,3885 and healing every sickness3886 and
every disease,3887 and giving life to the dead (O that He would give life to you who are dead
because of your heresy), and driving out demons,3888 sometimes Himself, sometimes by
his disciples; and feeding vast multitudes with a few loaves;3889 and walking dryshod upon
seas;3890 and being betrayed and crucified, and crucifying with Himself my sin; offered as
a Lamb, and offering as a Priest; as a Man buried in the grave, and as God rising again; and
then ascending, and to come again in His own glory. Why what a multitude of high festivals
there are in each of the mysteries of the Christ; all of which have one completion, namely,
my perfection and return to the first condition of Adam.

XVII. Now then I pray you accept His Conception, and leap before Him; if not like
John from the womb,3891 yet like David, because of the resting of the Ark.3892 Revere the

3884 Matt. iii. 13, 17.

Ib. iv. 1-11.

Ib. iv. 23.

3887 Nicetas distinguishes between Νόσος and Μαλακία, saying that the first is actual disease, and the second

the premonitory failing of health which prognosticates a disease. And, so he says, in reference to the soul, Νόσος 

is actual sin, while Μαλακία is the relaxation of the will which leads and assents to actual sin.

Ib. ix. 33.

Ib. ix. 14.

Ib. ix. 25.

Luke i. 41.

2 Sam. vi. 14.

On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.

enrolment on account of which thou wast written in heaven, and adore the Birth by which
thou wast loosed from the chains of thy birth,3893 and honour little Bethlehem, which hath
led thee back to Paradise; and worship the manger through which thou, being without sense,
wast fed by the Word. Know as Isaiah bids thee, thine Owner, like the ox, and like the ass
thy Master's crib;3894 if thou be one of those who are pure and lawful food, and who chew
the cud of the word and are fit for sacrifice. Or if thou art one of those who are as yet unclean
and uneatable and unfit for sacrifice, and of the gentile portion, run with the Star, and bear
thy Gifts with the Magi, gold and frankincense and myrrh,3895 as to a King, and to God,
and to One Who is dead for thee. With Shepherds glorify Him;3896 with Angels join in
chorus; with Archangels sing hymns. Let this Festival be common to the powers in heaven
and to the powers upon earth.3897 For I am persuaded that the Heavenly Hosts join in our
exultation and keep high Festival with us to-day3898...because they love men, and they love
God just like those whom David introduces after the Passion ascending with Christ3899 and
coming to meet Him, and bidding one another to lift up the gates.

XVIII. One thing connected with the Birth of Christ I would have you hate...the murder
of the infants by Herod.3900 Or rather you must venerate this too, the Sacrifice of the same
age as Christ, slain before the Offering of the New Victim. If He flees into Egypt,3901 joyfully
become a companion of His exile. It is a grand thing to share the exile of the persecuted
Christ. If He tarry long in Egypt, call Him out of Egypt by a reverent worship of Him there. 
Travel without fault through every stage and faculty of the Life of Christ. Be purified; be
circumcised; strip off the veil which has covered thee from thy birth. After this teach in the
Temple, and drive out the sacrilegious traders.3902 Submit to be stoned if need be, for well
I wot thou shalt be hidden from those who cast the stones; thou shalt escape even through
the midst of them, like God.3903 If thou be brought before Herod, answer not for the most
part.3904 He will respect thy silence more than most people's long speeches. If thou be

Luke ii. 1-5.

I.e., original sin (Ps. li. 5).

Isa. i. 3.

3896 Matt. ii.

Luke ii. 14, 15.

3898 The Liturgy.

Ps. xxiv.

3900 Matt. ii. 16.

Ib. v. 13.

John ii. 15.

Ib. viii. 59.

Luke xxiii. 9.

On the Theophany, or Birthday of Christ.

scourged,3905 ask for what they leave out. Taste gall for the taste's sake;3906 drink vinegar;3907
seek for spittings; accept blows, be crowned with thorns,3908 that is, with the hardness of
the godly life; put on the purple robe, take the reed in hand, and receive mock worship from
those who mock at the truth; lastly, be crucified with Him, and share His Death and Burial
gladly, that thou mayest rise with Him, and be glorified with Him and reign with Him. 
Look at and be looked at by the Great God, Who in Trinity is worshipped and glorified, and
Whom we declare to be now set forth as clearly before you as the chains of our flesh allow,
in Jesus Christ our Lord, to Whom be the glory for ever. Amen.

John xix. 1.

3906 Matt. xxvii. 34.

John xix. 29.

3908 Matt. xxvi. 67, and xxvii. 28.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

Oration XXXIX.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

The Oration on the Holy Lights was preached on the Festival of the Epiphany 381, and
was followed the next day by that on Baptism. In the Eastern Church this Festival is regarded
as more particularly the commemoration of our Lord's Baptism, and is accordingly one of the
great days for the solemn ministration of the Sacrament. It is generally called Theophania,
and the Gospel in the Liturgy is S. Matthew iii. 13-17. The Sunday in the Octave is called
μετὰ τὰ φῶτα (After The Lights), pointing to a time when the Feast was known as the "Holy
Lights," as seems to have been the case in S. Gregory's day. This name is derived from Baptism,
which was often in ancient days called Illumination, in reference to which name (derived from
the spiritual grace of the Sacrament) lighted torches or candles were carried by the neophytes. 
It would appear that the solemnites of the Festival lasted two days, of which the second was
devoted to the solemn conferring of the Sacrament. Accordingly we find two Orations belonging
to the Festival. In the first, delivered on the Day itself he dwells more especially on the Feast
and the Mystery of our Lord's Baptism therein commemorated; and proceeds to speak of the
different kinds of Baptism, of which he enumerates Five, viz.:-

1. The figurative Baptism of Israel by Moses in the cloud and in the Sea.
2. The preparatory Baptism of repentance ministered by S. John the Baptist.
3. The spiritual Baptism of water and the Holy Ghost given us by our Lord.
4. The glorious Baptism of Martyrdom.
5. The painful Baptism of Penance.
In speaking of this last he takes occasion to refute the extreme rigorism of the followers of

Novatus, who denied absolution to certain classes of sins committed after Baptism.

In the second Oration, delivered next day, he dwells on the Sacrament of Baptism and its
spiritual effects; and takes occasion to reprove the then still prevalent practice of deferring
Baptism till the near approach of death. He likewise dwells on the truth that the validity and
spiritual effect of the Sacrament is wholly independent of the rank or worthiness of the Priest
who may minister it; and he concludes with a sketch of the obligations which its reception involves, with a very valuable exposition of the Creed, and of the Ceremonies which accompanied
the administration of the Sacrament.

I. Again My Jesus, and again a mystery; not deceitful nor disorderly, nor belonging to
Greek error or drunkenness (for so I call their solemnities, and so I think will every man of
sound sense); but a mystery lofty and divine, and allied to the Glory above. For the Holy
Day of the Lights, to which we have come, and which we are celebrating to-day, has for its
origin the Baptism of my Christ, the True Light That lighteneth every man that cometh into

Oration on the Holy Lights.

the world,3909 and effecteth my purification, and assists that light which we received from
the beginning from Him from above, but which we darkened and confused by sin.

II. Therefore listen to the Voice of God, which sounds so exceeding clearly to me, who
am both disciple and master of these mysteries, as would to God it may sound to you; I Am
The Light Of The World.3910 Therefore approach ye to Him and be enlightened, and let
not your faces be ashamed,3911 being signed with the true Light. It is a season of new
birth,3912 let us be born again. It is a time of reformation, let us receive again the first
Adam.3913 Let us not remain what we are, but let us become what we once were. The Light
Shineth In Darkness,3914 in this life and in the flesh, and is chased by the darkness, but is
not overtaken by it:-I mean the adverse power leaping up in its shamelessness against the
visible Adam, but encountering God and being defeated;-in order that we, putting away
the darkness, may draw near to the Light, and may then become perfect Light, the children
of perfect Light. See the grace of this Day; see the power of this mystery. Are you not lifted
up from the earth? Are you not clearly placed on high, being exalted by our voice and
meditation? and you will be placed much higher when the Word shall have prospered the
course of my words.

III. Is there any such among the shadowy purifications of the Law, aiding as it did with
temporary sprinklings, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean;3915 or do the
gentiles celebrate any such thing in their mysteries, every ceremony and mystery of which
to me is nonsense, and a dark invention of demons, and a figment of an unhappy mind,
aided by time, and hidden by fable? For what they worship as true, they veil as mythical. 
But if these things are true, they ought not to be called myths, but to be proved not to be
shameful;3916 and if they are false, they ought not to be objects of wonder; nor ought people
so inconsiderately to hold the most contrary opinions about the same thing, as if they were
playing in the market-place with boys or really ill-disposed men, not engaged in discussion
with men of sense, and worshippers of the Word, though despisers of this artificial plausibility.

IV. We are not concerned in these mysteries with birth of Zeus and thefts of the Cretan
Tyrant3917 (though the Greeks may be displeased at such a title for him), nor with the name

John i. 9.

John viii. 12.

Ps. xxxiv. 5.

John iii. 3.

I.e., the condition of man before the fall.

Ib. i. 5.

3915 This is the same word which in S. John i. 5., is rendered by "comprehend."

3916 Heb. vii. 13.

I.e. Zeus, who was said by some to be a deified man, once tyrant of Crete, where his tomb was shown.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

of Curetes, and the armed dances, which were to hide the wailings of a weeping god, that
he might escape from his father's hate. For indeed it would be a strange thing that he who
was swallowed as a stone should be made to weep as a child.3918 Nor are we concerned with
Phrygian mutilations and flutes and Corybantes,3919 and all the ravings of men concerning
Rhea, consecrating people to the mother of the gods, and being initiated into such ceremonies
as befit the mother of such gods as these. Nor have we any carrying away of the Maiden,3920
nor wandering of Demeter, nor her intimacy with Celei and Triptolemi and Dragons; nor
her doings and sufferings...for I am ashamed to bring into daylight that ceremony of the
night, and to make a sacred mystery of obscenity. Eleusis knows these things, and so do
those who are eyewitnesses of what is there guarded by silence, and well worthy of it. Nor
is our commemoration one of Dionysus, and the thigh that travailed with an incomplete
birth, as before a head had travailed with another;3921 nor of the hermaphrodite god, nor a
chorus of the drunken and enervated host; nor of the folly of the Thebans which honours
him; nor the thunderbolt of Semele which they adore. Nor is it the harlot mysteries of
Aphrodite, who, as they themselves admit, was basely born and basely honoured; nor have
we here Phalli and Ithyphalli,3922 shameful both in form and action; nor Taurian massacres
of strangers;3923 nor blood of Laconian youths shed upon the altars, as they scourged

3918 The allusion is to the birth of Zeus. Kronos the Titan, father of the gods, was the husband of Rhea, who

bore him children. But an oracle having declared that Kronos should be dethroned by his children, he swallowed

them immediately after they were born. Rhea, however, on the birth of Zeus, aided by the Curetes, a wild band

of Cretan Priests, concealed the child, and substituted a stone, which Kronos swallowed in his haste without

perceiving the difference. The stone made him very sick, and he vomited forth the children whom he had pre-

viously swallowed; and by them and Zeus the prophecy was fulfilled. Kronos was deposed and imprisoned in

Tartarus.

3919 There was a temple of Rhea in Phrygia, in which at her festivals people mutilated themselves to do her

honour. The flutes alluded to served to turn the thoughts of the sufferers from the pain of the operation. The

Corybantes were the ministers of the goddess, who led the wild orgies of her worship. It is believed that there

is an allusion to this practice of self-mutilation in Galat. v. 12. So at least S. Jerome, S. Ambrose, and all the

Greek Fathers take the passage. S. Thomas Aquinas, understanding the word in the same sense, applies it mys-

tically; and Estius, who here follows Erasmus, refers the "cutting off" merely to excommunication, a sense which

he calls "Apostolico sensu dignior," though why "dignior" it is not easy to see. Yet he acknowledges that those

who interpret it literally do so "non immerito."

3920 The mythus of the Rape of Persephone and its consequences.

3921 Dionysus was said to have been born from the thigh of Zeus, as Athene to have sprung full-grown and

armed at all points from his head.

3922 These myths and practices are too shameful to be described.

See the Iphigenia In Tauris of Euripides.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

themselves with the whips;3924 and in this case alone use their courage badly, who honour
a goddess, and her a virgin. For these same people both honour effeminacy, and worship
boldness.

V. And where will you place the butchery of Pelops,3925 which feasted hungry gods,
that bitter and inhuman hospitality? Where the horrible and dark spectres of Hecate, and
the underground puerilities and sorceries of Trophonius, or the babblings of the Dodonaean
Oak, or the trickeries of the Delphian tripod, or the prophetic draught of Castalia, which
could prophesy anything, except their own being brought to silence?3926 Nor is it the sacrificial art of Magi, and their entrail forebodings, nor the Chaldaean astronomy and horoscopes,
comparing our lives with the movements of the heavenly bodies, which cannot know even
what they are themselves, or shall be. Nor are these Thracian orgies, from which the word
Worship (θρησκεία) is said to be derived; nor rites and mysteries of Orpheus, whom the
Greeks admired so much for his wisdom that they devised for him a lyre which draws all
things by its music. Nor the tortures of Mithras3927 which it is just that those who can endure
to be initiated into such things should suffer; nor the manglings of Osiris,3928 another
calamity honoured by the Egyptians; nor the ill-fortunes of Isis3929 and the goats more
venerable than the Mendesians, and the stall of Apis,3930 the calf that luxuriated in the folly
of the Memphites, nor all those honours with which they outrage the Nile, while themselves
proclaiming it in song to be the Giver of fruits and corn, and the measurer of happiness by
its cubits.3931

It was a custom of the Spartans that at their great festival of Artemis the youths who were just coming

of age (Ephebi) should scourge themselves cruelly on her altar in honour of the goddess, and to prove their

manhood.

3925 The gods came to dine with Tantalus, and he, to do them honour, boiled his son Pelops for their food. 

They, however, found it out, and restored him to life; not, however, before Demeter had unwittingly eaten his

shoulder, in the place of which they substituted one of ivory.

S. Jerome, commenting on Isaiah xli. 22, says: "Why could they never predict anything concerning

Christ and His Apostles, or the ruin and destruction of their own temples? If then they could not foretell their

own destruction, how can they foretell anything good or bad?"

3927 These Mysteries were of Persian origin, connected it is said with the worship of the Sun. The neophytes

were made to undergo twelve different kinds of torture.

3928 The Egyptian Mysteries.

Zeus fell in love with Isis, and carried her off in the form of a heifer. Here, discovering the fraud, sent

a gadfly, which drove Isis mad.

3930 Apis, the sacred bull, worshipped at Memphis.

i.e., that the prosperity of the country was proportionate to the annual rise of the River.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

VI. I pass over the honours they pay to reptiles, and their worship of vile things, each
of which has its peculiar cultus and festival, and all share in a common devilishness; so that,
if they were absolutely bound to be ungodly, and to fall away from honouring God, and to
be led astray to idols and works of art and things made with hands, men of sense could not
imprecate anything worse upon themselves than that they might worship just such things,
and honour them in just such a way; that, as Paul says, they might receive in themselves
that recompense of their error which was meet,3932 in the very objects of their worship; not
so much honouring them as suffering dishonour by them; abominable because of their error,
and yet more abominable from the vileness of the objects of their adoration and worship;
so that they should be even more without understanding than the objects of their worship;
being as excessively foolish as the latter are vile.

VII. Well, let these things be the amusement of the children of the Greeks and of the
demons to whom their folly is due, who turn aside the honour of God to themselves, and
divide men in various ways in pursuit of shameful thoughts and fancies, ever since they
drove us away from the Tree of Life, by means of the Tree of Knowledge unseasonably3933
and improperly imparted to us, and then assailed us as now weaker than before; carrying
clean away the mind, which is the ruling power in us, and opening a door to the passions. 
For, being of a nature envious and man-hating, or rather having become so by their own
wickedness, they could neither endure that we who were below should attain to that which
is above, having themselves fallen from above upon the earth; nor that such a change in
their glory and their first natures should have taken place. This is the meaning of their
persecution of the creature. For this God's Image was outraged; and as we did not like to
keep the Commandments,3934 we were given over to the independence of our error. And
as we erred we were disgraced by the objects of our worship. For there was not only this
calamity, that we who were made for good works3935 to the glory and praise of our Maker,
and to imitate God as far as might be, were turned into a den of all sorts of passions, which
cruelly devour and consume the inner man; but there was this further evil, that man actually

3932 Rom. i. 27.

cf. Orat. in Theoph. c. 12. The explanation seems to be, that the "Knowledge of good and evil" was a

necessary part of the development of man's intellect, but that a premature attempt to attain it per saltum instead

of by a gradual progress would prove fatal. Had human nature gone through its originally intended educational

stages, it might have reached to the knowledge of evil without having that knowledge alloyed and deteriorated

by the experience of evil, but might have known it, as God does, without taint. (Blount, Ann. Bible on Gen. ii.

7.)

Ibid. i. 28.

Eph. ii. 10; Phil. i. 11.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

made gods the advocates of his passions, so that sin might be reckoned not only irresponsible,
but even divine, taking refuge in the objects of his worship as his apology.

VIII. But since to us grace has been given to flee from superstitious error and to be
joined to the truth and to serve the living and true God, and to rise above creation, passing
by all that is subject to time and to first motion; let us look at and reason upon God and
things divine in a manner corresponding to this Grace given us. But let us begin our discussion of them from the most fitting point. And the most fitting is, as Solomon laid down for
us; us; The beginning of wisdom, he says, is to get wisdom.3936 And what this is he tells us;
the beginning of wisdom is fear.3937 For we must not begin with contemplation and leave
off with fear (for an unbridled contemplation would perhaps push us over a precipice), but
we must be grounded and purified and so to say made light by fear, and thus be raised to
the height. For where fear is there is keeping of commandments; and where there is keeping
of commandments there is purifying of the flesh, that cloud which covers the soul and suffers
it not to see the Divine Ray. And where there is purifying there is Illumination; and Illumination is the satisfying of desire to those who long for the greatest things, or the Greatest
Thing, or That Which surpasses all greatness.

IX. Wherefore we must purify ourselves first, and then approach this converse with
the Pure; unless we would have the same experience as Israel,3938 who could not endure the
glory of the face of Moses, and therefore asked for a veil;3939 or else would feel and say with
Manoah "We are undone O wife, we have seen God,"3940 although it was God only in his
fancy; or like Peter would send Jesus out of the boat,3941 as being ourselves unworthy of
such a visit; and when I say Peter, I am speaking of the man who walked upon the waves;3942
or like Paul would be stricken in eyes,3943 as he was before he was cleansed from the guilt
of his persecution, when he conversed with Him Whom he was persecuting-or rather with
a short flash of That great Light; or like the Centurion3944 would seek for healing, but would
not, through a praiseworthy fear, receive the Healer into his house. Let each one of us also

Prov. iv. 7.

Ib. i. 7 sq.

Exod. xxxiv. 30.

2 Cor. iii. 7.

Judg. xiii. 23.

Luke v. 8.

3942 Matt. xiv. 29.

3943 Acts ix. 3-8.

3944 Matt. viii. 8.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

speak so, as long as he is still uncleansed, and is a Centurion still, commanding many in
wickedness, and serving in the army of Caesar, the World-ruler of those who are being
dragged down; "I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof." But when he
shall have looked upon Jesus, though he be little of stature like Zaccheus3945 of old, and
climb up on the top of the sycamore tree by mortifying his members which are upon the
earth,3946 and having risen above the body of humiliation, then he shall receive the Word,
and it shall be said to him, This day is salvation come to this house.3947 Then let him lay
hold on the salvation, and bring forth fruit more perfectly, scattering and pouring forth
rightly that which as a publican he wrongly gathered.

X. For the same Word is on the one hand terrible through its nature to those who are
unworthy, and on the other through its loving kindness can be received by those who are
thus prepared, who have driven out the unclean and worldly spirit from their souls, and
have swept and adorned their own souls by self-examination, and have not left them idle
or without employment, so as again to be occupied with greater armament by the seven
spirits of wickedness...the same number as are reckoned of virtue (for that which is hardest
to fight against calls for the sternest efforts)...but besides fleeing from evil, practise virtue,
making Christ entirely, or at any rate to the greatest extent possible, to dwell within them,
so that the power of evil cannot meet with any empty place to fill it again with himself, and
make the last state of that man worse than the first, by the greater energy of his assault, and
the greater strength and impregnability of the fortress. But when, having guarded our soul
with every care, and having appointed goings up in our heart,3948 and broken up our fallow
ground,3949 and sown unto righteousness,3950 as David and Solomon and Jeremiah bid us,
let us enlighten ourselves with the light of knowledge, and then let us speak of the Wisdom
of God that hath been hid in a mystery,3951 and enlighten others. Meanwhile let us purify
ourselves, and receive the elementary initiation of the Word, that we may do ourselves the
utmost good, making ourselves godlike, and receiving the Word at His coming; and not
only so, but holding Him fast and shewing Him to others.

XI. And now, having purified the theatre by what has been said, let us discourse a little
about the Festival, and join in celebrating this Feast with festal and pious souls. And, since
the chief point of the Festival is the remembrance of God, let us call God to mind. For I

Luke xix. 3.

3946 Col. iii. 5.

Luke xix. 9.

Ps. lxxxiv. 5.

Jer. iv. 3.

Prov. xi. 18.

2 Cor. ii. 6.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

think that the sound of those who keep Festival There, where is the dwelling of all the
Blissful, is nothing else than this, the hymns and praises of God, sung by all who are counted
worthy of that City. Let none be astonished if what I have to say contains some things that
I have said before; for not only will I utter the same words, but I shall speak of the same
subjects, trembling both in tongue and mind and thought when I speak of God for you too,
that you may share this laudable and blessed feeling. And when I speak of God you must
be illumined at once by one flash of light and by three. Three in Individualities or Hypostases,
if any prefer so to call them, or persons,3952 for we will not quarrel about names so long as

The sense of Person (here πρόσωπον), which is the usual post-Nicene equivalent of ὑπόστασις, was by

no means generally attached to that word during the first Four Centuries, though here and there there are traces

of such a use. Throughout the Arian controversy a great deal of trouble and misunderstanding was caused by

the want of a precise definition of the meaning of ὑπόστασις. It seems to have been at first understood by the

Eastern Church to mean Real Personal Existence-Reality being the fundamental idea. In this fundamental

sense it was used in Theology as expressing the distinct individuality and relative bearing of the Three "Persons"

of the Blessed Trinity to each other (τὸ ἴδίον πὰρα τὸ κοινόν, Suidas). But Arius gave it a heretical twist, and

said that there are Three Hypostases, in the sense of Natures or Substances; and this doctrine was anathematized

by the Nicene Council, which, apparently regarding the term ὑπόστασις as exactly equivalent to οὐσία (as Arius

tried to make it) condemned the proposition that the Son is ἐξ ἑτέρας ὑποστάσεως ἢ οὐσίας (Symb. Nic.). 

Similar is the use of the word in S. Athanasius. As against Sabellius, however, who taught that in the Godhead

there are τρία πρόσωπα (using this word in the sense of Aspects only) but would not allow τρεῖς ὑποστάσεις

(i.e., Self-existent Personalities), the post-Nicene Church regarded ὑπόστασις as designating the Person, and

spoke freely of τρεῖς ὑποστάσεις. The Western Church increased the confusion by continuing to regard ὑπόστασις

as equivalent to οὐσία, and translating it by Substantia or Subsistentia. It was not till the word Essentia came

into use to express οὐσία that the Western Church grasped the difference, so long accepted in the East, so as to

use the words accurately. Meantime, however, there would seem to have grown up a difference in the use of

the two words supposed to represent ὑπόστασις, of the same kind as that between ὑπόστασις and οὐσία; Sub-

stantia being appropriated to the Essence of a thing, that which is the foundation of its being; while Subsistentia

came rather to connote a limitation, i.e., Personality. Thus the West also became confused, and Substantia was

held to be the true equivalent of ὑπόστασις. Hence the condemnation at Sardica (a.d. 347) by the Western

Bishops of the doctrine of Three Hypostases as Arian. The confusion lasted long, but in 362 a Council was held

at Alexandria, when this difference was seen to be a mere logomachy, and it was pronounced orthodox to confess

either τρεῖς ὑποστάσεις in the sense of "Persons," or μἰαν ὑπόστασιν in that of "Substance." Our author in his

Oration to the Fathers of the Council of Constantinople fully acknowledges this. "What do you mean," he says,

"by ὑποστάσεις or πρόσωπα? You mean that the Three are distinct, not in Nature, but in Personality." And in

the Panegyric on S. Athanasius (Or. xxi. c. 35), he remarks on the orthodoxy of the phrase μία οὐσία, τρεῖς

ὑποστάσεις, that the first expression refers to the Nature of the Godhead, the second to the special properties

of the Persons. With this, he says, the Italians agree, but the poverty of their language is such that it does not

Oration on the Holy Lights.

the syllables amount to the same meaning; but One in respect of the Substance-that is, the
Godhead. For they are divided without division, if I may so say; and they are united in division. For the Godhead is one in three, and the three are one, in whom the Godhead is, or
to speak more accurately, Who are the Godhead. Excesses and defects we will omit, neither
making the Unity a confusion, nor the division a separation. We would keep equally far
from the confusion of Sabellius and from the division of Arius, which are evils diametrically
opposed, yet equal in their wickedness. For what need is there heretically to fuse God together, or to cut Him up into inequality?

XII. For to us there is but One God, the Father, of Whom are all things, and One Lord
Jesus Christ, by Whom are all things; and One Holy Ghost, in Whom are all things;3953 yet
these words, of, by, in, whom, do not denote a difference of nature (for if this were the case,
the three prepositions, or the order of the three names would never be altered), but they
characterize the personalities of a nature which is one and unconfused. And this is proved
by the fact that They are again collected into one, if you will read-not carelessly-this
other passage of the same Apostle, "Of Him and through Him and to Him are all things; to
Him be glory forever, Amen."3954 The Father is Father, and is Unoriginate, for He is of no
one; the Son is Son, and is not unoriginate, for He is of the Father. But if you take the word
Origin in a temporal sense, He too is Unoriginate, for He is the Maker of Time, and is not
subject to Time. The Holy Ghost is truly Spirit, coming forth from the Father indeed, but
not after the manner of the Son, for it is not by Generation but by Procession (since I must
coin a word for the sake of clearness3955); for neither did the Father cease to be Unbegotten
because of His begetting something, nor the Son to be begotten because He is of the Unbegotten (how could that be?), nor is the Spirit changed into Father or Son because He proceeds,
or because He is God-though the ungodly do not believe it. For Personality is unchangeable;
else how could Personality remain, if it were changeable, and could be removed from one

admit of the distinction between οὐσία and ὑπόστασις, and therefore has to call in the word πρόσωπον, which

if misunderstood is liable to be charged with Sabellianism.

2 Cor. viii. 6.

3954 Rom. xi. 36.

The Coining is simply of the adverbial form; the Substantive is found in earlier writings. S. Gregory

himself uses it Orat. Theol. V. He uses other words also, as ἔκπεμψις, πρόοδος, and the verbs προέρχεσθαι,

προϊέναι. As to the question of the Double Procession (Filioque) see Introd. to Orat. Theol. V. Dr. Swete

(Doctr. of H. S. p. 118) says, "It is instructive to notice how at this period the two great Sees of Rome and Con-

stantinople seem to have agreed in abstaining from a minuter definition of the Procession. Both in East and

West the relations of the Spirit to the Son were being examined by individual theologians; but S. Gregory and

S. Damasus appear to have alike refrained from entering upon a question which did not touch the essentials of

the Faith." He adds in a note "This is the more remarkable because Damasus was of Spanish origin."

Oration on the Holy Lights.

to another? But they who make "Unbegotten" and "Begotten" natures of equivocal gods
would perhaps make Adam and Seth differ in nature, since the former was not born of flesh
(for he was created), but the latter was born of Adam and Eve. There is then One God in
Three, and These Three are One, as we have said.

XIII. Since then these things are so, or rather since This is so; and His Adoration ought
not to be rendered only by Beings above, but there ought to be also worshippers on earth,
that all things may be filled with the glory of God (forasmuch as they are filled with God
Himself); therefore man was created and honored with the hand3956 and Image of God. 
But to despise man, when by the envy of the Devil and the bitter taste of sin he was pitiably
severed from God his Maker-this was not in the Nature of God. What then was done, and
what is the great Mystery that concerns us? An innovation is made upon nature, and God
is made Man. "He that rideth upon the Heaven of Heavens in the East"3957 of His own
glory and Majesty, is glorified in the West of our meanness and lowliness. And the Son of
God deigns to become and to be called Son of Man; not changing what He was (for It is
unchangeable); but assuming what He was not (for He is full of love to man), that the Incomprehensible3958 might be comprehended, conversing with us through the mediation of
the Flesh as through a veil; since it was not possible for that nature which is subject to birth
and decay to endure His unveiled Godhead. Therefore the Unmingled is mingled; and not

"The rest of the Creation was made by the command of God, but Man was formed by the hand of God." 

(Wordsworth in Gen. ii. 7.) "There was a peculiar glory in the creation of Man, distinguishing him from the rest

of the creatures. The creatures inferior to man were called into being by a simple act of the Divine Will; but in

the case of man, bearing as he does the nature and the form which God was about to assume as His own, and

which, once assumed, was never again to be laid aside, the process of creation was markedly different. Then for

the first time the Most Holy Persons of the Blessed Trinity appear upon the scene. They are manifested as in

mutual consultation and common action personally engaged....‘Let Us make Man in Our Image after Our

Likeness'...Then followed the exercise of creative power as a personal act, the putting forth the Hand of God to

fashion the body of Man; ‘The Lord God formed Man of the dust of the earth.' Afterwards came the yet higher

work in the infusion of the immaterial invisible life enshrined in the body, perfecting the work of God; ‘He

breathed into his nostrils the breath of life and Man became a living soul.'" (T. T. Carter, The Divine Dispensa-

tions, p. 44.)

Ps. lxviii. 4.

3958 Ullman comments on this passage as follows: There is in it, as follows especially from what comes after,

the double sense that the Infinite Godhead entered in Christ into the limitations of a finite human life; and in

consequence of this, since otherwise as an infinite Being it was not fully cognisable by the finite human soul,

became in this limitation cognisable in some degree to it, as it was not before this special manifestation in Christ.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

only is God mingled with birth and Spirit3959 with flesh, and the Eternal with time, and the
Uncircumscribed with measure; but also Generation with Virginity, and dishonour with
Him who is higher than all honour; He who is impassible with Suffering,3960 and the Immortal with the corruptible. For since that Deceiver thought that he was unconquerable in
his malice, after he had cheated us with the hope of becoming gods, he was himself cheated
by God's assumption of our nature; so that in attacking Adam as he thought, he should
really meet with God, and thus the new Adam should save the old, and the condemnation
of the flesh should be abolished, death being slain by flesh.

XIV. At His birth we duly kept Festival, both I, the leader of the Feast, and you, and all
that is in the world and above the world. With the Star we ran, and with the Magi we worshipped, and with the Shepherds we were illuminated, and with the Angels we glorified
Him, and with Simeon we took Him up in our arms, and with Anna the aged and chaste
we made our responsive confession. And thanks be to Him who came to His own in the
guise of a stranger, because He glorified the stranger.3961 Now, we come to another action
of Christ, and another mystery. I cannot restrain my pleasure; I am rapt into God. Almost
like John I proclaim good tidings; for though I be not a Forerunner, yet am I from the
desert.3962 Christ is illumined, let us shine forth with Him. Christ is baptized, let us descend
with Him that we may also ascend with Him. Jesus is baptized; but we must attentively
consider not only this but also some other points. Who is He, and by whom is He baptized,
and at what time? He is the All-pure; and He is baptized by John; and the time is the beginning of His miracles. What are we to learn and to be taught by this? To purify ourselves
first; to be lowly minded; and to preach only in maturity both of spiritual and bodily stature. 
The first3963 has a word especially for those who rush to Baptism off hand, and without due
preparation, or providing for the stability of the Baptismal Grace by the disposition of their
minds to good. For since Grace contains remission of the past (for it is a grace), it is on that

"In this and several places πνεῦμα and νοῦς evidently denote the Divine the Spiritual, taken in the highest

and purest sense, in which it is lifted above the σάρξ, and generally above all that is material; in which sense S.

John says, πνεῦμα ὁ θεός." Ullmann.

"In a double sense;-either that the Godhead is, in union with the Man Jesus, subjected to suffering (cf.

Or. XXI. 24), or that the Divine Substance, which is unapproachable by any passion or suffering, combined itself

with a Man, whose nature cannot be free from such emotions." Ullmann.

i.e., human nature, which was severed from and made hostile to God by sin.

i.e., Sasima.

That the All-pure was baptized is to remind us of our need of preparation. That He was baptized by

John is to teach us humility towards the Priesthood, even if the Priest be socially our inferior. That He was

baptized at thirty years of age shews that the Teachers and Rulers of the Church ought not to be very young

men. Scholiast.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

account more worthy of reverence, that we return not to the same vomit again. The second
speaks to those who rebel against the Stewards of this Mystery, if they are their superiors in
rank. The third is for those who are confident in their youth, and think that any time is the
right one to teach or to preside. Jesus is purified, and dost thou despise purification?...and
by John, and dost thou rise up against thy herald?...and at thirty years of age, and dost thou
before thy beard has grown presume to teach the aged, or believe that thou teachest them,
though thou be not reverend on account of thine age, or even perhaps for thy character? 
But here it may be said, Daniel, and this or that other, were judges in their youth, and examples are on your tongues; for every wrongdoer is prepared to defend himself. But I reply
that that which is rare is not the law of the Church. For one swallow does not make a summer, nor one line a geometrician, nor one voyage a sailor.

XV. But John baptizes, Jesus comes to Him3964...perhaps to sanctify the Baptist himself,
but certainly to bury the whole of the old Adam in the water; and before this and for the
sake of this, to sanctify Jordan; for as He is Spirit and Flesh, so He consecrates us by Spirit
and water.3965 John will not receive Him; Jesus contends. "I have need to be baptized of
Thee"3966 says the Voice to the Word, the Friend to the Bridegroom;3967 he that is above
all among them that are born of women,3968 to Him Who is the Firstborn of every
creature;3969 he that leaped in the womb,3970 to Him Who was adored in the womb; he who
was and is to be the Forerunner3971 to Him Who was and is to be manifested. "I have need
to be baptized of Thee;" add to this "and for Thee;" for he knew that he would be baptized
by Martyrdom, or, like Peter, that he would be cleansed not only as to his feet.3972 "And
comest Thou to me?" This also was prophetic; for he knew that after Herod would come
the madness of Pilate, and so that when he had gone before Christ would follow him. But
what saith Jesus? "Suffer it to be so now," for this is the time of His Incarnation; for He
knew that yet a little while and He should baptize the Baptist. And what is the "Fan?" The

3964 Matt. iii. 14.

John v. 35.

3966 Matt. iii. 17.

John iii. 39.

3968 Matt. xi. 11.

3969 Col. i. 5.

Luke i. 41.

"He who was the forerunner on earth, and was to be the forerunner in Hades of Christ, Who manifested

Himself on earth, and manifested Himself also in Hades." Elias Cretensis.

John xiii. 9.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

Purification. And what is the "Fire?" The consuming of the chaff, and the heat of the
Spirit. And what the "Axe?" The excision of the soul which is incurable even after the
dung.3973 And what the Sword? The cutting of the Word, which separates the worse from
the better,3974 and makes a division between the faithful and the unbeliever;3975 and stirs
up the son and the daughter and the bride against the father and the mother and the
mother in law,3976 the young and fresh against the old and shadowy. And what is the Latchet
of the shoe, which thou John who baptizest Jesus mayest not loose?3977 thou who art of the
desert, and hast no food, the new Elias,3978 the more than Prophet, inasmuch as thou sawest
Him of Whom thou didst prophesy, thou Mediator of the Old and New Testaments. What
is this? Perhaps the Message of the Advent, and the Incarnation, of which not the least point
may be loosed, I say not by those3979 who are yet carnal and babes in Christ, but not even
by those who are like John in spirit.

XVI. But further-Jesus goeth up out of the water...for with Himself He carries up the
world...and sees the heaven opened which Adam had shut against himself and all his posterity,3980 as the gates of Paradise by the flaming sword. And the Spirit bears witness to His
Godhead, for he descends upon One that is like Him, as does the Voice from Heaven (for
He to Whom the witness is borne came from thence), and like a Dove, for He honours the
Body (for this also was God, through its union with God) by being seen in a bodily form;
and moreover, the Dove has from distant ages been wont to proclaim the end of the Deluge.3981 But if you are to judge of Godhead by bulk and weight, and the Spirit seems to
you a small thing because He came in the form of a Dove, O man of contemptible littleness
of thought concerning the greatest of things, you must also to be consistent despise the
Kingdom of Heaven, because it is compared to a grain of mustard seed;3982 and you must
exalt the adversary above the Majesty of Jesus, because he is called a great Mountain,3983

Luke xiii. 8.

3974 Heb. iv. 12.

3975 Matt. x. 35.

3976 Micah vii. 6.

John i. 27.

Luke vii. 26.

3979 One important ms. reads "Us Who."

3980 Gen. iii. 24.

Ib. viii. 11.

3982 Matt. xiii. 31.

Zech. iv. 7.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

and Leviathan3984 and King of that which lives in the water, whereas Christ is called the
Lamb,3985 and the Pearl,3986 and the Drop3987 and similar names.

XVII. Now, since our Festival is of Baptism, and we must endure a little hardness with
Him Who for our sake took form, and was baptized, and was crucified; let us speak about
the different kinds of Baptism, that we may come out thence purified. Moses baptized3988
but it was in water, and before that in the cloud and in the sea.3989 This was typical as Paul
saith; the Sea of the water, and the Cloud of the Spirit; the Manna, of the Bread of Life; the
Drink, of the Divine Drink. John also baptized; but this was not like the baptism of the Jews,
for it was not only in water, but also "unto repentance." Still it was not wholly spiritual, for
he does not add "And in the Spirit." Jesus also baptized, but in the Spirit. This is the perfect
Baptism. And how is He not God, if I may digress a little, by whom you too are made God? 
I know also a Fourth Baptism-that by Martyrdom and blood, which also Christ himself
underwent:-and this one is far more august than all the others, inasmuch as it cannot be
defiled by after-stains. Yes, and I know of a Fifth also, which is that of tears, and is much
more laborious, received by him who washes his bed every night and his couch with tears;3990
whose bruises stink through his wickedness;3991 and who goeth mourning and of a sad
countenance; who imitates the repentance of Manasseh3992 and the humiliation of the
Ninevites3993 upon which God had mercy; who utters the words of the Publican in the
Temple, and is justified rather than the stiff-necked Pharisee;3994 who like the Canaanite
woman bends down and asks for mercy and crumbs, the food of a dog that is very hungry.3995
XVIII. I, however, for I confess myself to be a man,-that is to say, an animal shifty
and of a changeable nature,-both eagerly receive this Baptism, and worship Him Who has
given it me, and impart it to others; and by shewing mercy make provision for mercy. For
I know that I too am compassed with infirmity,3996 and that with what measure I mete it

3984 The word Leviathan does not occur in the LXX., though it is found twice in other Greek Versions of the

Book of Job, viz.:-iii. 8 and xl. 20.

Isa. liii. 7.

3986 Matt. xiii. 46.

Ps. lxxii. 6.

Lev. xi.

1 Cor. x. 2.

Ps. vi. 6.

Ib. xxxviii. 5.

2 Chron. xxxviii. 12.

Jon. iii. 7-10.

Luke xviii. 13.

3995 Matt. xv. 27.

3996 Heb. v. 2.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

shall be measured to me again.3997 But what sayest thou, O new Pharisee pure3998 in title
but not in intention, who dischargest upon us the sentiments of Novatus,3999 though thou
sharest the same infirmities? Wilt thou not give any place to weeping? Wilt thou shed no
tear? Mayest thou not meet with a Judge like thyself? Art thou not ashamed by the mercy
of Jesus, Who took our infirmities and bare our sicknesses;4000 Who came not to call the
righteous but sinners to repentance;4001 Who will have mercy rather than sacrifice; who
forgiveth sins till seventy times seven.4002 How blessed would your exaltation be if it really
were purity, not pride, making laws above the reach of men, and destroying improvement
by despair. For both are alike evil, indulgence not regulated by prudence, and condemnation
that will never forgive; the one because it relaxes all reins, the other because it strangles by
its severity. Shew me your purity, and I will approve your boldness. But as it is, I fear that
being full of sores you will render them incurable. Will you not admit even David's repentance, to whom his penitence preserved even the gift of prophecy? nor the great Peter himself,
who fell into human weakness at the Passion of our Saviour? Yet Jesus received him, and
by the threefold question and confession healed the threefold denial.4003 Or will you even
refuse to admit that he was made perfect by blood (for your folly goes even as far as that)? 
Or the transgressor at Corinth? But Paul confirmed love towards him when he saw his
amendment, and gives the reason, "that such an one be not swallowed up by overmuch

3997 Matt. vii. 2.

3998 The Novatians were known as Cathari or Puritans.

In a.d. 251 Novatus, a Presbyter of the Church of Carthage, who with others had formed a party against

S. Cyprian, their Bishop, came to Rome, and excited Novatian to become leader in a similar schism against

Cornelius, the recently elected Bishop of the Apostolic See. The plea urged on behalf of the schism was that

Cornelius, who was of one accord with Cyprian, had lapsed in the time of the persecution under Decius, a.d.

250, and that he had relaxed the discipline of the Church by admitting to Communion on too easy terms those

who had been guilty of a similar offence; and that therefore he ought not to be recognized as a true Bishop of

the Church, but a faithful Pastor should be chosen in his place. Consequently Novatian was elected by some

who held these views, and was consecrated by three Bishops. There seem to have been a good many of his fol-

lowers in Constantinople at this time. There had been at one time a disposition among them to reunite themselves

to the Catholic Church, for they were orthodox in faith; but it had been hindered by the malevolence of their

party leaders; so that the schism continued, and the Novatians must be added to the opponents with whom S.

Gregory had to deal.

4000 Matt. viii. 17.

Ib. ix. 13.

Ib. xviii. 22.

John xxi. 15. sq.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

sorrow,"4004 being overwhelmed by the excess of the punishment.4005 And will you refuse
to grant liberty of marriage to young widows on account of the liability of their age to fall? 
Paul ventured to do so; but of course you can teach him; for you have been caught up to the
Fourth heaven, and to another Paradise, and have heard words more unspeakable, and
comprehend a larger circle in your Gospel.

XIX. But these sins were not after Baptism, you will say. Where is your proof? Either
prove it-or refrain from condemning; and if there be any doubt, let charity prevail. But
Novatus, you say, would not receive those who lapsed in the persecution. What do you
mean by this? If they were unrepentant he was right; I too would refuse to receive those
who either would not stoop at all or not sufficiently, and who would refuse to make their
amendment counterbalance their sin; and when I do receive them, I will assign them their
proper place;4006 but if he refused those who wore themselves away with weeping, I will not
imitate him. And why should Novatus's want of charity be a rule for me? He never punished
covetousness, which is a second idolatry; but he condemned fornication as though he himself
were not flesh and body. What say you? Are we convincing you by these words? Come
and stand here on our side, that is, on the side of humanity. Let us magnify the Lord together. Let none of you, even though he has much confidence in himself, dare to say, Touch me
not for I am pure, and who is so pure as I? Give us too a share in your brightness. But
perhaps we are not convincing you? Then we will weep for you. Let these men then if they
will, follow our way, which is Christ's way; but if they will not, let them go their own. Perhaps
in it they will be baptized with Fire, in that last Baptism which is more painful and longer,
which devours wood like grass,4007 and consumes the stubble of every evil.

XX. But let us venerate to-day the Baptism of Christ; and let us keep the feast well, not
in pampering the belly, but rejoicing in spirit. And how shall we luxuriate? "Wash you,
make you clean."4008 If ye be scarlet with sin and less bloody, be made white as snow; if ye
be red, and men bathed in blood, yet be ye brought to the whiteness of wool. Anyhow be
purified, and you shall be clean (for God rejoices in nothing so much as in the amendment

2 Cor. ii. 7.

"This too often ignored page gives a solemn contradiction to those who, falsifying history as well as

theology, pretended two centuries ago to revive by their extravagant rigour the spirit of the primitive Church. 

The spirit of the Church never changes. Inflexible against error, it is full of gentleness and kindliness for repentant

sinners. The spirit of the Church is that of the Saints of all times; or rather it is that of the Divine Shepherd,

Who made Himself known above all by His unspeakable tenderness and His inexhaustible mercy to lost sheep." 

(Benoit S. G. de N.)

i.e., their proper class among the Penitents.

1 Cor. iii. 12-19.

Isa. i. 17, 18.

Oration on the Holy Lights.

and salvation of man, on whose behalf is every discourse and every Sacrament), that you
may be like lights in the world, a quickening force to all other men; that you may stand as
perfect lights beside That great Light, and may learn the mystery of the illumination of
Heaven, enlightened by the Trinity more purely and clearly, of Which even now you are
receiving in a measure the One Ray from the One Godhead in Christ Jesus our Lord; to
Whom be the glory and the might for ever and ever. Amen.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

Oration XL.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

Preached at Constantinople Jan. 6, 381, being the day following the delivery of that on the

Holy Lights.

I. Yesterday we kept high Festival on the illustrious Day of the Holy Lights; for it was
fitting that rejoicings should be kept for our Salvation, and that far more than for weddings
and birthdays, and namedays, and house-warmings, and registrations of children, and anniversaries, and all the other festivities that men observe for their earthly friends. And now
to-day let us discourse briefly concerning Baptism, and the benefits which accrue to us
therefrom, even though our discourse yesterday spoke of it cursorily; partly because the
time pressed us hard, and partly because the sermon had to avoid tediousness. For too great
length in a sermon is as much an enemy to people's ears, as too much food is to their bodies....It will be worth your while to apply your minds to what we say, and to receive our
discourse on so important a subject not perfunctorily, but with ready mind, since to know
the power of this Sacrament is itself Enlightenment.4009

II. The Word recognizes three Births for us; namely, the natural birth, that of Baptism,
and that of the Resurrection. Of these the first is by night, and is servile, and involves passion;
but the second is by day, and is destructive of passion, cutting off all the veil4010 that is derived
from birth, and leading on to the higher life; and the third is more terrible and shorter,
bringing together in a moment all mankind,4011 to stand before its Creator, and to give an
account of its service and conversation here; whether it has followed the flesh, or whether
it has mounted up with the spirit, and worshipped the grace of its new creation. My Lord
Jesus Christ has showed that He honoured all these births in His own Person; the first, by
that first and quickening Inbreathing;4012 the second by His Incarnation and the Baptism
wherewith He Himself was baptized; and the third by the Resurrection of which He was the
Firstfruits; condescending, as He became the Firstborn4013 among many brethren, so also
to become the Firstborn from the dead.4014

Enlightenment (φωτισμός) is one of the most ancient names for Holy Baptism; the name, in fact, which

S. Gregory uses throughout this Oration, and which his Latin translator almost invariably renders by Baptismus.

4010 This Veil is Original Sin, by which the soul is darkened and as it were covered.

4011 All Mankind (πᾶν τὸ πλάσμα). πλάσμα would not be correctly rendered by Creation. It is a word be-

longing solely to Man, who was formed by the Hand of God, and who, alone among creatures, has to give an

account of his past life to his Creator at the Last Day. (Edd. Bened.)

4012 Gen. ii. 7.

4013 Rom. viii. 29.

4014 Col. i. 18.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

III. Concerning two of these births, the first and the last, we have not to speak on the
present occasion. Let us discourse upon the second, which is now necessary for us, and
which gives its name to the Feast of the Lights. Illumination is the splendour of souls, the
conversion of the life, the question put to the Godward conscience.4015 It is the aid to our
weakness, the renunciation of the flesh, the following of the Spirit, the fellowship of the
Word, the improvement of the creature, the overwhelming of sin, the participation of light,
the dissolution of darkness. It is the carriage to God, the dying with Christ, the perfecting
of the mind, the bulwark of Faith, the key of the Kingdom of heaven, the change of life, the
removal of slavery, the loosing of chains, the remodelling of the whole man. Why should
I go into further detail? Illumination is the greatest and most magnificent of the Gifts of
God. For just as we speak of the Holy of Holies, and the Song of Songs, as more comprehensive and more excellent than others, so is this called Illumination, as being more holy
than any other illumination which we possess.

IV. And as Christ the Giver of it is called by many various names, so too is this Gift,
whether it is from the exceeding gladness of its nature (as those who are very fond of a thing
take pleasure in using its name), or that the great variety of its benefits has reacted for us
upon its names. We call it, the Gift, the Grace, Baptism, Unction, Illumination, the Clothing
of Immortality, the Laver of Regeneration, the Seal, and everything that is honourable. We
call it the Gift, because it is given to us in return for nothing on our part; Grace, because it
is conferred even on debtors; Baptism, because sin is buried with it in the water; Unction,
as Priestly and Royal, for such were they who were anointed; Illumination, because of its
splendour; Clothing, because it hides our shame; the Laver, because it washes us; the Seal
because it preserves us, and is moreover the indication of Dominion. In it the heavens rejoice;
it is glorified by Angels, because of its kindred splendour. It is the image of the heavenly
bliss. We long indeed to sing out its praises, but we cannot worthily do so.

V. God is Light:4016 the highest, the unapproachable, the ineffable, That can neither
be conceived in the mind nor uttered with the lips,4017 That giveth life to every reasoning
creature.4018 He is in the world of thought, what the sun is in the world of sense; presenting
Himself to our minds in proportion as we are cleansed; and loved in proportion as He is

4015 This is the literal version of the passage, which is somewhat loosely quoted from 1 S. Peter iii. 21, where

the A.V. renders "the answer of a good conscience towards God," and the R.V., "The interrogation (Marg. inquiry)

of a good conscience, etc." The passage is usually explained as referring to the Interrogatories in Holy Baptism,

answered by the threefold Vow which enlists us "under Christ's banner against sin, the world, and the Devil,"

professes the Faith, and promises obedience.

1 John i. 5.

1 Tim. vi. 16.

John i. 9.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

presented to our mind; and again, conceived in proportion as we love Him; Himself contemplating and comprehending Himself, and pouring Himself out upon what is external to
Him. That Light, I mean, which is contemplated in the Father and the Son and the Holy
Ghost, Whose riches is Their unity of nature, and the one outleaping of Their brightness. 
A second Light is the Angel, a kind of outflow or communication of that first Light, drawing
its illumination from its inclination and obedience thereto; and I know not whether its illumination is distributed according to the order of its state, or whether its order is due to the
respective measures of its illumination.4019 A third Light is man; a light which is visible to
external objects. For they call man light4020 because of the faculty of speech in us. And the
name is applied again to those of us who are more like God, and who approach God more
nearly than others. I also acknowledge another Light, by which the primeval darkness was
driven away or pierced. It was the first of all the visible creation to be called into existence;
and it irradiates the whole universe, the circling orbit of the stars, and all the heavenly beacon
fires.

VI. Light was also the firstborn commandment given to the firstborn man (for the
commandment of the Law is a lamp and a light;4021 and again, Because Thy judgments are
a light upon the earth);4022 although the envious darkness crept in and wrought wickedness. 
And a Light typical and proportionate to those who were its subjects was the written law,
adumbrating the truth and the sacrament of the great Light, for Moses' face was made
glorious by it.4023 And, to mention more Lights-it was Light that appeared out of Fire to
Moses, when it burned the bush indeed, but did not consume it,4024 to shew its nature and
to declare the power that was in it. And it was Light that was in the pillar of fire that led
Israel and tamed the wilderness.4025 It was Light that carried up Elias in the car of fire,4026
and yet did not burn him as it carried him. It was Light that shone round the Shepherds4027
when the Eternal Light was mingled with the temporal. It was Light that was the beauty of
the Star that went before to Bethlehem to guide the Wise Men's way,4028 and to be the escort

S. Thomas Aquinas (Summa I qu. 108) seems to solve this question in accordance with the second of

these alternatives.

4020 φώς (masc) is a common poetical word for Man. It is probably derived from the root (Indo-Eur. Bha)

of φάω, which also appears in φημί and modified in φαίνω.

Prov. vi. 23.

Ps. cxix. 105.

Exod. xxxiv. 30.

Ib. iii. 2.

Ex. xiii. 21.

2 Kings ii. 11.

Luke ii. 9.

4028 Matt. ii. 9.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

of the Light That is above us, when He came amongst us. Light was That Godhead Which
was shewn upon the Mount to the disciples-and a little too strong for their eyes.4029 Light
was That Vision which blazed out upon Paul,4030 and by wounding his eyes healed the
darkness of his soul. Light is also the brilliancy of heaven to those who have been purified
here, when the righteous shall shine forth as the Sun,4031 and God shall stand in the midst
of them,4032 gods and kings, deciding and distinguishing the ranks of the Blessedness of
heaven. Light beside these in a special sense is the illumination of Baptism of which we are
now speaking; for it contains a great and marvellous sacrament of our salvation.

VII. For since to be utterly sinless belongs to God, and to the first and uncompounded
nature (for simplicity is peaceful, and not subject to dissension), and I venture to say also
that it belongs to the Angelic nature too; or at least, I would affirm that nature to be very
nearly sinless, because of its nearness to God; but to sin is human and belongs to the Compound on earth (for composition is the beginning of separation); therefore the master did
not think it right to leave His creature unaided, or to neglect its danger of separation from
Himself; but on the contrary, just as He gave existence to that which did not exist, so He
gave new creation to that which did exist, a diviner creation and a loftier than the first, which
is to those who are beginning life a Seal, and to those who are more mature in age both a
gift and a restoration of the image which had fallen through sin, that we may not, by becoming worse through despair, and ever being borne downward to that which is more evil, fall
altogether from good and from virtue, through despondency; and having fallen into a depth
of evil (as it is said) despise Him;4033 but that like those who in the course of a long journey
make a brief rest from labour at an inn, we should be enabled to accomplish the rest of the
road fresh and full of courage. Such is the grace and power of baptism; not an overwhelming
of the world as of old, but a purification of the sins of each individual, and a complete
cleansing from all the bruises and stains of sin.

VIII. And since we are double-made, I mean of body and soul, and the one part is visible,
the other invisible, so the cleansing also is twofold, by water and the spirit; the one received
visibly in the body, the other concurring with it invisibly and apart from the body; the one
typical, the other real and cleansing the depths. And this which comes to the aid of our first
birth, makes us new instead of old, and like God instead of what we now are; recasting us
without fire, and creating us anew without breaking us up. For, to say it all in one word,
the virtue of Baptism is to be understood as a covenant with God for a second life and a

Luke ix. 32, 34.

4030 Acts ix. 3.

4031 Matt. xiii. 43.

4032 Wisd. iii. 7.

Prov. xviii. 3 (LXX.).

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

purer conversation. And indeed all need to fear this very much, and to watch our own souls,
each one of us, with all care, that we do not become liars in respect of this profession. For
if God is called upon as a Mediator to ratify human professions, how great is the danger if
we be found transgressors of the covenant which we have made with God Himself; and if
we be found guilty before the Truth Himself of that lie, besides our other transgressions...and
that when there is no second regeneration, or recreation, or restoration to our former state,
even though we seek it with all our might, and with many sighs and tears, by which it is cicatrized over (with great difficulty in my opinion, though we all believe that it may be cicatrized). Yet if we might wipe away even the scars I should be glad, since I too have need of
mercy. But it is better not to stand in need of a second cleansing, but to stop at the first,
which is, I know, common to all, and involves no labour, and is of equal price to slaves, to
masters, to poor, to rich, to humble, to exalted, to gentle, to simple, to debtors, to those who
are free from debt; like the breathing of the air, and the pouring forth of the light, and the
changes of the seasons, and the sight of creation, that great delight which we all share alike,
and the equal distribution of the faith.

IX. For it is a strange thing to substitute for a painless remedy one which is more
painful; to cast away the grace of mercy, and owe a debt of punishment; and to measure our
amendment against sin. For how many tears must we contribute before they can equal the
fount of baptism; and who will be surety for us that death shall wait for our cure, and that
the judgment seat shall not summon us while still debtors, and needing the fire of the other
world? You perhaps, as a good and pitiful husbandman, will entreat the Master still to spare
the figtree,4034 and not yet to cut it down, though accused of unfruitfulness; but to allow
you to put dung about it in the shape of tears, sighs, invocations, sleepings on the ground,
vigils, mortifications of soul and body, and correction by confession and a life of humiliation. 
But it is uncertain if the Master will spare it, inasmuch as it cumbers the ground of another
asking for mercy, and becoming deteriorated by the longsuffering shewn to this one. Let
us then be buried with Christ by Baptism,4035 that we may also rise with Him; let us descend
with Him, that we may also be exalted with Him; let us ascend with Him, that we may also
be glorified together.

X. If after baptism the persecutor and tempter of the light assail you (for he assailed
even the Word my God through the veil,4036 the hidden Light through that which was
manifested), you have the means to conquer him. Fear not the conflict; defend yourself
with the Water; defend yourself with the Spirit, by Which all the fiery darts of the wicked

Luke xiii. 8.

4035 Rom. vi. 4; Col. ii. 12.

i.e., the Sacred Manhood.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

shall be quenched.4037 It is Spirit, but That Spirit which rent the Mountains.4038 It is Water,
but that which quenches fire. If he assail you by your want (as he dared to assail Christ),
and asks that stones should be made bread, do not be ignorant of his devices.4039 Teach
him what he has not learnt. Defend yourself with the Word of life, Who is the Bread sent
down from heaven, and giving life to the world.4040 If he plot against you with vain glory
(as he did against Christ when he led Him up to the pinnacle of the temple and said to Him,
Cast Thyself down4041 as a proof of Thy Godhead), be not overborne by elation. If you be
taken by this he will not stop here. For he is insatiable, he grasps at every thing. He fawns
upon you with fair pretences, but he ends in evil; this is the manner of his fighting. Yes,
and the robber is skilled in Scripture. On the one side was that It is written about the Bread,
and on the other that it Is written about the Angels. It is written, quoth he, He shall give
His Angels charge concerning thee, and they shall bear thee in their hands.4042 O vile
sophist! how was it that thou didst suppress the words that follow, for I know it well, even
if thou passest it by in silence? I will make thee to go upon the asp and basilisk, and I will
tread upon serpents and scorpions, being fenced by the Trinity. If he wrestle against thee
to a fall through avarice, shewing thee all the Kingdoms at one instant and in the twinkling
of an eye, as belonging to himself, and demand thy worship, despise him as a beggar. Say
to him relying on the Seal, "I am myself the Image of God; I have not yet been cast down
from the heavenly Glory, as thou wast through thy pride; I have put on Christ; I have been
transformed into Christ by Baptism; worship thou me." Well do I know that he will depart,
defeated and put to shame by this; as he did from Christ the first Light, so he will from those
who are illumined by Christ. Such blessings does the laver bestow on those who apprehend
it; such is the rich feast which it provides for those who hunger aright.

XI. Let us then be baptized that we may win the victory; let us partake of the cleansing
waters, more purifying than hyssop, purer than the legal blood, more sacred than the ashes
of the heifer sprinkling the unclean,4043 and providing a temporary cleansing of the body,
but not a complete taking away of sin; for if once purged, why should they need further
purification? Let us be baptized today, that we suffer not violence4044 to-morrow; and let
us not put off the blessing as if it were an injury, nor wait till we get more wicked that more

Ephes. vi. 16.

1 Kings xix. 11.

2 Cor. ii. 11.

John vi. 33.

4041 Matt. iv. 6.

Ps. xci. 14.

4043 Heb. x. 4.

4044 There is here an untranslatable play upon words.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

may be forgiven us; and let us not become sellers and traffickers of Christ, lest we become
more heavily burdened than we are able to bear, that we be not sunk with all hands4045 and
make shipwreck of the Gift, and lose all because we expected too much. While thou art still
master of thy thoughts run to the Gift. While thou art not yet sick in body or in mind, nor
seemest so to those who are with thee (though thou art really of sound mind); while thy
good is not yet in the power of others, but thou thyself art still master of it; while thy tongue
is not stammering or parched, or (to say no more) deprived of the power of pronouncing
the sacramental words; while thou canst still be made one of the faithful, not conjecturally
but confessedly; and canst still receive not pity but congratulation; while the Gift is still clear
to thee, and there is no doubt about it; while the grace can reach the depth of thy soul, and
it is not merely thy body that is washed for burial; and before tears surround thee announcing
thy decease-and even these restrained perhaps for thy sake-and thy wife and children
would delay thy departure, and are listening for thy dying words; before the physician is
powerless to help thee, and is giving thee but hours to live-hours which are not his to
give-and is balancing thy salvation with the nod of his head, and discoursing learnedly on
thy disease after thou art dead, or making his charges heavier by withdrawals, or hinting at
despair; before there is a struggle between the man who would baptize thee and the man
who seeks thy money, the one striving that thou mayest receive thy Viaticum, the other that
he may be inscribed in thy Will as heir-and there is no time for both.

XII. Why wait for a fever to bring you this blessing, and refuse it from God? Why will
you have it through lapse of time, and not through reason? Why will you owe it to a plotting
friend, and not to a saving desire? Why will you receive it of force and not of free will; of
necessity rather than of liberty? Why must you hear of your death from another, rather
than think of it as even now present? Why do you seek for drugs which will do no good, or
the sweat of the crisis, when the sweat of death is perhaps upon you? Heal yourself before
your extremity; have pity upon yourself the only true healer of your disease; apply to yourself

4045 Again a play upon words. Βαπτἰζεσθαι is sometimes used in the sense of to be drowned. The word

primarily means to Immerse, and this of course, when applied to a ship, is to sink her. The practice of immersion

in Holy Baptism was undoubtedly universal in the primitive ages, except where in cases of necessity persons

were baptized in sickness, or in prison under sentence of death; and in such cases this "Clinic" Baptism, though

recognized as valid, and therefore not to be repeated, was viewed as irregular, and disqualified its recipient from

subsequently receiving Holy Orders. Affusion was gradually allowed, probably for climatic reasons, to become

the prevailing practice of the West, though immersion predominated as late as the Twelfth Century. It is,

however, a remarkable fact that the Didache, a Manual of instruction which some date within the lifetime of

the Apostles, and nearly all are agreed in placing not later than the early years of the Second Century, expressly

permits affusion, without any hint of irregularity, or mention of any circumstance of necessity except scarcity

of water.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

the really saving medicine; while you are still sailing with a favouring breeze fear shipwreck,
and you will be in less danger of it, if you make use of your terror as a helper. Give yourself
occasion to celebrate the Gift with feasting, not with mourning; let the talent be cultivated,
not buried in the ground; let some time intervene between the grace and death, that not
only may the account of sins be wiped out, but something better may be written in its place;
that you may have not only the Gift, but also the Reward; that you may not only escape the
fire, but may also inherit the glory, which is bestowed by cultivation of the Gift. For to men
of little soul it is a great thing to escape torment; but men of great soul aim also at attaining
reward.

XIII. I know of three classes among the saved; the slaves, the hired servants, the sons. 
If you are a slave, be afraid of the whip; if you are a hired servant, look only to receive your
hire; if you are more than this, a son, revere Him as a Father, and work that which is good,
because it is good to obey a Father; and even though no reward should come of it for you,
this is itself a reward, that you please your Father. Let us then take care not to despise these
things. How absurd it would be to grasp at money and throw away health; and to be lavish
of the cleansing of the body, but economical over the cleansing of the soul; and to seek for
freedom from earthly slavery, but not to care about heavenly freedom; and to make every
effort to be splendidly housed and dressed, but to have never a thought how you yourself
may become really very precious; and to be zealous to do good to others, without any desire
to do good to yourself. And if good could be bought, you would spare no money; but if
mercy is freely at your feet, you despise it for its cheapness. Every time is suitable for your
ablution, since any time may be your death. With Paul I shout to you with that loud voice,
"Behold now is the accepted time; behold Now is the day of salvation;"4046 and that Now
does not point to any one time, but is every present moment. And again "Awake, thou that
sleepest, and Christ shall give thee light,"4047 dispelling the darkness of sin. For as Isaiah
says,4048 In the night hope is evil, and it is more profitable to be received in the morning.
XIV. Sow in good season, and gather together, and open thy barns when it is the time
to do so; and plant in season, and let the clusters be cut when they are ripe, and launch
boldly in spring, and draw thy ship on shore again at the beginning of winter, when the sea
begins to rage. And let there be to thee also a time for war and a time for peace; a time to
marry, and a time to abstain from marrying; a time for friendship, and a time for discord,
if this be needed; and in short a time for everything, if you will follow Solomon's advice.4049 
And it is best to do so, for the advice is profitable. But the work of your salvation is one

2 Cor. vi. 2.

Ephes. v. 14.

Isa. xxviii. 19, LXX.

Eccl. iii. 1. sq.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

upon which you should be engaged at all times; and let every time be to you the definite one
for Baptism. If you are always passing over to-day and waiting for to-morrow, by your little
procrastinations you will be cheated without knowing it by the Evil One, as his manner is. 
Give to me, he says, the present, and to God the future; to me your youth, and to God old
age; to me your pleasures, and to Him your uselessness. How great is the danger that surrounds you. How many the unexpected mischances. War has expended you; or an earthquake overwhelmed you; or the sea swallowed you up; or a wild beast carried you off; or a
sickness killed you; or a crumb going the wrong way (a most insignificant thing, but what
is easier than for a man to die, though you are so proud of the divine image); or a too freely
indulged drinking bout;4050 or a wind knocked you down; or a horse ran away with you; or
a drug maliciously scheming against you, or perhaps found to be deleterious when meant
to be wholesome; or an inhuman judge; or an inexorable executioner; or any of the things
which make the change swiftest and beyond the power of human aid.

XV. But if you would fortify yourself beforehand with the Seal, and secure yourself for
the future with the best and strongest of all aids, being signed both in body and in soul with
the unction, as Israel was of old with that blood and unction of the firstborn at night that
guarded him,4051 what then can happen to you, and what has been wrought out for you? 
Listen to the Proverbs. "If thou sittest, he says, thou shalt be without fear; and if thou
sleepest, thy sleep shall be sweet."4052 And listen to David giving thee the good news, "Thou
shalt not be afraid for the terror by night, for mischance or noonday demon."4053 This,
even while you live, will greatly contribute to your sense of safety (for a sheep that is sealed
is not easily snared, but that which is unmarked is an easy prey to thieves), and at your death
a fortunate shroud, more precious than gold, more magnificent than a sepulchre, more
reverent than fruitless libations,4054 more seasonable than ripe firstfruits, which the dead
bestow on the dead, making a law out of custom. Nay, if all things forsake thee,4055 or be
taken violently away from thee; money, possessions, thrones, distinctions, and everything
that belongs to this early turmoil, yet you will be able to lay down your life in safety, having
suffered no loss of the helps which God gave you unto salvation.

Some mss. read "A flooded river."

Exod. xii. 22.

Prov. iii. 24.

Ps. xci. 5.

Billius suggests, though without adopting it in his text, a slight conjectural alteration, which would read

"Than funeral games and libations;" but this, though it gives a very good sense, is a needless departure from the

mss.

Luke ix. 60.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

XVI. But are you afraid lest you should destroy the Gift, and do you therefore put off
your cleansing, because you cannot have it a second time? What? Would you not be afraid
of danger in time of persecution, and of losing the most precious Thing you have-Christ? 
Would you then on this account avoid becoming a Christian? Perish the thought. Such a
fear is not for a sane man; such an argument argues insanity. O incautious caution, if I may
so. O trick of the Evil One! Truly he is darkness and pretends to be light; and when he can
no longer prevail in open war, he lays snares in secret, and gives advice, apparently good,
really evil, if by some trick at least he may prevail, and we find no escape from his plotting. 
And this is clearly what he is aiming at in this instance. For, being unable to persuade you
to despise Baptism, he inflicts loss upon you through a fictitious security; that in consequence
of your fear you may suffer unconsciously the very thing you are afraid of; and because you
fear to destroy the Gift, you may for this very reason fail of the Gift altogether. This is his
character; and he will never cease his duplicity as long as he sees us pressing onwards towards
heaven from which he has fallen. Wherefore, O man of God, do thou recognize the plots
of thine adversary; for the battle is against him that hath, and it is concerned with the most
important interests. Take not thine enemy to be thy counsellor; despise not to be and to be
called Faithful. As long as you are a Catechumen you are but in the porch of Religion; you
must come inside, and cross the court, and observe the Holy Things, and look into the Holy
of Holies, and be in company with the Trinity. Great are the interests for which you are
fighting, great too the stability which you need. Protect yourself with the shield of faith. 
He fears you, if you fight armed with this weapon, and therefore he would strip you of the
Gift, that he may the more easily overcome you unarmed and defenceless. He assails every
age, and every form of life; he must be repelled by all.

XVII. Art thou young? stand against thy passions; be numbered with the alliance in
the army of God:4056 do valiantly against Goliath.4057 Take your thousands or your myriads;4058 thus enjoy your manhood; but do not allow your youth to be withered, being killed
by the imperfection of your faith. Are you old and near the predestined necessity? Aid your
few remaining days. Entrust the purification to your old age. Why do you fear youthful
passion in deep old age and at your last breath? Or will you wait to be washed till you are
dead, and not so much the object of pity as of dislike? Are you regretting the dregs of
pleasure, being yourself in the dregs of life? It is a shameful thing to be past indeed the

The Benedictine Editors punctuate differently, and render "Stand against passions with the assistance

(of Baptism), be numbered in the army of God." remarking that David fought Goliath without allies, leaning

on God's assistance; and that S. Gregory here certainly means that a Christian who relies on the aid of his Baptism

is to stand firm in the battle against the Devil.

1 Sam. xvii. 32.

Ib. xviii. 7.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

flower of your age, but not past your wickedness; but either to be involved in it still, or at
least to seem so by delaying your purification. Have you an infant child? Do not let sin get
any opportunity, but let him be sanctified from his childhood; from his very tenderest age
let him be consecrated by the Spirit. Fearest thou the Seal on account of the weakness of
nature? O what a small-souled mother, and of how little faith! Why, Anna even before
Samuel was born4059 promised him to God, and after his birth consecrated him at once,
and brought him up in the priestly habit, not fearing anything in human nature, but trusting
in God. You have no need of amulets or incantations, with which the Devil also comes in,
stealing worship from God for himself in the minds of vainer men. Give your child the
Trinity, that great and noble Guard.

XVIII. What more? Are you living in Virginity? Be sealed by this purification; make
this the sharer and companion of your life. Let this direct your life, your words, every
member, every movement, every sense. Honour it, that it may honour you; that it may give
to your head a crown of graces, and with a crown of delights may shield you.4060 Art thou
bound by wedlock? Be bound also by the Seal; make it dwell with you as a guardian of your
continence, safer than any number of eunuchs or of doorkeepers. Art thou not yet wedded
to flesh? Fear not this consecration; thou art pure even after marriage. I will take the risk
of that. I will join you in wedlock. I will dress the bride. We do not dishonour marriage
because we give a higher honour to virginity. I will imitate Christ, the pure Grooms-man
and Bridegroom, as He both wrought a miracle at a wedding, and honours wedlock with
His Presence.4061 Only let marriage be pure and unmingled with filthy lusts. This only I
ask; receive safety from the Gift, and give to the Gift the oblation of chastity in its due season,
when the fixed time of prayer comes round, and that which is more precious than business. 
And do this by common consent and approval. For we do not command, we exhort; and
we would receive something of you for your own profit, and the common security of you
both. And in one word, there is no state of life and no occupation to which Baptism is not
profitable. You who are a free man,4062 be curbed by it; you who are in slavery, be made of
equal rank; you who are in grief, receive comfort; let the gladsome be disciplined; the poor
receive riches that cannot be taken away; the rich be made capable of being good stewards
of their possessions. Do not play tricks or lay plots against your own salvation. For even if
we can delude others we cannot delude ourselves. And so to play against oneself is very
dangerous and foolish.

1 Sam. i. 10.

Ecclus. xxxii. 3.

John ii. 1-11.

ἐν ἐξουσιᾳ evidently means Tui juris-your own master.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

XIX. But you have to live in the midst of public affairs, and are stained by them; and it
would be a terrible thing to waste this mercy. The answer is simple. Flee, if you can, even
from the forum, along with the good company, making yourself the wings of an eagle, or,
to speak more suitably, of a dove...for what have you to do with Caesar or the things of
Caesar?...until you can rest where there is no sin, and no blackening, and no biting snake
in the way to hinder your godly steps. Snatch your soul away from the world; flee from
Sodom; flee from the burning; travel on without turning back, lest you should be fixed as a
pillar of salt.4063 Escape to the Mountain lest you be destroyed with the plain. But if you
are already bound and constrained by the chain of necessity, reason thus with yourself; or
rather let me reason thus with you. It is better both to attain the good and to keep the
purification. But if it be impossible to do both it is surely better to be a little stained with
your public affairs than to fall altogether short of grace; just as I think it better to undergo
a slight punishment from father or master than to be put out of doors; and to be a little
beamed upon than to be left in total darkness. And it is the part of wise men to choose, as
in good things the greater and more perfect, so in evils the lesser and lighter. Wherefore
do not overmuch dread the purification. For our success is always judged by comparison
with our place in life by our just and merciful Judge; and often one who is in public life and
has had small success has had a greater reward than one who in the enjoyment of liberty
has not completely succeeded; as I think it more marvellous for a man to advance a little in
fetters, than for one to run who is not carrying any weight; or to be only a little spattered in
walking through mud, than to be perfectly clean when the road is clean. To give you a proof
of what I have said:-Rahab the harlot was justified by one thing alone, her hospitality,4064
though she receives no praise for the rest of her conduct; and the Publican was exalted by
one thing, his humility,4065 though he received no testimony for anything else; so that you
may learn not easily to despair concerning yourself.

XX. But some will say, What shall I gain, if, when I am preoccupied by baptism, and
have cut off myself by my haste from the pleasures of life, when it was in my power to give
the reins to pleasure, and then to obtain grace? For the labourers in the vineyard who had
worked the longest time gained nothing thereby, for equal wages were given to the very
last.4066 You have delivered me from some trouble, whoever you are who say this, because
you have at last with much difficulty told the secret of your delay; and though I cannot applaud your shiftiness, I do applaud your confession. But come hither and listen to the interpretation of the parable, that you may not be injured by Scripture for want of information. 

4063 Gen. xix. 26.

Josh. vi. 25; James ii. 25.

Luke xviii. 14.

4066 Matt. xx. 1 sq.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

First of all, there is no question here of baptism, but of those who believe at different times
and enter the good vineyard of the Church. For from the day and hour at which each believed, from that day and hour he is required to work. And then, although they who entered
first contributed more to the measure of the labour yet they did not contribute more to the
measure of the purpose; nay perhaps even more was due to the last in respect of this, though
the statement may seem paradoxical. For the cause of their later entrance was their later
call to the work of the vineyard. In all other respects let us see how different they are. The
first did not believe or enter till they had agreed on their hire; but the others came forward
to do the work without an agreement, which is a proof of greater faith. And the first were
found to be of an envious and murmuring nature, but no such charge is brought against
the others. And to the first, that which was given was wages, though they were worthless
fellows; to the last it was the free gift. So that the first were convicted of folly, and with
reason deprived of the greater reward. Let us see what would have happened to them if they
had been late. Why, the equal pay, evidently. How then can they blame the employer as
unjust because of their equality? For all these things take away the merit of their labour
from the first, although they were at work first; and therefore it turns out that the distribution
of equal pay was just, if you measure the good will against the labour.

XXI. But supposing that the Parable does sketch the power of the font according to
your interpretation, what would prevent you, if you entered first, and bore the heat, from
avoiding envy of the last, that by this very lovingkindness you might obtain more, and receive
the reward, not as of grace but as of debt? And next, the workmen who receive the wages
are those who have entered, not those who have missed, the vineyard; which last is like to
be your case. So that if it were certain that you would obtain the Gift, though you are of
such a mind, and maliciously keep back some of the labour, you might be forgiven for taking
refuge in such arguments, and desiring to make unlawful gain out of the kindness of the
master; though I might assure you that the very fact of being able to labour is a greater reward
to any who is not altogether of a huckstering mind. But since there is a risk of your being
altogether shut out of the vineyard through your bargaining, and losing the capital through
stopping to pick up little gains, do let yourselves be persuaded by my words to forsake the
false interpretations and contradictions, and to come forward without arguing to receive
the Gift, lest you should be snatched away before you realize your hopes, and should find
out that it was to your own loss that you devised these sophistries.

XXII. But then, you say, is not God merciful, and since He knows our thoughts and
searches out our desires, will He not take the desire of Baptism instead of Baptism? You
are speaking in riddles, if what you mean is that because of God's mercy the unenlightened
is enlightened in His sight; and he is within the kingdom of heaven who merely desires to
attain to it, but refrains from doing that which pertains to the kingdom. I will, however,
speak out boldly my opinion on these matters; and I think that all other sensible men will

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

range themselves on my side. Of those who have received the gift, some were altogether
alien from God and from salvation, both addicted to all manner of sin, and desirous to be
bad; others were semivicious, and in a kind of mean state between good and bad; others
again, while they did that which was evil, yet did not approve their own action, just as men
in a fever are not pleased with their own sickness. And others even before they were illuminated were worthy of praise; partly by nature, and partly by the care with which they
prepared themselves for Baptism. These after their initiation became evidently better, and
less liable to fall; in the one case with a view to procuring good, and in the other in order to
preserve it. And amongst these, those who gave in to some evil are better than those who
were altogether bad; and better still than those who yielded a little, are those who were more
zealous, and broke up their fallow ground before Baptism; they have the advantage over the
others of having already laboured; for the font does not do away with good deeds as it does
with sins. But better even than these are they who are also cultivating the Gift, and are
polishing themselves to the utmost possible beauty.

XXIII. And so also in those who fail to receive the Gift, some are altogether animal or
bestial, according as they are either foolish or wicked; and this, I think, has to be added to
their other sins, that they have no reverence at all for this Gift, but look upon it as a mere
gift-to be acquiesced in if given them, and if not given them, then to be neglected. Others
know and honour the Gift, but put it off; some through laziness, some through greediness. 
Others are not in a position to receive it, perhaps on account of infancy,4067 or some perfectly
involuntary circumstance through which they are prevented from receiving it, even if they
wish. As then in the former case we found much difference, so too in this. They who altogether despise it are worse than they who neglect it through greed or carelessness. These
are worse than they who have lost the Gift through ignorance or tyranny, for tyranny is
nothing but an involuntary error.4068 And I think that the first will have to suffer punishment, as for all their sins, so for their contempt of baptism; and that the second will also
have to suffer, but less, because it was not so much through wickedness as through folly that
they wrought their failure; and that the third will be neither glorified nor punished by the
righteous Judge, as unsealed and yet not wicked, but persons who have suffered rather than
done wrong. For not every one who is not bad enough to be punished is good enough to
be honoured; just as not every one who is not good enough to be honoured is bad enough
to be punished. And I look upon it as well from another point of view. If you judge the

4067 That S. Gregory did not reject infant Baptism is clear, from the directions given later on in this Oration

(c. xxviii; and cf. c. xvii. s. fin.). He is here referring simply to the inability of infants to bring themselves to the

font whereby through the mistaken scruples of parents many must have died unbaptized.

i.e., The sins which are due altogether to external tyranny do not involve guilt, inasmuch as they are in-

voluntary, whereas the guilt of sin is in the will.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

murderously disposed man by his will alone, apart from the act of murder, then you may
reckon as baptized him who desired baptism apart from the reception of baptism. But if
you cannot do the one how can you do the other? I cannot see it. Or, if you like, we will
put it thus:-If desire in your opinion has equal power with actual baptism, then judge in
the same way in regard to glory, and you may be content with longing for it, as if that were
itself glory. And what harm is done you by your not attaining the actual glory, as long as
you have the desire for it?

XXIV. Therefore since you have heard these words, come forward to it, and be enlightened, and your faces shall not be ashamed4069 through missing the Grace. Receive then
the Enlightenment in due season, that darkness pursue you not, and catch you, and sever
you from the Illumining. The night cometh when no man can work4070 after our departure
hence. The one is the voice of David, the other of the True Light which lighteth every man
that cometh into the world.4071 And consider how Solomon reproves you who are too idle
or lethargic, saying, How long wilt thou sleep, O sluggard,4072 and when wilt thou arise out
of thy sleep? You rely upon this or that, and "pretend pretences in sins;"4073 am waiting
for Epiphany; I prefer Easter; I will wait for Pentecost.4074 It is better to be baptized with
Christ, to rise with Christ on the Day of His Resurrection,4075 to honour the Manifestation
of the Spirit. And what then? The end will come suddenly in a day for which thou lookest
not, and in an hour that thou art not aware of; and then you will have for a companion lack
of grace; and you will be famished in the midst of all those riches of goodness, though you

Ps. xxxiv. 5.

John xii. 35.

Ib. i. 4.

Prov. vi. 9.

Ps. cxli. 4.

The Festivals of Easter and Pentecost were set apart as early as the Second Century for the solemn ad-

ministration of Holy Baptism; and S. Siricius Bishop of Rome about the time of S. Gregory of Nazianzus, states

that all the Churches agreed in keeping these exclusively. But this is a mistake (though Van Espen says (II., c.

i., tit. 2, c. 4) that S. Siricius acknowledges the existence of the different custom, but condemns it, and gives ref-

erence to ad. Himerum Tarraconensem, c. 2), for there is evidence that in many Churches the Epiphany also

was thus observed, and in some Christmas also. But Tertullian (De Bapt.) says that no time is unsuitable. In

the Western Church, however, Papal decrees, Conciliar Canons, and Imperial Capitularies from the VIth to the

XIIIth. Centuries abound, limiting the administration, except in cases of sickness, to the two seasons of Easter

and Pentecost, on the Vigils of which it is still provided for in the Missals. No doubt it was felt to be a very

useful limitation, when most persons who were presented for Baptism were adults, and required preparation. 

When this ceased to be the case the rule gradually became obsolete, and has long ceased to be observed.

4075 Matt. xxiv. 50.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

ought to reap the opposite fruit from the opposite course, a harvest by diligence, and refreshment from the font, like the thirsty hart4076 that runs in haste to the spring, and quenches
the labour of his race by water; and not to be in Ishmael's case, dried up for want of water,4077
or as the fable has it, punished by thirst in the midst of a spring.4078 It is a sad thing to let
the market day go by and then to seek for work. It is a sad thing to let the Manna pass and
then to long for food. It is a sad thing to take a counsel too late, and to become sensible of
the loss only when it is impossible to repair it; that is, after our departure hence, and the
bitter closing of the acts of each man's life, and the punishment of sinners, and the glory of
the purified. Therefore do not delay in coming to grace, but hasten, lest the robber outstrip
you, lest the adulterer pass you by, lest the insatiate be satisfied before you, lest the murderer
seize the blessing first, or the publican or the fornicator, or any of these violent ones who
take the Kingdom of heaven by force.4079 For it suffers violence willingly, and is tyrannized
over through goodness.

XXV. Take my advice, my friend, and be slow to do evil, but swift to your salvation;
for readiness to evil and tardiness to good are equally bad. If you are invited to a revel, be
not swift to go; if to apostasy, leap away; if a company of evildoers say to you, "Come with
us, share our bloodguiltiness, let us hide in the earth a righteous man unjustly,"4080 do not
lend them even your ears. Thus you will make two very great gains; you will make known
to the other his sin, and you will deliver yourself from evil company. But if David the Great
say unto you, Come and let us rejoice in the Lord;4081 or another Prophet, Come and let us
ascend into the Mountain of the Lord;4082 or our Saviour Himself, Come unto me all ye
that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest;4083 or, Arise, let us go hence,
shining brightly, glittering above snow, whiter than milk,4084 shining above the sapphire
stone; let us not resist or delay. Let us be like Peter and John, and let us hasten;4085 as they
did to the Sepulchre and the Resurrection, so we to the Font; running together, racing against

Ps. xlii. 1.

4077 Gen. xix. 15. sqq.

4078 The allusion is to the well known story of Tantalus, whose punishment in hell was said to be that, being

tormented with hunger and thirst, he was condemned to stand for ever in water up to his lips, but to be unable

to drink, and to have a tree laden with luscious fruit within easy reach, but to be unable to gather of it.

4079 Matt. xi. 12.

Prov. i. 11.

Ps. xcv. 1.

4082 Mic. iv. 2.

4083 Matt. xi. 28.

4084 The A.V. is here used, as more accurate than the LXX. The passage is quoted freely from Lam. iv. 7.

John xx. 3.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

each other, striving to be first to obtain this Blessing. And say not, "Go away, and come
again, and tomorrow I will be baptized,"4086 when you may have the blessing today. "I will
have with me father, mother, brothers, wife, children, friends, and all whom I value, and
then I will be saved; but it is not yet the fitting time for me to be made bright;" for if you say
so, there is reason to fear lest you should have as sharers of your sorrow those whom you
hoped to have as sharers of your joy. If they will be with you, well;-but do not wait for
them. For it is base to say, "But where is my offering for my baptism, and where is my
baptismal robe, in which I shall be made bright, and where is what is wanted for the entertainment of my baptizers, that in these too I may become worthy of notice? For, as you see,
all these things are necessary, and on account of this the Grace will be lessened." Do not
thus trifle with great things, or allow yourself to think so basely. The Sacrament is greater
than the visible environment. Offer yourself; clothe yourself with Christ, feast me with your
conduct; I rejoice to be thus affectionately treated, and God Who gives these great gifts rejoices thus. Nothing is great in the sight of God, but what the poor may give, so that the
poor may not here also be outrun, for they cannot contend with the rich. In other matters
there is a distinction between poor and rich, but here the more willing is the richer.

XXVI. Let nothing hinder you from going on, nor draw you away from your readiness. 
While your desire is still vehement, seize upon that which you desire. While the iron is hot,
let it be tempered by the cold water, lest anything should happen in the interval, and put an
end to your desire. I am Philip; do you be Candace's Eunuch.4087 Do you also say, "See,
here is water, what doth hinder me to be baptized?" Seize the opportunity; rejoice greatly
in the blessing; and having spoken be baptized; and having been baptized be saved; and
though you be an Ethiopian body, be made white in soul. Do not say, "A Bishop shall baptize
me,-and he a Metropolitan,-and he of Jerusalem (for the Grace does not come of a place,
but of the Spirit),-and he of noble birth, for it would be a sad thing for my nobility to be
insulted by being baptized by a man of no family." Do not say, "I do not mind a mere Priest,
if he is a celibate, and a religious, and of angelic life; for it would be a sad thing for me to be
defiled even in the moment of my cleansing." Do not ask for credentials of the preacher or
the baptizer. For another is his judge,4088 and the examiner of what thou canst not see. For
man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart. But to thee let
every one be trustworthy for purification, so only he is one of those who have been approved,
not of those who are openly condemned, and not a stranger to the Church. Do not judge
your judges, you who need healing; and do not make nice distinctions about the rank of
those who shall cleanse you, or be critical about your spiritual fathers. One may be higher

Prov. iii. 28.

4087 Acts viii. 36.

1 Sam. xvi. 7.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

or lower than another, but all are higher than you. Look at it this way. One may be golden,
another iron, but both are rings and have engraved on them the same royal image; and thus
when they impress the wax, what difference is there between the seal of the one and that of
the other? None. Detect the material in the wax, if you are so very clever. Tell me which
is the impression of the iron ring, and which of the golden. And how do they come to be
one? The difference is in the material and not in the seal. And so anyone can be your baptizer; for though one may excel another in his life, yet the grace of baptism is the same, and
any one may be your consecrator who is formed in the same faith.

XXVII. Do not disdain to be baptized with a poor man, if you are rich; or if you are
noble, with one who is lowborn; or if you are a master, with one who is up to the present
time your slave. Not even so will you be humbling yourself as Christ, unto Whom you are
baptized today, Who for your sake took upon Himself even the form of a slave. From the
day of your new birth all the old marks were effaced, and Christ was put upon all in one
form. Do not disdain to confess your sins, knowing how John baptized, that by present
shame you may escape from future shame (for this too is a part of the future punishment);
and prove that you really hate sin by making a shew of it openly, and triumphing over it as
worthy of contempt. Do not reject the medicine of exorcism, nor refuse it because of its
length. This too is a touchstone of your right disposition for grace. What labour have you
to do compared with that of the Queen of Ethiopia,4089 who arose and came from the utmost
part of the earth to see the wisdom of Solomon? And behold a Greater than Solomon is
here4090 in the judgment of those who reason maturely. Do not hesitate either at length of
journey, or distance by sea; or fire, if this too lies before you; or of any other, small or great,
of the hindrances that you may attain to the gift. But if without any labour and trouble at
all you may obtain that which you desire, what folly it is to put off the gift: "Ho, every one
that thirsteth, come ye to the waters,"4091 Esaias invites you, "and he that hath no money,
come buy wine and milk, without money and without price." O swiftness of His mercy: O
easiness of the Covenant: This blessing may be bought by you merely for willing it; He accepts
the very desire as a great price; He thirsts to be thirsted for; He gives to drink to all who
desire to drink; He takes it as a kindness to be asked for the kindness; He is ready and liberal;
He gives with more pleasure than others receive.4092 Only let us not be condemned for
frivolity by asking for little, and for what is unworthy of the Giver. Blessed is he from whom
Jesus asks drink, as He did from that Samaritan woman, and gives a well of water springing
up unto eternal life.4093 Blessed is he that soweth beside all waters, and upon every soul,

1 Kings x. 1.

4090 Matt. xii. 42.

Isa. lv. 1.

4092 Acts xx. 35.

John iv. 7.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

tomorrow to be ploughed and watered, which today the ox and the ass tread, while it is dry
and without water,4094 and oppressed with unreason. And blessed is he who, though he be
a "valley of rushes,"4095 is watered out of the House of the Lord; for he is made fruitbearing
instead of rushbearing, and produces that which is for the food of man, not that which is
rough and unprofitable. And for the sake of this we must be very careful not to miss the
Grace.

XXVIII. Be it so, some will say, in the case of those who ask for Baptism; what have you
to say about those who are still children, and conscious neither of the loss nor of the grace? 
Are we to baptize them too? Certainly, if any danger presses. For it is better that they should
be unconsciously sanctified than that they should depart unsealed and uninitiated.

A proof of this is found in the Circumcision on the eighth day, which was a sort of
typical seal, and was conferred on children before they had the use of reason. And so is the
anointing of the doorposts,4096 which preserved the firstborn, though applied to things
which had no consciousness. But in respect of others4097 I give my advice to wait till the
end of the third year, or a little more or less, when they may be able to listen and to answer
something about the Sacrament; that, even though they do not perfectly understand it, yet
at any rate they may know the outlines; and then to sanctify them in soul and body with the
great sacrament of our consecration. For this is how the matter stands; at that time they
begin to be responsible for their lives, when reason is matured, and they learn the mystery
of life (for of sins of ignorance owing to their tender years they have no account to give),
and it is far more profitable on all accounts to be fortified by the Font, because of the sudden
assaults of danger that befall us, stronger than our helpers.

XXIX. But, one says, Christ was thirty years old when He was baptized,4098 and that
although He was God; and do you bid us hurry our Baptism?-You have solved the difficulty
when you say He was God. For He was absolute cleansing; He had no need of cleansing;
but it was for you that He was purified, just as it was for you that, though He had not flesh,
yet He is clothed with flesh. Nor was there any danger to Him from putting off Baptism,
for He had the ordering of His own Passion as of His own Birth. But in your case the danger
is to no small interests, if you were to depart after a birth to corruption alone, and without
being clothed with incorruption. And there is this further point for me to consider, that
that particular time of baptism was a necessity for Him, but your case is not the same. He
manifested Himself in the thirtieth year after His birth and not before; first, in order that

Isa. xxxii. 20.

Joel iii. 18; The Hebrew word rendered "rushes" by the LXX is in our Hebrew text Shittim-acacia trees.

Exod. xii. 22.

i.e. when there is no danger.

Luke iii. 23.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

He might not appear ostentatious, which is a condition belonging to vulgar minds; and next,
because that age tests virtue thoroughly, and is the right time to teach. And since it was
needful for Him to undergo the passion which saves the world, it was needful also that all
things which belong to the passion should fit into the passion; the Manifestation, the Baptism,
the Witness from Heaven, the Proclamation, the concourse of the multitude, the Miracles;
and that they should be as it were one body, not torn asunder, nor broken apart by intervals. 
For out of the Baptism and Proclamation arose that earthquake of people coming together,4099 for so Scripture calls that time;4100 and out of the multitude arose the shewing of the
signs and the miracles that lead up to the Gospel. And out of these came the jealousy, and
from this the hatred, and out of the hatred the circumstance of the plot against Him, and
the betrayal; and out of these the Cross, and the other events by which our Salvation has
been effected. Such are the reasons in the case of Christ4101 so far as we can attain to them. 
And perhaps another more secret reason might be found.

XXX. But for you, what necessity is there that by following the examples which are far
above you, you should do a thing so ill-advised for yourself? For there are many other details
of the Gospel History which are quite different to what happens nowadays, and the seasons
of which do not correspond. For instance Christ fasted a little before His temptation, we
before Easter. As far as the fasting days are concerned it is the same,4102 but the difference
in the seasons is no little one. He armed Himself with them against temptation; but to us
this fast is symbolical of dying with Christ, and it is a purification in preparation for the
festival. And He fasted absolutely for forty days, for He was God; but we measure our fasting
by our power, even though some are led by zeal to rush beyond their strength. Again, He
gave the Sacrament of the Passover to His Disciples in an upper chamber, and after supper,
and one day before He suffered; but we celebrate it in Houses of Prayer, and before food,4103
and after His resurrection. He rose again the third day; our resurrection is not till after a
long time. But matters which have to do with Him are neither abruptly separated from us,
nor yet yoked together with those which concern us in point of time; but they were handed
down to us just so far as to be patterns of what we should do, and then they carefully avoided
an entire and exact resemblance.

"All the City was moved." A.V., lit. "shaken as by earthquake."

4100 Matt. xxi. 10.

i.e., the reasons why He was not baptized till He was thirty.

4102 Here is an indication that the Forty Days of Lent were a well known observance in S. Gregory's time. 

At the Council of Nicaea this period was taken for granted. The Great Fast of the Eastern Church begins on the

Monday after the Sunday corresponding to our Quinquagesima, and the Fast is kept to some extent even on

Sunday.

4103 Note the rule of Fasting Communion here recognized as universal.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

XXXI. If then you will listen to me, you will bid a long farewell to all such arguments,
and you will jump at this Blessing, and begin to struggle in a twofold conflict; first, to prepare
yourself for baptism by purifying yourself; and next, to preserve the baptismal gift; for it is
a matter of equal difficulty to obtain a blessing which we have not, and to keep it when we
have gained it. For often what zeal has acquired sloth has destroyed; and what hesitation
has lost diligence has regained. A great assistance to the attainment of what you desire are
vigils, fasts, sleeping on the ground, prayers, tears, pity of and almsgiving to those who are
in need. And let these be your thanksgiving for what you have received, and at the same
time your safeguard of them. You have the benefit to remind you of many commandments;
so do not transgress them. Does a poor man approach you? Remember how poor you once
were, and how rich you were made. One in want of bread or of drink, perhaps another
Lazarus,4104 is cast at your gate; respect the Sacramental Table to which you have approached,
the Bread of Which you have partaken, the Cup in Which you have communicated,4105
being consecrated by the Sufferings of Christ. If a stranger fall at your feet, homeless and a
foreigner, welcome in him Him who for your sake was a stranger, and that among His
own,4106 and who came to dwell in you by His grace, and who drew you towards the heavenly
dwelling place. Be a Zaccheus,4107 who yesterday was a Publican, and is to-day of liberal
soul; offer all to the coming in of Christ, that though small in bodily stature you may show
yourself great, nobly contemplating Christ. A sick or a wounded man lies before you; respect
your own health, and the wounds from which Christ delivered you. If you see one naked
clothe him, in honour of your own garment of incorruption, which is Christ, for as many
as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ.4108 If you find a debtor falling at your
feet,4109 tear up every document, whether just or unjust. Remember the ten thousand talents
which Christ forgave you, and be not a harsh exactor of a smaller debt-and that from
whom? From your fellow servant, you who were forgiven so much more by the Master. 
Otherwise you will have to give satisfaction to His mercy, which you would not imitate and
take as your copy.

XXXII. Let the laver be not for your body only, but also for the image of God in you;
not merely a washing away of sins in you, but also a correction of your temper; let it not
only wash away the old filth, but let it purify the fountainhead. Let it not only move you to

Luke xvi. 19 sq.

4105 Note that this allusion implies that Communion in both Kinds was given separately, as in the Anglican

Church, not by intinction, as in the present Orthodox Eastern Church.

John i. 11.

Luke xix. 1 sq.

4108 Galat. iii. 27.

4109 Matt. xviii. 23, &c.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

honourable acquisition, but let it teach you also honourably to lose possession; or, which is
more easy, to make restitution of what you have wrongfully acquired. For what profit is it
that your sin should have been forgiven you, but the loss which you have inflicted should
not be repaired to him whom you have injured? Two sins are on your conscience, the one
that you made a dishonest gain, the other that you retained the gains; you received forgiveness
for the one, but in respect of the other you are still in sin, for you have still possession of
what belongs to another; and your sin has not been put to an end, but only divided by the
time which has elapsed. Part of it was perpetrated before your Baptism, but part remains
after your Baptism; for Baptism carries forgiveness of Past, not of Present sins; and its
purification must not be played with, but be genuinely impressed upon you; you must be
made perfectly bright, and not be merely coloured; you must receive the gift, not of a mere
covering of your sins, but of a taking them clean away. Blessed are they whose iniquities
are forgiven4110...this is done by the complete cleansing...and whose sins are hidden...this
belongs to those who are not yet healed in their deepest soul. Blessed is the man to whom
the Lord will not impute sin....This is a third class of sinners, whose actions are not praiseworthy, but who are innocent of intention.

XXXIII. What say I then, and what is my argument? Yesterday you were a Canaanite
soul bent together4111 by sin; today you have been made straight by the Word. Do not be
bent gain, and condemned to the earth, as if weighed down by the Devil with a wooden
collar, nor get an incurable curvature. Yesterday you were being dried up4112 by an
abundant haemorrhage, for you were pouring out crimson sin; today stanched and flourishing
again, for you have touched the hem of Christ and your issue has been stayed. Guard, I
pray you, the cleansing lest you should again have a haemorrhage, and not be able to lay
hold of Christ to steal salvation; for Christ does not like to be stolen from often, though He
is very merciful. Yesterday you were flung upon a bed, exhausted and paralyzed, and you
had no one when the water should be troubled to put you into the pool.4113 Today you
have Him Who is in one Person Man and God, or rather God and Man. You were raised
up from your bed, or rather you took up your bed, and publicly acknowledged the benefit. 
Do not again be thrown upon your bed by sinning, in the evil rest of a body paralyzed by
its pleasures. But as you now are, so walk, mindful of the command,4114 Behold thou art
made whole; sin no more lest a worse thing happen unto thee if thou prove thyself bad after
the blessing thou hast received. You have heard the loud voice, Lazarus, come forth,4115 as

Ps. xxxii. 1.

Luke xiii. 11, which S. Gregory has apparently mixed with a recollection of Matt. xv. 21.

4112 Matt. ix. 20.

John v. 1, &c.

Ib. v. 14.

John xi. 43.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

you lay in the tomb; not, however, after four days, but after many days; and you were loosed
from the bonds of your graveclothes. Do not again become dead, nor live with those who
dwell in the tombs;4116 nor bind yourself with the bonds of your own sins;4117 for it is uncertain whether you will rise again from the tomb till the last and universal resurrection,
which will bring every work into judgment,4118 not to be healed, but to be judged, and to
give account of all which for good or evil it has treasured up.

XXXIV. If you were full of leprosy, that shapeless evil, yet you scraped off the evil
matter, and received again the Image whole. Shew your cleansing to me your Priest, that I
may recognize how much more precious it is than the legal one. Do not range yourself with
the nine unthankful men, but imitate the tenth.4119 For although he was a Samaritan, yet
he was of better mind than the others. Make certain that you will not break out again with
evil ulcers, and find the indisposition of your body hard to heal. Yesterday meanness and
avarice were withering your hand; to-day let liberality and kindness stretch it out.4120 It is
a noble cure for a weak hand to disperse abroad, to give to the poor,4121 to pour out the
things which we possess abundantly, till we reach the very bottom; and perhaps this will
gush forth food for you, as for the woman of Sarepta,4122 and especially if you happen to
be feeding an Elias, to recognize that it is a good abundance to be needy for the sake of
Christ, Who for our sakes became poor. If you were deaf and dumb, let the Word sound4123
in your ears, or rather keep there Him Who hath sounded. Do not shut your ears to the
Instruction of the Lord, and to His Counsel, like the adder to charms.4124 If you are blind
and unenlightened, lighten your eyes that you sleep not in death.4125 In God's Light see
light,4126 and in the Spirit of God be enlightened by the Son, That Threefold and Undivided
Light. If you receive all the Word, you will bring therewith upon your own soul all the
healing powers of Christ, with which separately these individuals were healed. Only be not
ignorant of the measure of grace; only let not the enemy, while you sleep, maliciously sow
tares.4127 Only take care that as by your cleansing you have become an object of enmity to

4116 Mark v. 3.

Ps. lxviii. 9.

Eccles. xii. 14.

Luke xvii. 12, &c.

Ib. vi. 6.

Ps. cxii. 9.

1 Kings xvii. 8, &c.

4123 Mark vii. 32.

Ps. lviii. 4, 5.

Ib. xiii. 3.

Ib. xxxvi. 9.

4127 Matt. xiii. 25.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

the Evil One, you do not again make yourself an object of pity by sin. Only be careful lest,
while rejoicing and lifted up above measure by the blessing, you fall again through pride. 
Only be diligent as to your cleansing, "setting ascensions in your heart,"4128 and keep with
all diligence the remission which you have received as a gift, in order that, while the remission
comes from God, the preservation of it may come from yourself also.

XXXV. How shall this be? Remember always the parable,4129 and so will you best and
most perfectly help yourself. The unclean and malignant spirit is gone out of you, being
chased by baptism. He will not submit to the expulsion, he will not resign himself to be
houseless and homeless: He goes through waterless places, dry of the Divine Stream, and
there he desires to abide. He wanders, seeking rest; he finds none. He lights on baptized
souls, whose sins the font has washed away. He fears the water; he is choked with the
cleansing, as the Legion were in the sea.4130 Again he returns to the house whence he came
out. He is shameless, he is contentious, he makes a fresh assault upon it, he makes a new
attempt. If he finds that Christ has taken up His abode there, and has filled the place which
he had vacated, he is driven back again, and goes off without success and is become an object
of pity in his wandering state. But if he finds in you a place, swept and garnished indeed,
but empty and idle, equally ready to take in this or that which shall first occupy it, he makes
a leap into it, he takes up his abode there with a larger train; and the last state is worse than
the first, inasmuch as then there was a hope of amendment and safety, but now the evil is
rampant, and drags in sin by its flight from good, and therefore the possession is more secure
to him who dwells there.

XXXVI. I will remind you again about Illuminations, and that often, and will reckon
them up from Holy Scripture. For I myself shall be happier for remembering them (for
what is sweeter than light to those who have tasted light?) and I will dazzle you with my
words. There is sprung up a light for the righteous, and its partner joyful gladness.4131 
And, The light of the righteous is everlasting;4132 and Thou art shining wondrously from
the everlasting mountains, is said to God, I think of the Angelic powers which aid our efforts
after good. And you have heard David's words; The Lord is my Light and my Salvation,
whom then shall I fear?4133 And now he asks that the Light and the Truth may be sent forth

Ps. lxxxiv. 6. So LXX. and Vulgate. Various interpretations are given of these Steps, but they differ only

by indicating different virtues and good works as especially intended, and may well be summed up under the

three heads of the purgative, illuminative, and unitive ways of salvation. A man can set in his heart such a "going

up" by the co-operation of grace and free will.-Neale & Littledale in Pss.

Luke xi. 24.

4130 Mark v. 13.

Ps. xcvii. 11.

Prov. xiii. 9.

Ps. lxxvi. 4.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

for him,4134 now giving thanks that he has a share in it, in that the Light of God is marked
upon him;4135 that is, that the signs of the illumination given are impressed upon him and
recognized. One light alone let us shun-that which is the offspring of the baleful fire; let
us not walk in the light of our fire,4136 and in the flame which we have kindled. For I know
a cleansing fire which Christ came to send upon the earth,4137 and He Himself is anagogically4138 called a Fire. This Fire takes away whatsoever is material and of evil habit; and this
He desires to kindle with all speed, for He longs for speed in doing us good, since He gives
us even coals of fire to help us.4139 I know also a fire which is not cleansing, but avenging;
either that fire of Sodom4140 which He pours down on all sinners,4141 mingled with brimstone and storms, or that which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels4142 or that which
proceeds from the face of the Lord, and shall burn up his enemies round about;4143 and one
even more fearful still than these, the unquenchable fire4144 which is ranged with the worm
that dieth not but is eternal for the wicked. For all these belong to the destroying power;
though some may prefer even in this place to take a more merciful view4145 of this fire,
worthily of Him That chastises.

XXXVII. And as I know of two kinds of fire, so also do I of light. The one is the light
of our ruling power directing our steps according to the will of God; the other is a deceitful
and meddling one, quite contrary to the true light, though pretending to be that light, that
it may cheat us by its appearance. This really is darkness, yet has the appearance of noonday,
the high perfection of light. And so I read that passage of those who continually flee in
darkness at noonday;4146 for this is really night, and yet is thought to be bright light by those
who have been ruined by luxury. For what saith David? "Night was around me and I knew

Ib. xliii. 3.

Ib. iv. 7.

Isa. l. 11.

Luke xii. 49.

4138 Anagoge is one of the three methods of mystical interpretation, according to the distich, Littera scripta

docet: Quid credas allegoria: Quid speres anagoge; Quid agas tropologia.

cf. Isa. xlvii. 14. LXX.

4140 Gen. xix. 24.

Ps. xi. 6.

4142 Matt. xxv. 41.

Ps. xcvii. 3.

4144 Mark ix. 44, &c.

i.e. To view the Fire there spoken of as Temporal punishment, with a purpose of correcting and reforming

the sinner. This is not S. Gregory's own view of the meaning of the passage, though he admits it to be tenable.

Isa. xvi. 3.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

it not, for I thought that my luxury was enlightenment."4147 But such are they, and in this
condition; but let us kindle for ourselves the light of knowledge.4148 This will be done by
sowing unto righteousness, and reaping the fruit of life, for action is the patron of contemplation, that amongst other things we may learn also what is the true light, and what the
false, and be saved from falling unawares into evil wearing the guise of good. Let us be made
light, as it was said to the disciples by the Great Light, ye are the light of the world.4149 Let
us be made lights in the world, holding forth the Word of Life;4150 that is, let us be made a
quickening power to others. Let us lay hold of the Godhead; let us lay hold of the First and
Brightest Light. Let us walk towards Him shining, before our feet stumble upon dark and
hostile mountains.4151 While it is day let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and
drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness,4152 which are the dishonesties of the
night.

XXXVIII. Let us cleanse every member, Brethren, let us purify every sense; let nothing
in us be imperfect or of our first birth; let us leave nothing unilluminated. Let us enlighten
our eyes,4153 that we may look straight on, and not bear in ourselves any harlot idol through
curious and busy sight; for even though we might not worship lust, yet our soul would be
defiled. If there be beam or mote,4154 let us purge it away, that we may be able to see those
of others also. Let us be enlightened in our ears; let us be enlightened in our tongue, that
we may hearken what the Lord God will speak,4155 and that He may cause4156 us to hear
His lovingkindness in the morning, and that we may be made to hear of joy and gladness,4157
spoken into godly ears, that we may not be a sharp sword, nor a whetted razor,4158 nor turn
under our tongue labour and toil,4159 but that we may speak the Wisdom of God in a mystery,

4147 A strange paraphrase of the last clause of Ps. cxxxix. 11, in the LXX., "And I said, then the darkness shall

swallow me, and night is enlightenment in my luxury."

4148 Thus LXX. in Hosea x. 12, where we read "Break up your fallow ground."

4149 Matt. v. 14.

Phil. ii. 15, 16.

Jer. xlii. 16.

4152 Rom. xiii. 13.

Prov. iv. 25.

4154 Matt. vii. 2.

Ps. lxxxv. 8.

Ib. cxliii. 8.

Ib. li. 8.

Ib. lvii. 4; lii. 2.

Ib. x. 7.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

even the hidden Wisdom,4160 reverencing the fiery tongues.4161 Let us be healed also in
the smell, that we be not effeminate; and be sprinkled with dust instead of sweet perfumes,4162
but may smell the Ointment that was poured out for us,4163 spiritually receiving it; and so
formed and transformed by it, that from us too a sweet odour may be smelled. Let us cleanse
our touch, our taste, our throat, not touching them over gently, nor delighting in smooth
things, but handling them as is worthy of Him, the Word That was made flesh for us; and
so far following the example of Thomas,4164 not pampering them with dainties and sauces,
those brethren of a more baleful pampering,4165 but tasting and learning that the Lord is
good,4166 with the better and abiding taste; and not for a short while refreshing that baneful
and thankless dust, which lets pass and does not hold that which is given to it; but delighting
it with the words which are sweeter than honey.4167

XXXIX. And in addition to what has been said, it is good with our head cleansed, as
the head which is the workshop of the senses is cleansed, to hold fast the Head of Christ,4168
from which the whole body is fitly joined together and compacted; and to cast down our
sin that exalted itself, when it would exalt us above our better part. It is good also for the
shoulder to be sanctified and purified that it may be able to take up the Cross of Christ,
which not everyone can easily do. It is good for the hands to be consecrated, and the feet;
the one that they may in every place be lifted up holy;4169 and that they may lay hold of the
discipline4170 of Christ, lest the Lord at any time be angered; and that the Word may gain
credence by action, as was the case with that which was given in the hand of a prophet;4171
the other, that they be not swift to shed blood, nor to run to evil,4172 but that they be prompt
to run to the Gospel and the Prize4173 of the high Calling, and to receive Christ Who washes
and cleanses them. And if there be also a cleansing of that belly which receiveth and digesteth

1 Cor. ii. 7.

4161 Acts ii. 3.

Isa. iii. 34.

4163 Cant. i. 3.

John xx. 28.

4165 Quia gula est parens immunditiae et luxuriae.

Ps. xxxiv. 8.

Ps. cxix. 103.

Ephes. iv. 16.

1 Tim. ii. 8.

Ps. ii. 12.

4171 Hag. i. 1.

4172 Mal. i. 1 sq.; Prov. i. 16.

Phil. iii. 14.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

the food of the Word, it were good also; not to make it a god by luxury and the meat that
perisheth,4174 but rather to give it all possible cleansing, and to make it more spare, that it
may receive the Word of God at the very heart, and grieve honourably over the sins of Israel.4175 I find also the heart and inward parts deemed worthy of honour. David convinces
me of this, when he prays that a clean heart may be created in him, and a right spirit renewed
in his inward parts;4176 meaning, I think, the mind and its movements or thoughts.

XL. And what of the loins, or reins, for we must not pass these over? Let the purification
take hold of these also. Let our loins be girded about and kept in check by continence, as
the Law bade Israel of old when partaking of the Passover.4177 For none comes out of Egypt
purely, or escapes the Destroyer, except he who has disciplined these. And let the reins be
changed by that good conversion by which they transfer all the affections to God, so that
they can say, Lord, all my desire is before Thee,4178 and the day of man have I not desired;4179
for you must be a man of desires,4180 but they must be those of the spirit. For thus you
would destroy the dragon that carries the greater part of his strength upon his navel and his
loins,4181 by slaying the power that comes to him from these. Do not be surprised at my
giving a more abundant honour to our uncomely parts,4182 mortifying them and making
them chaste by my speech, and standing up against the flesh. Let us give to God all our
members which are upon the earth;4183 let us consecrate them all; not the lobe of the liver4184

John vi. 27.

Jer. iv. 19.

Ps. li. 10.

Exod. xii. 11.

Ps. xxxviii. 9.

Job xvii. 16.

4180 Dan. x. 11.

Job xxxix. 16.

1 Cor. xii. 23.

4183 Col. iii. 5.

Levit. iii. 4. The Mosaic Law ordered that the upper part of the liver and the kidneys, together with the

fat, should in creation sacrifices be consecrated to God; signifying that anger (which was intimated by the liver,

which produces bile), and lust (signified by the kidneys and the fat) should especially be sacrificed to God. 

Again Moses assigned the shoulder and the breast of some sacrifices to the Priests, hinting obscurely at this,

that we ought to take care to offer our hearts to the Priests by confession (for the heart is signified by the breast

which protects it) and also our actions, which are intended by the shoulder, that by the Priest they may be

presented to God. But the Apostle bids us mortify all our members which are upon the earth, and offer ourselves

entire as a sacrifice to God, destroying with the sword of the Word of God all our evil and corrupt affec-

tions.-Nicetas.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

or the kidneys with the fat, nor some part of our bodies now this now that (why should we
despise the rest?); but let us bring ourselves entire, let us be reasonable holocausts,4185 perfect
sacrifices; and let us not make only the shoulder or the breast a portion for the Priest to take
away,4186 for that would be a small thing, but let us give ourselves entire, that we may receive
back ourselves entire; for this is to receive entirely, when we give ourselves to God and offer
as a sacrifice our own salvation.

XLI. Besides all this and before all, keep I pray you the good deposit, by which I live
and work, and which I desire to have as the companion of my departure; with which I endure
all that is so distressful, and despise all delights; the confession of the Father and the Son
and the Holy Ghost. This I commit unto you to-day; with this I will baptize you and make
you grow. This I give you to share, and to defend all your life, the One Godhead and Power,
found in the Three in Unity, and comprising the Three separately, not unequal, in substances
or natures, neither increased nor diminished by superiorities or inferiorities; in every respect
equal, in every respect the same; just as the beauty and the greatness of the heavens is one;
the infinite conjunction of Three Infinite Ones, Each God when considered in Himself; as
the Father so the Son, as the Son so the Holy Ghost; the Three One God when contemplated
together; Each God because Consubstantial; One God because of the Monarchia. No
sooner do I conceive of the One than I am illumined by the Splendour of the Three; no
sooner do I distinguish Them than I am carried back to the One. When I think of any One
of the Three I think of Him as the Whole, and my eyes are filled, and the greater part of
what I am thinking of escapes me.4187 I cannot grasp the greatness of That One so as to
attribute a greater greatness to the Rest. When I contemplate the Three together, I see but
one torch, and cannot divide or measure out the Undivided Light.

XLII. Do you fear to speak of Generation lest you should attribute aught of passion to
the impassible God? I on the other hand fear to speak of Creation, lest I should destroy God
by the insult and the untrue division, either cutting the Son away from the Father, or from
the Son the Substance of the Spirit. For this paradox is involved, that not only is a created
Life foisted into the Godhead by those who measure Godhead badly; but even this created
life is divided against itself. For as these low earthly minds make the Son subject to the
Father, so again is the rank of the Spirit made inferior to that of the Son, until both God and
created life are insulted by the new Theology. No, my friends, there is nothing servile in
the Trinity, nothing created, nothing accidental, as I have heard one of the wise4188 say. If

4185 Rom. xii. 1.

Levit. vii. 34.

i.e. If I think of One Blessed Person, the other Two are not in my mind, and so the greater part of God

escapes me.

S. Gregory Thaumaturgus.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

I yet pleased men I should not be the servant of Christ, says the Apostle;4189 and if I yet
worshipped a creature, or were baptized into a creature, I should not be made divine, nor
have changed my first birth. What shall I say to those who worship Astarte or Chemosh,
the abomination of the Sidonians, or the likeness of a star,4190 a god a little above them to
these idolaters, but yet a creature and a piece of workmanship, when I myself either do not
worship Two of Those into Whose united Name I am baptized, or else worship my fellowservants, for they are fellow-servants, even if a little higher in the scale; for differences must
exist among fellow-servants.

XLIII. I should like to call the Father the greater, because from him flows both the
Equality and the Being of the Equals (this will be granted on all hands), but I am afraid to
use the word Origin, lest I should make Him the Origin of Inferiors, and thus insult Him
by precedencies of honour. For the lowering of those Who are from Him is no glory to the
Source. Moreover, I look with suspicion at your insatiate desire, for fear you should take
hold of this word Greater, and divide the Nature, using the word Greater in all senses,
whereas it does not apply to the Nature, but only to Origination. For in the Consubstantial
Persons there is nothing greater or less in point of Substance. I would honour the Son as
Son before the Spirit, but Baptism consecrating me through the Spirit does not allow of this. 
But are you afraid of being reproached with Tritheism? Do you take possession of this good
thing, the Unity in the Three, and leave me to fight the battle. Let me be the shipbuilder,
and do you use the ship; or if another is the builder of the ship, take me for the architect of
the house, and do you live in it with safety, though you spent no labour upon it. You shall
not have a less prosperous voyage, or a less safe habitation than I who built them, because
you have not laboured upon them. See how great is my indulgence; see the goodness of the
Spirit; the war shall be mine, yours the achievement; I will be under fire, and you shall live
in peace; but join with your defender in prayer, and give me your hand by the Faith. I have
three stones which I will sling at the Philistine;4191 I have three inspirations against the son
of the Sareptan,4192 with which I will quicken the slain; I have three floods against the faggots
with which I will consecrate the Sacrifice with water, raising the most unexpected fire;4193
and I will throw down the prophets of shame by the power of the Sacrament.

XLIV. What need have I any more of speech? It is the time for teaching, not for controversy. I protest before God and the elect Angels,4194 be thou baptized in this faith. If

4189 Galat. i. 10.

4190 Amos v. 26.

1 Sam. xvii. 49.

1 Kings xvii. 21.

Ib. xviii. 33.

1 Tim. v. 21.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

thy heart is written upon in some other way than as my teaching demands, come and have
the writing changed; I am no unskilled caligrapher of these truths. I write that which is
written upon my own heart; and I teach that which I have been taught, and have kept from
the beginning up to these hoar hairs.4195 Mine is the risk; be mine also the reward of being
the Director of your soul, and consecrating you by Baptism. But if you are already rightly
disposed, and marked with the good inscription, see that you keep what is written, and remain
unchanged in a changing time concerning an unchanging Thing. Follow Pilate's example
in the better sense; you who are rightly written on, imitate him who wrote wrongfully. Say
to those who would persuade you differently, what I have written, I have written.4196 For
indeed I should be ashamed if, while that which was wrong remained inflexible, that which
is right should be so easily bent aside; whereas we ought to be easily bent to that which is
better from that which is worse, but immovable from the better to the worse. If it be thus,
and according to this teaching that you come to Baptism, lo I will not refrain my lips,4197
lo I lend my hands to the Spirit; let us hasten your salvation. The Spirit is eager, the Consecrator is ready, the Gift is prepared. But if you still halt and will not receive the perfectness
of the Godhead, go and look for someone else to baptize-or rather to drown you: I have
no time to cut the Godhead, and to make you dead in the moment of your regeneration,
that you should have neither the Gift nor the Hope of Grace, but should in so short a time
make shipwreck of your salvation. For whatever you may subtract from the Deity of the
Three, you will have overthrown the whole, and destroyed your own being made perfect.

XLV. But not yet perhaps is there formed upon your soul any writing good or bad; and
you want to be written upon today, and formed by us unto perfection. Let us go within the
cloud. Give me the tables of your heart; I will be your Moses, though this be a bold thing
to say; I will write on them with the finger of God a new Decalogue.4198 I will write on them
a shorter method of salvation. And if there be any heretical or unreasoning beast, let him
remain below, or he will run the risk of being stoned by the Word of truth. I will baptize
you and make you a disciple in the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost;4199 and These Three have One common name, the Godhead. And you shall know,
both by appearances4200 and by words that you reject all ungodliness, and are united to all

Supposing S. Gregory's birth to have been in 325, the earliest date which seems at all probable, he would

be under 60 in 381, when this Oration was delivered; so that the expression on the text must be held to be a

rhetorical exaggeration. Suidas, however, pushes back the date of his birth as far as 299 or 300; which does not

fit in well with the chronology of his life, as given by himself.

John xix. 22.

Ps. xl. 9.

Exod. xxxviii. 28.

Ib. xix. 13.

4200 Matt. xxviii. 19.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

the Godhead. Believe that all that is in the world, both all that is seen and all that is unseen,
was made out of nothing by God, and is governed by the Providence of its Creator, and will
receive a change to a better state. Believe that evil has no substance or kingdom, either unoriginate or self-existent or created by God; but that it is our work, and the evil one's, and
came upon us through our heedlessness, but not from our Creator. Believe that the Son of
God, the Eternal Word, Who was begotten of the Father before all time and without body,
was in these latter days for your sake made also Son of Man, born of the Virgin Mary ineffably
and stainlessly (for nothing can be stained where God is, and by which salvation comes), in
His own Person at once entire Man and perfect God, for the sake of the entire sufferer, that
He may bestow salvation on your whole being, having destroyed the whole condemnation
of your sins: impassible in His Godhead, passible in that which He assumed; as much Man
for your sake as you are made God for His. Believe that for us sinners He was led to death;
was crucified and buried, so far as to taste of death; and that He rose again the third day,
and ascended into heaven, that He might take you with Him who were lying low; and that
He will come again with His glorious Presence to judge the quick and the dead; no longer
flesh, nor yet without a body, according to the laws which He alone knows of a more godlike
body, that He may be seen by those who pierced Him,4201 and on the other hand may remain
as God without carnality. Receive besides this the Resurrection, the Judgment and the Reward
according to the righteous scales of God; and believe that this will be Light to those whose
mind is purified (that is, God-seen and known) proportionate to their degree of purity,
which we call the Kingdom of heaven; but to those who suffer from blindness of their ruling
faculty, darkness, that is estrangement from God, proportionate to their blindness here. 
Then, in the tenth place, work that which is good upon this foundation of dogma; for faith
without works is dead,4202 even as are works apart from faith. This is all that may be divulged
of the Sacrament, and that is not forbidden to the ear of the many. The rest you shall learn
within the Church by the grace of the Holy Trinity; and those matters you shall conceal
within yourself, sealed and secure.

XLVI. But one thing more I preach unto you. The Station in which you shall presently
stand after your Baptism before the Great Sanctuary4203 is a foretype of the future glory. 

4201 Rev. i. 7.

James ii. 17.

4203 The word here used is Bema, which properly means a Platform. In an Oriental Church the East end of

the building is raised by one or more steps above the choir. A little distance East of these steps is a great Screen

called the Iconostasis, from the picture (Icons) with which it is covered. It has three doors, one in the centre,

called the Royal Gates, leading to the Altar; one on the left hand, leading to the Prothesis, or Credence; and one

on the right to the Sacristy. The whole raised portion is called the Bema, or sometimes the Altar, the Altar

proper being known as the Throne.

The Oration on Holy Baptism.

The Psalmody with which you will be received is a prelude to the Psalmody of Heaven; the
lamps which you will kindle are a Sacrament of the illumination there with which we shall
meet the Bridegroom, shining and virgin souls, with the lamps of our faith shining, not
sleeping through our carelessness, that we may not miss Him that we look for if He come
unexpectedly; nor yet unfed, and without oil, and destitute of good works, that we be not
cast out of the Bridechamber. For I see how pitiable is such a case. He will come when the
cry demands the meeting, and they who are prudent shall meet Him, with their light shining
and its food abundant, but the others seeking for oil too late from those who possess it. 
And He will come with speed, and the former shall go in with Him, but the latter shall be
shut out, having wasted in preparations the time of entrance; and they shall weep sore when
all too late they learn the penalty of their slothfulness, when the Bride-chamber can no
longer be entered by them for all their entreaties, for they have shut it against themselves
by their sin, following in another fashion the example of those who missed the Wedding
feast4204 with which the good Father feasts the good Bridegroom; one on account of a newly
wedded wife; another of a newly purchased field; another of a yoke of oxen; which he and
they acquired to their misfortune, since for the sake of the little they lose the great. For none
are there of the disdainful, nor of the slothful, nor of those who are clothed in filthy rags
and not in the Wedding garment even though here they may have thought themselves
worthy of wearing the bright robe there, and secretly intruded themselves, deceiving themselves with vain hopes. And then, What? When we have entered, then the Bridegroom
knows what He will teach us, and how He will converse with the souls that have come in
with Him. He will converse with them, I think in teaching things more perfect and more
pure. Of which may we all, both Teachers and Taught, have share, in the Same Christ our
Lord, to Whom be the Glory and the Empire, for ever and ever. Amen.

Luke xiv. 16 &c.

On Pentecost.

Oration XLI.

On Pentecost.

On Pentecost.

It is uncertain to what year the following Oration belongs. It was, however, certainly delivered at Constantinople; the Benedictine Editors think in the year 381, in which case the day
would be May 16. An indication tending to establish this date is found in c. 14, in the expression of apprehension of personal danger to himself for his boldness in setting forth the true
faith. In fact, in the earlier part of this year, after the Emperor Theodosius had put him in
possession of the Patriarchal Throne, vacant by the expulsion and deposition of the Arian
Demophilus, he had narrowly escaped assassination at the hands of the Arians.

The Oration deals again with the subject of the Fifth Theological Oration, the question
of the Deity of the Holy Ghost, but proceeds to establish the point by quite a different set of
arguments from those adopted in the former discourse, none of whose points are here repeated.
The Preacher begins by commenting on the various ways in which Festivals are kept by
Jews, by Heathen and by Christians. Then he remarked on the mystical significance of the
number Seven, which he illustrates by several instances; and next proceeds with his principal
Subject.

God the Holy Ghost, he says, completes the work of Christ. Those who regard Him as a
Created Being, as did the followers of Macedonius, are thereby guilty of blasphemy and impiety. 
The true Faith recognizes Him as God; and this belief is necessary to salvation; yet some reserve
must be employed in applying that Name to Him. We must indeed insist on the recognition
of His possession of all the attributes of Godhead; and we must at any rate bear with those
who, like the Orator himself, also give Him the Name of God, which he hopes all his hearers
will receive from the Holy Ghost grace to do. Then he proceeds to shew from Holy Scripture
that in fact all the Attributes of Deity do belong to the Holy Spirit; and that His distinctive
Personal Mark is that He is neither Unbegotten like the Father, nor Begotten like the Son. He
does not touch on the question of the double Procession.

It would seem from some expressions in c. 8 that this Discourse was not delivered to his

usual audience, but to an Assembly of "Religious."

The Title of the Oration varies in different mss. Thus some have it "Of The Same On
Pentecost," to which one adds "And On The Holy Spirit;" and another puts it "Of The Same,
a Homily on Pentecost." The printed Editions before the Benedictine have "On The Holy
Pentecost."

I. Let us reason a little about the Festival, that we may keep it spiritually. For different
persons have different ways of keeping Festival; but to the worshipper of the Word a discourse
seems best; and of discourses, that which is best adapted to the occasion. And of all beautiful
things none gives so much joy to the lover of the beautiful, as that the lover of festivals should

On Pentecost.

keep them spiritually. Let us look into the matter thus. The Jew keeps festival as well as we,
but only in the letter. For while following after the bodily Law, he has not attained to the
spiritual Law. The Greek too keeps festival, but only in the body, and in honour of his own
gods and demons, some of whom are creators of passion by their own admission, and others
were honoured out of passion. Therefore even their manner of keeping festival is passionate,
as though their very sin were an honour to God, in Whom their passion takes refuge as a
thing to be proud of.4205 We too keep festival, but we keep it as is pleasing to the Spirit. 
And it is pleasing to Him that we should keep it by discharging some duty, either of action
or speech. This then is our manner of keeping festival, to treasure up in our soul some of
those things which are permanent and will cleave to it, not of those which will forsake us
and be destroyed, and which only tickle our senses for a little while; whereas they are for
the most part, in my judgment at least, harmful and ruinous. For sufficient unto the body
is the evil thereof. What need has that fire of further fuel, or that beast of more plentiful
food, to make it more uncontrollable, and too violent for reason?

II. Wherefore we must keep the feast spiritually. And this is the beginning of our discourse; for we must speak, even if our speech do seem a little too discursive; and we must
be diligent for the sake of those who love learning, that we may as it were mix up some
seasoning with our solemn festival. The children of the Hebrews do honour to the number
Seven, according to the legislation of Moses (as did the Pythagoreans in later days to the
number Four, by which indeed they were in the habit of swearing4206 as the Simonians and
Marcionites4207 do by the number Eight and the number Thirty, inasmuch as they have

4205 They deify bad passions, and then act as if the gratification of them were an honour to the gods in whom

they have personified them.

4206 The followers of Pythagoras swore by their master, who taught them the mystic properties of the number

Four, which he called the Fountain of the Universe, because all things were made of four elements.

4207 The Simonians and Marcionites were two Gnostic sects, the one deriving its name from Simon Magus,

the other from Marcion of Sinope. Simon, of whom we read in the Acts c. viii., is generally regarded by the

Fathers as the precursor of the Gnostic Heresies. He maintained a system of Emanations from God, of which

he claimed to be himself the chief. In his teaching the first cause of all things was an Ineffable Existence or Non-

existence, which he sometimes called Silence and sometimes Fire, from which the Universe was generated by a

series of six Emanations called Roots, which he arranged in pairs, male and female; and these six contained

among them the whole Essence of his first Principle Silence. These Roots with Simon himself and his consort

Helena, make up the Ogdoad referred to in the text. Marcion was a native of Sinope in Pontus, and flourished

about the middle of the Second Century. His system of teaching was mainly rationalistic, and did not recognize

(Dr. Mansel tells us, "Gnostic Heresies," p. 203) any theory of Emanations as connecting links between God and

the world; for from his point of view the Supreme God was not, even indirectly, the Author of the world. It

would seem that S. Gregory is confusing Marcion with Valentinus, and Egyptian heresiarch who flourished

about the same time. In his theory we first find a system of "Aeons," divided into an Ogdoad, a Decad, and a

On Pentecost.

given names to and reverence a system of Aeons of these numbers); I cannot say by what
rules of analogy, or in consequence of what power of this number; anyhow they do honour
to it. One thing indeed is evident, that God, having in six days created matter, and given it
form, and having arranged it in all kinds of shapes and mixtures, and having made this
present visible world, on the seventh day rested from all His works, as is shewn by the very
name of the Sabbath, which in Hebrew means Rest. If there be, however, any more lofty
reason than this, let others discuss it. But this honour which they pay to it is not confined
to days alone, but also extends to years. That belonging to days the Sabbath proves, because
it is continually observed among them; and in accordance with this the removal of leaven
is for that number of days.4208 And that belonging to years is shewn by the seventh year,
the year of Release;4209 and it consists not only of Hebdomads, but of Hebdomads of Hebdomads, alike in days and years. The Hebdomads of days give birth to Pentecost, a day
called holy among them; and those of years to what they call the Jubilee, which also has a
release of land, and a manumission of slaves, and a release of possessions bought. For this
nation consecrates to God, not only the firstfruits of offspring, or of firstborn, but also those
of days and years. Thus the veneration paid to the number Seven gave rise also to the veneration of Pentecost. For seven being multiplied by seven generates fifty all but one day,
which we borrow from the world to come, at once the Eighth and the first, or rather one
and indestructible. For the present sabbatism of our souls can find its cessation there, that
a portion may be given to seven and also to eight4210 (so some of our predecessors have
interpreted this passage of Solomon).

III. As to the honour paid to Seven there are many testimonies, but we will be content
with a few out of the many. For instance, seven precious spirits are named; for I think
Isaiah4211 loves to call the activities of the Spirit spirits; and the Oracles of the Lord are
purified seven times according to David,4212 and the just is delivered from six troubles and
in the seventh is not smitten.4213 But the sinner is pardoned not seven times, but seventy

Dodecad. Or he may mean Marcus, a follower of Valentinus, and founder of the subordinate sect of the Marco-

sians.

Exod. xii. 15.

Ib. xxi. 2.

Eccles. xi. 2. S. Gregory himself (Or. xviii. "in laudem Patris," c. 20) comments upon this passage as

enjoining liberal almsgiving. S. Ambrose (in Luc. vi.) has a mystical interpretation somewhat resembling that

here referred to: but I cannot find a predecessor of Gregory on the verse. Some later commentators, according

to Cornelius and Lapide, take the Seven of the poor in this life, and the Eight of the souls in Purgatory, following

a common interpretation of these numbers.

Isa. xi. 2.

Ps. xix. 6.

Job v. 19.

On Pentecost.

times seven.4214 And we may see it by the contrary also (for the punishment of wickedness
is to be praised), Cain being avenged seven times, that is, punishment being exacted from
him for his fratricide, and Lamech seventy times seven,4215 because he was a murderer after
the law and the condemnation.4216 And wicked neighbours receive sevenfold into their

4214 Matt. xviii. 22.

4215 Gen. iv. 24.

It will be worth while, says Nicetas, to add S. John Chrysostom's account of the sevenfold punishment

which was inflicted on Cain. The number Seven he says (Hom. in Gen. xix. 5, p. 168 c.) is often used in Holy

Scripture in the sense of multitude, as e.g., in such places, as, "The barren hath borne seven," and the like. So

here; the greatness of the crime is implied, and that it is not a simple and single crime, but seven sins; and those

of such a sort that every one of them must be avenged by a very severe punishment. First, that he envied his

brother when he saw that God loved him, a sin which without any other added to it was sufficient to be deadly. 

The next was that this sin was against a brother. The third that he compassed a deceit. The fourth that he per-

petrated a murder. The fifth that it was his brother that he slew. The sixth that he was the first man to commit

a murder. The seventh that he lied to God. You have followed these steps with your mind, or do you desire

that I should repeat the enumeration in a fuller way, to make you understand how each of these sins would be

visited with a very severe penalty, even if it stood alone. Who would judge a man worthy of pardon who envies

another simply because he enjoys the favour and love of God? Here then is one very great and inexpiable sin. 

And this is shewn to be even more atrocious when he who is envied is a brother, and has done him no wrong. 

Further, he contrived a deceit, bringing his brother out by a trick into the field, without reverence for nature

herself. The fourth crime is the murder which he committed. The fifth is that it was his brother whom he put

to death; his brother, I say, that came out of the same womb. Sixthly, he was the first inventor of murder. Sev-

enthly, when questioned by God he did not hesitate to lie. And therefore because he dared to lay hands on his

brother, he draws upon himself severe punishments. He then proceeds to shew how Lamech's crime was worse

than Cain's, and is therefore said to be punished seventy times; that is, in manifold ways. Lamech slew a man

and a young man, and this, after the law against murder had been given; that is, after God had punished Cain. 

Cain's punishment he says was sevenfold, corresponding to his seven sins:-1. Cursed is the ground for thy

sake. 2. Thou shalt till the ground; i.e., thou shalt never rest from the toils of husbandry. 3. It shall not yield

unto thee its strength; 4. thy labours shall be barren, and 5. "sighing and trembling" shalt thou be. And the sixth

is from the lips of Cain himself:-"If Thou castest me out from the earth," i.e., from all earthly conveniences,

"from Thy face shall I be hid." And God put a mark upon Cain; this is the seventh punishment-a mark of infamy

declaring his guilt and shame to all that should see him. Others according to the same authority (and Bishop

Wordsworth adopts the explanation) explains it thus. From Cain to the Deluge are seven generations, and then

the world was punished because sin had spread far and wide. But Lamech's sin could not be cured by the Deluge,

but only by Him Who taketh away the sin of the world. Then count all the generations from Adam to Christ,

On Pentecost.

bosom;4217 and the House of Wisdom rests on seven pillars4218 and the Stone of Zerubbabel
is adorned with seven eyes;4219 and God is praised seven times a day.4220 And again the
barren beareth seven,4221 the perfect number, she who is contrasted with her who is imperfect
in her children.4222

IV. And if we must also look at ancient history, I perceive that Enoch,4223 the seventh
among our ancestors, was honoured by translation. I perceive also that the twenty-first,
Abraham,4224 was given the glory of the Patriarchate, by the addition of a greater mystery. 
For the Hebdomad thrice repeated brings out this number. And one who is very bold might
venture even to come to the New Adam, my God and Lord Jesus Christ, Who is counted
the Seventy-seventh from the old Adam who fell under sin, in the backward genealogy according to Luke.4225 And I think of the seven trumpets of Jesus, the son of Nave, and the
same number of circuits and days and priests, by which the walls of Jericho were shaken
down.4226 And so too the seven compassings of the City; in the same way as there is a
mystery in the threefold breathings of Elias, the Prophet, by which he breathed life into the
son of the Sareptan widow,4227 and the same number of his floodings of the wood,4228 when
he consumed the sacrifice with fire sent from God, and condemned the prophets of shame
who could not do the like at his challenge. And the sevenfold looking for the cloud imposed
upon the young servant; and Elissaeus stretching himself that number of times upon the

and according to the Genealogy in Luke, you will find that our Lord was born in the seventieth generation. This

is S. Jerome's explanation.

Ps. lxxix. 12.

Prov. ix. i.

Zech. iii. 9.

Ps. cxix. 164.

1 Sam. ii. 5.

Peninnah who had "many" children is called Imperfect in her children, because Many is an indefinite

word; where Hannah's one child Samuel was so perfect a man that he was as it were seven to his mother. For

Seven is mystically, as Six or Ten is arithmetically, the perfect number. (Six because it is the sum of its own

factors, 1, 2, 3; Ten, because it is the basis of numeration; Seven because it is the number of Creation; for God

rested on the Sabbath Day.).

Jude 14.

4224 Gen. v. 22.

Luke iii. 34.

Josh. vi. 4. &c.

1 Kings xvii. 21.

Ib. xviii. 33.

On Pentecost.

child of the Shunammite, by which stretching the breath of life was restored.4229 To the
same doctrine belongs, I think (if I may omit the seven-stemmed and seven-lamped candlestick of the Temple4230) that the ceremony of the Priests' consecration lasted seven days;4231
and seven that of the purifying of a leper,4232 and that of the Dedication of the Temple4233
the same number, and that in the seventieth year the people returned from the Captivity;4234
that whatever is in Units may appear also in Decads, and the mystery of the Hebdomad be
reverenced in a more perfect number. But why do I speak of the distant past? Jesus Himself
who is pure perfection, could in the desert and with five loaves feed five thousand, and again
with seven loaves four thousand. And the leavings after they were satisfied were in the first
case twelve baskets full, and in the other seven baskets;4235 neither, I imagine, without a
reason or unworthy of the Spirit. And if you read for yourself you may take note of many
numbers which contain a meaning deeper than appears on the surface. But to come to an
instance which is most useful to us on the present occasion, not that for these reasons or
others very similar or yet more divine, the Hebrews honour the Day of Pentecost, and we
also honour it; just as there are other rites of the Hebrews which we observe...they were
typically observed by them, and by us they are sacramentally reinstated. And now having
said so much by way of preface about the Day, let us proceed to what we have to say further.
V. We are keeping the feast of Pentecost and of the Coming of the Spirit, and the appointed time of the Promise, and the fulfilment of our hope. And how great, how august,
is the Mystery. The dispensations of the Body of Christ are ended; or rather, what belongs
to His Bodily Advent (for I hesitate to say the Dispensation of His Body, as long as no discourse persuades me that it is better to have put off the body4236), and that of the Spirit is
beginning. And what were the things pertaining to the Christ? The Virgin, the Birth, the

2 Kings iv. 25, where the LXX. has "he contracted himself upon the child until seven times, and the child

opened his eyes;" saying nothing about the sneezing of the child, which the Hebrew and Vulgate mention, while

they omit the number in the case of Elisha's similar action. S. Bernard has a curious explanation of the seven

sneezes of the child (in Cant. xvi).

Ex. xxv. 32, 37.

Levit. viii. 33.

Ib. xiv. 8.

1 Kings viii. 6.

2 Chron. xxxvi. 32.

4235 Different words are used here as in the New Testament for Baskets. The second implies a larger size; it

is the word used for the "basket" in which St. Paul was let down from the wall of Damascus, Acts ix. 25.

S. Gregory makes this explanation because there were certain heretics who taught that our Lord at His

Ascension laid aside His Humanity. It is said that this was held by certain Manichaeans, who based their idea

on Ps. xix. 4, where the LXX. and Vulgate read, "He hath set His Tabernacle in the Sun."

On Pentecost.

Manger, the Swaddling, the Angels glorifying Him, the Shepherds running to Him, the
course of the Star, the Magi worshipping Him and bringing Gifts, Herod's murder of the
children, the Flight of Jesus into Egypt, the Return from Egypt, the Circumcision, the Baptism,
the Witness from Heaven, the Temptation, the Stoning for our sake (because He had to be
given as an Example to us of enduring affliction for the Word), the Betrayal, the Nailing,
the Burial, the Resurrection, the Ascension; and of these even now He suffers many dishonours at the hands of the enemies of Christ; and He bears them, for He is longsuffering. But
from those who love Him He receives all that is honourable. And He defers, as in the former
case His wrath, so in ours His kindness; in their case perhaps to give them the grace of repentance, and in ours to test our love; whether we do not faint in our tribulations4237 and
conflicts for the true Religion, as was from of old the order of His Divine Economy, and of
his unsearchable judgments, with which He orders wisely all that concerns us. Such are the
mysteries of Christ. And what follows we shall see to be more glorious; and may we too be
seen. As to the things of the Spirit, may the Spirit be with me, and grant me speech as much
as I desire; or if not that, yet as is in due proportion to the season. Anyhow He will be with
me as my Lord; not in servile guise, nor awaiting a command, as some think.4238 For He
bloweth where He wills and on whom He wills, and to what extent He wills.4239 Thus we
are inspired both to think and to speak of the Spirit.

VI. They who reduce the Holy Spirit to the rank of a creature are blasphemers and
wicked servants, and worst of the wicked. For it is the part of wicked servants to despise
Lordship, and to rebel against dominion, and to make That which is free their fellow-servant. 
But they who deem Him God are inspired by God4240 and are illustrious in their mind; and
they who go further and call Him so, if to well disposed hearers are exalted; if to the low,
are not reserved enough, for they commit pearls to clay, and the noise of thunder to weak

Ephes. iii. 13.

The reference is to the Macedonians or Pneumatomachi, followers of Macedonius, Patriarch of Con-

stantinople, who had passed from extreme or Anomoean Arianism to Semi-Arianism, and was forcibly intruded

on the See by order of Constantius in 343, but was afterwards deposed. After his deposition he broached the

heresy known by his name, denying the Deity of the Holy Ghost; some of its adherents, with Macedonius himself,

maintaining Him to be a mere creature; others stopping short of this; and others calling Him a creature and

servant of the Son. The heresy was formally condemned in the Ecumenical Council of Constantinople in 381.

John iii. 8.

S. Gregory here commends the practice of reserve in respect of the Deity of the Holy Ghost. To believe

it is necessary to salvation, he would say; but in view of the prevailing ignorance it is well to be careful before

whom we give Him the Name of God. But he demands that his hearers should give to the Holy Ghost all the

Attributes of Godhead, and should bear with those who, like himself, gave Him also the Name, as he prays that

they all may have grace to do (Bénoît).

On Pentecost.

ears, and the sun to feeble eyes, and solid food to those who are still using milk;4241 whereas
they ought to lead them little by little up to what lies beyond them, and to bring them up to
the higher truth; adding light to light, and supplying truth upon truth. Therefore we will
leave the more mature discourse, for which the time has not yet come, and will speak with
them as follows.

VII. If, my friends, you will not acknowledge the Holy Spirit to be uncreated, nor yet
eternal; clearly such a state of mind is due to the contrary spirit-forgive me, if in my zeal
I speak somewhat over boldly. If, however, you are sound enough to escape this evident
impiety, and to place outside of slavery Him Who gives freedom to yourselves, then see for
yourselves with the help of the Holy Ghost and of us what follows. For I am persuaded that
you are to some extent partakers of Him, so that I will go into the question with you as
kindred souls. Either shew me some mean between lordship and servitude, that I may there
place the rank of the Spirit; or, if you shrink from imputing servitude to Him, there is no
doubt of the rank in which you must place the object of your search. But you are dissatisfied
with the syllables, and you stumble at the word, and it is to you a stone of stumbling and a
rock of offence;4242 for so is Christ to some minds. It is only human after all. Let us meet
one another in a spiritual manner; let us be full rather of brotherly than of self love. Grant
us the Power of the Godhead, and we will give up to you the use of the Name. Confess the
Nature in other words for which you have greater reverence, and we will heal you as infirm
people, filching from you some matters in which you delight. For it is shameful, yes,
shameful and utterly illogical, when you are sound in soul, to draw petty distinctions about
the sound, and to hide the Treasure, as if you envied it to others, or were afraid lest you
should sanctify your own tongue too. But it is even more shameful for us to be in the state
of which we accuse you, and, while condemning your petty distinctions of words to make
petty distinctions of letters.

VIII. Confess, my friends, the Trinity to be of One Godhead; or if you will, of One
Nature; and we will pray the Spirit to give you this word God. He will give it to you, I well
know, inasmuch as He has already granted you the first portion and the second;4243 and
especially if that about which we are contending is some spiritual cowardice, and not the
devil's objection. Yet more clearly and concisely, let me say, do not you call us to account
for our loftier word (for envy has nothing to do with this ascent), and we will not find fault
with what you have been able to attain, until by another road you are brought up to the
same resting place. For we are not seeking victory, but to gain brethren, by whose separation

4241 Heb. v. 12.

Isa. viii. 14; Rom. ix. 33; 1 Pet. ii. 8.

i.e., inasmuch as He has granted you a right faith in the Consubstantiality and Unity of the Trinity, I

am sure He will in time grant you the grace also to call Him by the Name of God.

On Pentecost.

from us we are torn. This we concede to you in whom we do find something of vital truth,
who are sound as to the Son. We admire your life, but we do not altogether approve your
doctrine. Ye who have the things of the Spirit, receive Himself in addition, that ye may not
only strive, but strive lawfully,4244 which is the condition of your crown. May this reward
of your conversation be granted you, that you may confess the Spirit perfectly and proclaim
with us, aye and before us, all that is His due. Yes, and I will venture even more on your
behalf; I will even utter the Apostle's wish. So much do I cling to you, and so much do I
revere your array, and the colour of your continence, and those sacred assemblies, and the
august Virginity, and purification, and the Psalmody that lasts all night4245 and your love
of the poor, and of the brethren, and of strangers, that I could consent to be Anathema from
Christ, and even to suffer something as one condemned, if only you might stand beside us,
and we might glorify the Trinity together. For of the others why should I speak, seeing they
are clearly dead (and it is the part of Christ alone to raise them, Who quickeneth the dead
by His own Power), and are unhappily separated in place as they are bound together by
their doctrine; and who quarrel among themselves as much as a pair of squinting eyes in
looking at the same object, and differ with one another, not in sight but in position-if indeed
we may charge them only with squinting, and not with utter blindness. And now that I
have to some extent laid down your position, come, let us return again to the subject of the
Spirit, and I think you will follow me now.

IX. The Holy Ghost, then, always existed, and exists, and always will exist. He neither
had a beginning, nor will He have an end; but He was everlastingly ranged with and
numbered with the Father and the Son. For it was not ever fitting that either the Son should
be wanting to the Father, or the Spirit to the Son. For then Deity would be shorn of Its Glory
in its greatest respect, for It would seem to have arrived at the consummation of perfection
as if by an afterthought. Therefore He was ever being partaken, but not partaking; perfecting,
not being perfected; sanctifying, not being sanctified; deifying, not being deified; Himself
ever the same with Himself, and with Those with Whom He is ranged; invisible, eternal,
incomprehensible, unchangeable, without quality, without quantity, without form, impalpable, self-moving, eternally moving, with free-will, self-powerful, All-powerful (even though
all that is of the Spirit is referable to the First Cause, just as is all that is of the Only-begotten);
Life and Lifegiver; Light and Lightgiver; absolute Good, and Spring of Goodness; the Right,
the Princely Spirit; the Lord, the Sender, the Separator; Builder of His own Temple; leading,
working as He wills; distributing His own Gifts; the Spirit of Adoption, of Truth, of Wisdom,

2 Tim. ii. 5.

The Constantinopolitan followers of Macedonius at the period were noted for their strict asceticism. 

The attempt to revive the Night Office among the secular Clergy of the Diocese brought great odium on S. John

Chrysostom a few years later.

On Pentecost.

of Understanding, of Knowledge, of Godliness, of Counsel, of Fear (which are ascribed to
Him4246) by Whom the Father is known and the Son is glorified; and by Whom alone He
is known; one class, one service, worship, power, perfection, sanctification. Why make a
long discourse of it? All that the Father hath the Son hath also, except the being Unbegotten;
and all that the Son hath the Spirit hath also, except the Generation. And these two matters
do not divide the Substance, as I understand it, but rather are divisions within the Substance.4247

X. Are you labouring to bring forth objections? Well, so am I to get on with my discourse. Honour the Day of the Spirit; restrain your tongue if you can a little. It is the time
to speak of other tongues-reverence them or fear them, when you see that they are of fire. 
To-day let us teach dogmatically; to-morrow we may discuss. To-day let us keep the feast;
to-morrow will be time enough to behave ourselves unseemly-the first mystically, the
second theatrically; the one in the Churches, the other in the marketplace; the one among
the sober, the other among the drunken; the one as befits those who vehemently desire, the
other, as among those who make a joke of the Spirit. Having then put an end to the element
that is foreign to us, let us now thoroughly furnish our own friends.

XI. He wrought first in the heavenly and angelic powers, and such as are first after God
and around God. For from no other source flows their perfection and their brightness, and
the difficulty or impossibility of moving them to sin, but from the Holy Ghost. And next,
in the Patriarchs and Prophets, of whom the former saw Visions of God, or knew Him, and
the latter also foreknew the future, having their master part moulded by the Spirit, and being
associated with events that were yet future as if present, for such is the power of the Spirit. 
And next in the Disciples of Christ (for I omit to mention Christ Himself, in Whom He
dwelt, not as energizing, but as accompanying His Equal), and that in three ways, as they
were able to receive Him, and on three occasions; before Christ was glorified by the Passion,
and after He was glorified by the Resurrection; and after His Ascension, or Restoration, or
whatever we ought to call it, to Heaven. Now the first of these manifests Him-the healing
of the sick and casting out of evil spirits, which could not be apart from the Spirit; and so
does that breathing upon them after the Resurrection, which was clearly a divine inspiration;
and so too the present distribution of the fiery tongues, which we are now commemorating. 
But the first manifested Him indistinctly, the second more expressly, this present one more
perfectly, since He is no longer present only in energy, but as we may say, substantially, associating with us, and dwelling in us. For it was fitting that as the Son had lived with us in

i.e., by Isaiah.

Job xxxviii. 4, Ps. v. 10, xxxvi., cxxxix. 7-15, cxlii., Isa. xi. 1-3, xlviii. 16, Mal. iii. 6, Wisd. i. 2, John i. 14,

iii. 24, xv. 26, xvi. 14, 15, Acts xiii. 2, Rom. iv. 17, xv. 16, 19, 1 Cor. ii. 10, vi. 19, viii. 2, 2 Cor. iii. 1, 6, xiii. 4, 2

Thess. iii. 5, 1 Tim. vi. 10, Heb. ix. 14.

On Pentecost.

bodily form-so the Spirit too should appear in bodily form; and that after Christ had returned to His own place, He should have come down to us-Coming because He is the Lord;
Sent, because He is not a rival God. For such words no less manifest the Unanimity than
they mark the separate Individuality.

XII. And therefore He came after Christ, that a Comforter should not be lacking unto
us; but Another Comforter, that you might acknowledge His co-equality. For this word
Another marks an Alter Ego, a name of equal Lordship, not of inequality. For Another is
not said, I know, of different kinds, but of things consubstantial. And He came in the form
of Tongues because of His close relation to the Word. And they were of Fire, perhaps because
of His purifying Power (for our Scripture knows of a purifying fire, as any one who wishes
can find out), or else because of His Substance. For our God is a consuming Fire, and a
Fire4248 burning up the ungodly;4249 though you may again pick a quarrel over these words,
being brought into difficulty by the Consubstantiality. And the tongues were cloven, because
of the diversity of Gifts; and they sat to signify His Royalty and Rest among the Saints, and
because the Cherubim are the Throne of God. And it took place in an Upper Chamber (I
hope I am not seeming to any one over tedious), because those who should receive it were
to ascend and be raised above the earth; for also certain upper chambers4250 are covered
with Divine Waters,4251 by which the praise of God are sung. And Jesus Himself in an
Upper Chamber gave the Communion of the Sacrament to those who were being initiated
into the higher Mysteries, that thereby might be shewn on the one hand that God must
come down to us, as I know He did of old to Moses; and on the other that we must go up
to Him, and that so there should come to pass a Communion of God with men, by a coalescing of the dignity. For as long as either remains on its own footing, the One in His Glory4252
the other in his lowliness, so long the Goodness of God cannot mingle with us, and His
lovingkindness is incommunicable, and there is a great gulf between, which cannot be
crossed; and which separates not only the Rich Man from Lazarus and Abraham's Bosom
which he longs for, but also the created and changing natures from that which is eternal
and immutable.

4248 Heb. xii. 20.

4249 Deut. iv. 24.

Ps. civ. 3.

Ps. cxlviii. 4.

ἐπὶ περιοπῆς; Billius renders "In specula sua," "On His watch tower," and the meaning is admissible,

but the context seems rather to point to the passive sense of Majesty or Glory. The word is not in the Lexicon,

and Suicer does not notice it; but the corresponding adjective has only the passive sense. Specula, however, is

used in the sense of Eminence, but apparently only geographically.

On Pentecost.

XIII. This was proclaimed by the Prophets in such passages as the following:-The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me;4253 and, There shall rest upon Him Seven Spirits; and The
Spirit of the Lord descended and led them;4254 and The spirit of Knowledge filling Bezaleel,4255 the Master-builder of the Tabernacle; and, The Spirit provoking to anger;4256 and
the Spirit carrying away Elias in a chariot,4257 and sought in double measure by Elissaeus;
and David led and strengthened by the Good and Princely Spirit.4258 And He was promised
by the mouth of Joel first, who said, And it shall be in the last days that I will pour out of
My Spirit upon all flesh (that is, upon all that believe), and upon your sons and upon your
daughters,4259 and the rest; and then afterwards by Jesus, being glorified by Him, and giving
back glory to Him, as He was glorified by and glorified the Father.4260 And how abundant
was this Promise. He shall abide for ever, and shall remain with you, whether now with
those who in the sphere of time are worthy, or hereafter with those who are counted worthy
of that world, when we have kept Him altogether by our life here, and not rejected Him in
so far as we sin.

XIV. This Spirit shares with the Son in working both the Creation and the Resurrection,
as you may be shewn by this Scripture; By the Word of the Lord were the heavens made,
and all the power of them by the breath of His Mouth;4261 and this, The Spirit of God that
made me, and the Breath of the Almighty that teacheth me;4262 and again, Thou shalt send
forth Thy Spirit and they shall be created, and Thou shalt renew the face of the earth.4263 
And He is the Author of spiritual regeneration. Here is your proof:-None can see or enter
into the Kingdom, except he be born again of the Spirit,4264 and be cleansed from the first
birth, which is a mystery of the night, by a remoulding of the day and of the Light, by which
every one singly is created anew. This Spirit, for He is most wise and most loving,4265 if He
takes possession of a shepherd makes him a Psalmist, subduing evil spirits by his song,4266

Isa. lxi. 1.

Ib. xi. 2; lxiii. 14.

Exod. xxxi. 3.

Isa. lxiii. 10.

2 Kings ii. 11.

Ps. li. 12; cxliii. 10.

Joel ii. 28.

John xiv. 16.

Ps. xxxiii. 6.

Job xxxiii. 4.

Ps. civ. 30.

John iii. 3.

4265 Wisd. i. 6.

1 Sam. xvi. 23.

On Pentecost.

and proclaims him King; if he possess a goatherd and scraper4267 of sycamore fruit,4268 He
makes him a Prophet. Call to mind David and Amos. If He possess a goodly youth, He
makes him a Judge of Elders,4269 even beyond his years, as Daniel testifies, who conquered
the lions in their den.4270 If He takes possession of Fishermen, He makes them catch the
whole world in the nets of Christ, taking them up in the meshes of the Word. Look at Peter
and Andrew and the Sons of Thunder, thundering the things of the Spirit. If of Publicans,
He makes gain of them for discipleship, and makes them merchants of souls; witness Matthew, yesterday a Publican, today an Evangelist. If of zealous persecutors, He changes the
current of their zeal, and makes them Pauls instead of Sauls, and as full of piety as He found
them of wickedness. And He is the Spirit of Meekness, and yet is provoked by those who
sin. Let us therefore make proof of Him as gentle, not as wrathful, by confessing His Dignity;
and let us not desire to see Him implacably wrathful. He too it is who has made me today
a bold herald to you;-if without rest to myself, God be thanked; but if with risk, thanks to
Him nevertheless; in the one case, that He may spare those that hate us; in the other, that
He may consecrate us, in receiving this reward of our preaching of the Gospel, to be made
perfect by blood.

XV. They spoke with strange tongues, and not those of their native land; and the wonder
was great, a language spoken by those who had not learnt it. And the sign is to them that
believe not,4271 and not to them that believe, that it may be an accusation of the unbelievers,
as it is written, With other tongues and other lips will I speak unto this people, and not even
so will they listen to Me4272 saith the Lord. But they heard. Here stop a little and raise a
question, how you are to divide the words. For the expression has an ambiguity, which is
to be determined by the punctuation. Did they each hear in their own dialect4273 so that if
I may so say, one sound was uttered, but many were heard; the air being thus beaten and,
so to speak, sounds being produced more clear than the original sound; or are we to put the
stop after "they Heard," and then to add "them speaking in their own languages" to what

The Hebrew word means "a cultivator of sycamores." The LXX. rendering is due to the process of

maturing the fruit, which grows on the stem of the trunk, and is made to mature by puncturing it with an iron

instrument, when after three days the fruit is fit to eat. The Hebrew word occurs only this once in the Bible;

Aquila renders it by "Looking for;" Symmachus by "propping with stakes."

4268 Amos vii. 14.

Susannah.

4270 Dan. vi. 22.

1 Cor. xiv. 22.

Isa. xxviii. 11.

4273 The actual order of the words in the Greek of Acts ii. 6 is, They heard each individual in his own dialect

them speaking; so that the position of the comma affects the meaning.

On Pentecost.

follows, so that it would be speaking in languages their own to the hearers, which would be
foreign to the speakers? I prefer to put it this latter way; for on the other plan the miracle
would be rather of the hearers than of the speakers; whereas in this it would be on the
speakers' side; and it was they who were reproached for drunkenness, evidently because
they by the Spirit wrought a miracle in the matter of the tongues.

XVI. But as the old Confusion of tongues was laudable, when men who were of one
language in wickedness and impiety, even as some now venture to be, were building the
Tower;4274 for by the confusion of their language the unity of their intention was broken
up, and their undertaking destroyed; so much more worthy of praise is the present miraculous
one. For being poured from One Spirit upon many men, it brings them again into harmony. 
And there is a diversity of Gifts, which stands in need of yet another Gift to discern which
is the best, where all are praiseworthy. And that division also might be called noble of which
David says, Drown O Lord and divide their tongues.4275 Why? Because they loved all words
of drowning, the deceitful tongue.4276 Where he all but expressly arraigns the tongues of
the present day4277 which sever the Godhead. Thus much upon this point.

XVII. Next, since it was to inhabitants of Jerusalem, most devout Jews, Parthians, Medes,
and Elamites, Egyptians, and Libyans, Cretans too, and Arabians, and Mesopotamians, and
my own Cappadocians, that the tongues spake, and to Jews (if any one prefer so to understand
it), out of every nation under heaven thither collected; it is worth while to see who these
were and of what captivity. For the captivity in Egypt and Babylon was circumscribed, and
moreover had long since been brought to an end by the Return; and that under the Romans,
which was exacted for their audacity against our Saviour, was not yet come to pass, though
it was in the near future. It remains then to understand it of the captivity under Antiochus,
which happened not so very long before this time. But if any does not accept this explanation,
as being too elaborate, seeing that this captivity was neither ancient nor widespread over
the world, and is looking for a more reliable-perhaps the best way to take it would be as
follows. The nation was removed many times, as Esdras related; and some of the Tribes
were recovered, and some were left behind; of whom probably (dispersed as they were
among the nations) some would have been present and shared the miracle.

XVIII. These questions have been examined before by the studious, and perhaps not
without occasion; and whatever else any one may contribute at the present day, he will be
joined with us. But now it is our duty to dissolve this Assembly, for enough has been said. 
But the Festival is never to be put an end to; but kept now indeed with our bodies; but a

4274 Gen. xi. 7.

Ps. lv. 9.

Ib. lii. 4.

4277 Arians, Macedonians, and kindred sects.

On Pentecost.

little later on altogether spiritually there, where we shall see the reasons of these things more
purely and clearly, in the Word Himself, and God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, the True
Festival and Rejoicing of the Saved-to Whom be the glory and the worship, with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, now and for ever. Amen.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

Oration XLII.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

ThisOration was delivered during the Second Oecumenical Council, held at Constantinople
a.d. 381. Historical as well as personal motives render the occasion of the deepest interest. 
The audience consisted of the one hundred and fifty Bishops of the Eastern Church who took
part in the Council, and of the speaker's own flock, the orthodox Christians of Constantinople. 
He had by his own exertions gathered that flock together, after it had been ravaged by
heretical teachers. He had won the admiration and affection of its members, by his courageous
championship of the Faith, his lucid teaching, and his fatherly care for their spiritual needs. 
He had been, against his will, enthroned with acclamation in the highest ecclesiastical position
in the Eastern Church, and called to preside over the Synod of its assembled Bishops. Finding
himself unable to guide the deliberations of the Council in regard to a question of the highest
importance, and perceiving that he himself and his position were made by some of the Bishops
a fresh cause of dissension, he felt bound to resign his high office, and endeavour by this personal sacrifice to restore peace to the Church. His language is worthy of the occasion. Obliged
to deal with the topics which had caused dissension, he handles them with gentle and discriminating tact; he speaks with great self-restraint in his own defence; he sets forth with tenderest
feeling the common experiences of himself and his flock; he gives with dignity and clearness
his last public exposition of the Faith; and finally, in language of exquisite beauty, spoken with
the quivering tones of an aged man, he bids a tender farewell to his flock, his cathedral, and
his throne, with all their affecting associations. It was an occasion whose pathos is unsurpassed
in history. Orator and audience were alike deeply moved, and the emotion has been renewed
in all those who have read his words, and realised the scene of their delivery.

1. What think ye of our affairs, dear shepherds and fellow-shepherds: whose feet are
beautiful, for you bring glad tidings of peace and of the good things4278 with which ye have
come; beautiful again in our eyes, to whom ye have come in season, not to convert a wandering sheep,4279 but to converse with a pilgrim shepherd? What think ye of this our pilgrimage? And of its fruit, or rather of that of the Spirit4280 within us,4281 by Whom we are
ever moved,4282 and specially have now been moved, desiring to have, and perhaps having,
nothing of our own? Do you of yourselves understand and perceive-and are you kindly

Isai. lii. 7; Rom. x. 15.

S. Matt. xviii. 12.

4280 Gal. v. 22.

2 Tim. i. 14.

4282 Acts xvii. 28.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

critics of our actions? Or must we, like those from whom a reckoning is demanded as to
their military command, or civil government, or administration of the exchequer, publicly
and in person submit to you the accounts of our administration? Not indeed that we are
ashamed of being judged, for we are ourselves judges in turn, and both with the same
charity. But the law is an ancient one: for even Paul communicated to the Apostles his
Gospel:4283 not for the sake of ostentation, for the Spirit is far removed from all ostentation,
but in order to establish his success and correct his failure, if indeed there were any such in
his words or actions, as he declares when writing of himself. Since even the Spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the prophets,4284 according to the order of the Spirit who regulates
and divides all things well. And do not wonder that, while he rendered his account privately
and to some, I do so publicly, and to all. For my need is greater than his, of being aided by
the freedom of my censors, if I am proved to have failed in my duty, lest I should run, or
have run, in vain.4285 And the only possible mode of self-defence is speech in the presence
of men who know the facts.

2. What then is my defence?4286 If it be false, you must convict me, but if true, you on
behalf of whom4287 and in whose presence I speak, must bear witness to it. For you are my
defence, my witnesses, and my crown of rejoicing,4288 if I also may venture to boast myself
a little in the Apostle's language. This flock was, when it was small and poor, as far as appearances went, nay, not even a flock, but a slight trace and relic of a flock, without order,
or shepherd, or bounds, with neither right to pasturage, nor the defence of a fold, wandering
upon the mountains and in caves and dens of the earth,4289 scattered and dispersed hither
and thither as each one could find shelter or pasture, or could gratefully secure its own
safety; like that flock which was harassed by lions, dispersed by tempest, or scattered in
darkness, the lamentation of prophets who compared it to the misfortunes of Israel,4290
given up to the Gentiles; over which we also lamented, so long as our lot was worthy of
lamentation. For in very deed we also were thrust out and cast off, and scattered upon every
mountain and hill, from the need of a shepherd:4291 and a dreadful storm fell upon the

4283 Gal. ii. 2.

1 Cor. xiv. 32.

4285 Gal. ii. 2.

1 Cor. ix. 3.

4287 On behalf of, i.e., the Christians of Constantinople, whose Pastor he had been, who were present at the

time in the church.

1 Thess. ii. 19.

4289 Heb. xi. 38.

Ezek. xxxi. ii.

Ib. xxxiv. 6.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

Church, and fearful beasts assailed her, who do not even now, after the calm, spare us, but
without being ashamed of themselves, wield a greater power than the time should allow;
while a gloomy darkness, far more oppressive than the ninth plague of Egypt, the darkness
which might be felt,4292 enveloped and concealed everything, so that we could scarcely even
see one another.

3. To speak in a more feeling strain, trusting in Him Who then forsook me, as in a
Father, "Abraham has been ignorant of us, Israel has acknowledged us not, but Thou art
our Father, and unto Thee do we look;4293 beside Thee we know none else, we make mention
of Thy name."4294 Therefore, says Jeremiah, I will plead with Thee, I will reason the cause
with Thee.4295 We are become as at the beginning, when Thou barest not rule4296 over us,
and Thou hast forgotten Thy holy covenant, and shut up Thy mercies from us. Therefore
we, the worshippers of the Trinity, the perfect suppliants of the perfect Deity, became a reproach to Thy Beloved, neither daring to bring down to our own level any of the things
above us, nor in such wise to rise up against the godless tongues which fought against God,
as to make His Majesty a fellow servant with ourselves; but, as is plain, we were delivered
up on account of our other sins, and because our conduct had been unworthy of Thy commandments, and we had walked after our own evil mind. For what other reason can there
be for our being delivered up to the most unrighteous and wicked men of all the dwellers
upon the earth? First Nebuchadnezzar4297 afflicted us,4298 possessed during the Christian
era with an anti-Christian rage, hating Christ just because he had through Him gained salvation, and having bartered the sacred books for sacrifices to those who are no gods. He
devoured me, he tore me in pieces, a slight darkness enveloped me,4299 if I may even in my
lamentation keep to the language of Scripture. If the Lord had not helped me,4300 and
righteously delivered him to the hands of the lawless, by casting him off (such are the judgments of God) to the Persians, by whom his blood was righteously shed for his unholy
sheddings of blood, since in this case alone justice could not afford even to be longsuffering,
my soul had shortly dwelt in the grave.4301 The second4302 no more kindly, if he were not

Exod. x. 21.

Isai. lxiii. 16.

Ib. xxvi. 13 (LXX.).

Jer. xii. 1.

Isai. lxiii. 19.

4297 Nebuchadnezzar, i.e., Julian.

Jer. li. 34.

Ps. lv. 6 (LXX.).

Ps. xciv. 17.

Ib. xciv. 17.

The second, i.e. Valens.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

even more grievous still, for while he bore the name of Christ, he was a false Christ, and at
once a burden and a reproach to the Christians, for, while to obey him was ungodly, to
suffer at his hands was inglorious, since they did not even seem to be wronged, nor to gain
by their sufferings the glorious title of martyr, inasmuch as the truth was in this case perverted, for while they suffered as Christians, they were supposed to be punished as heretics. 
Alas! how rich we were in misfortunes, for the fire consumed the beauties of the world.4303 
That which the palmerworm left did the locust eat, and that which the locust left did the
caterpillar eat: then came the cankerworm,4304 then, what next I know not, one evil
springing up after another. But for what purpose should I give a tragic description of the
evils of the time, and of the penalty exacted from us, or, if I must rather call it so, the testing
and refining we endured? At any rate, we went through fire and water,4305 and have attained
a place of refreshment by the good pleasure of God our Saviour.

4. To return to my original startingpoint. This was my field, when it was small and
poor, unworthy not only of God, Who has been, and is cultivating the whole world with the
fair seeds and doctrines of piety, but, apparently, even of any poor and needy man of slender
means. Nay it did not deserve to be called a field, requiring neither barn nor threshingfloor, and not even worthy of the sickle; with neither heap nor sheaves, or small and untimely
sheaves, like those on the housetop, which do not fill the hand of the reaper, nor call forth
a blessing from them which go by.4306 Such was my field, such my harvest; great and welleared and fat in the eyes of Him Who beholdeth hidden things, and becoming such a husbandman, its abundance springing from the valleys of souls well tilled with the Word: unrecognized however in public, and not collected together, but gathered in fragments, as an
ear gleaned in the stubble,4307 as gleaning-grapes in the vintage, where there is no cluster
left. I think I may add, only too appropriately, I found Israel like a figtree in the wilderness,4308 and like one or two ripe grapes in an unripe cluster, preserved as a blessing from
the Lord,4309 and a consecrated firstfruit, though small as yet and scanty, and not filling the
mouth of the eater: and as an ensign on a hill,4310 and as a beacon on a mountain, or any
other solitary thing visible only to few. Such was its former poverty and dejection.

Joel i. 19.

Ib. i. 4.

Ps. lxvi. 12.

Ib. cxxix. 6 sqq.

4307 Mic. vii. 1 (LXX.).

4308 Hos. ix. 10 (LXX.).

Isai. lxv. 8.

Ib. xxx. 17.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

5. But since God, Who maketh poor and maketh rich, Who killeth and maketh alive;4311
Who maketh and transformeth all things; Who turneth night into day,4312 winter into
spring, storm into calm, drought into abundance of rain; and often for the sake of the
prayers4313 of one righteous man4314 sorely persecuted; Who lifteth up the meek on high,
and bringeth the ungodly down to the ground;4315 since God said to Himself, I have surely
seen the affliction of Israel;4316 and they shall no longer be further vexed with clay and brickmaking; and when He spake He visited, and in His visitation He saved, and led forth His
people with a mighty hand and outstretched arm,4317 by the hand of Moses and Aaron,4318
His chosen-what is the result, and what wonders have been wrought? Those which books
and monuments contain. For besides all the wonders by the way, and that mighty roar, to
speak most concisely, Joseph came into Egypt alone,4319 and soon after six hundred thousand
depart from Egypt.4320 What more marvellous than this? What greater proof of the generosity of God, when from men without means He wills to supply the means for public affairs? 
And the land of promise is distributed through one who was hated, and he who was sold4321
dispossesses nations, and is himself made a great nation, and that small offshoot becomes
a luxuriant vine,4322 so great that it reaches to the river, and is stretched out to the sea,4323
and spreads from border to border, and hides the mountains with the height of its glory
and is exalted above the cedars, even the cedars of God, whatever we are to take these
mountains and cedars to be.

6. Such then was once this flock, and such it is now, so healthy and well grown, and if
it be not yet in perfection, it is advancing towards it by constant increase, and I prophesy
that it will advance. This is foretold me by the Holy Spirit, if I have any prophetic instinct
and insight into the future. And from what has preceded I am able to be confident, and
recognize this by reasoning, being the nursling of reason. For it was much more improbable

1 Sam. ii. 6 sqq.

4312 Amos v. 8.

1 Kings xviii. 42.

S. James v. 16, 17.

Ps. cxlvii. 6.

Exod. iii. 7.

Ps. cxxxvi. 12.

Ib. lxxvii. 20.

4319 Gen. xxxvii. 28.

Exod. xii. 37.

4321 Gen. xlix. 22.

4322 Hos. x. 1.

Ps. lxxx. 8 et seq.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

that, from that condition, it should reach its present development, than that, as it now is, it
should attain to the height of renown. For ever since it began to be gathered together, by
Him Who quickeneth the dead,4324 bone to its bone, joint to joint, and the Spirit of life and
regeneration was given to it in their dryness,4325 its entire resurrection has been, I know
well, sure to be fulfilled: so that the rebellious should not exalt themselves,4326 and that
those who grasp at a shadow, or at a dream when one awaketh,4327 or at the dispersing
breezes, or at the traces of a ship in the water,4328 should not think that they have anything. 
Howl, firtree, for the cedar is fallen!4329 Let them be instructed by the misfortunes of others,
and learn that the poor shall not alway be forgotten,4330 and that the Deity will not refrain,
as Habakkuk says, from striking through the heads of the mighty ones4331 in His fury-the
Deity, Who has been struck through and impiously divided into Ruler and Ruled, in order
to insult the Deity in the highest degree by degrading It, and oppress a creature by equality
with Deity.

7. I seem indeed to hear that voice, from Him Who gathers together those who are
broken, and welcomes the oppressed: Enlarge thy cords, break forth on the right hand and
on the left, drive in thy stakes, spare not thy curtains.4332 I have given thee up, and I will
help thee. In a little wrath I smote thee, but with everlasting mercy I will glorify thee.4333 
The measure of His kindness exceeds the measure of His discipline. The former things were
owing to our wickedness, the present things to the adorable Trinity: the former for our
cleansing, the present for My glory, Who will glorify them that glorify Me,4334 and I will
move to jealousy them that move Me to jealousy. Behold this is sealed up with Me,4335 and
this is the indissoluble law of recompense. But thou didst surround thyself with walls and
tablets and richly set stones, and long porticos and galleries, and didst shine and sparkle
with gold, which thou didst, in part pour forth like water, in part treasure up like sand; not
knowing that better is faith, with no other roof but the sky to cover it, than impiety rolling

4324 Rom. iv. 17.

Ezek. xxxvii. 7, 10.

Ps. lxvi. 7.

Ps. lxxiii. 20.

4328 Wisd. v. 9 sqq.

Zech. xi. 2.

Ps. ix. 18.

4331 Hab. iii. 13.

Isai. liv. 2.

Ib. liv. 8.

1 Sam. ii. 30.

4335 Deut. xxxii. 21, 34.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

in wealth, and that three gathered together in the Name of the Lord4336 count for more with
God than tens of thousands of those who deny the Godhead. Would you prefer the whole
of the Canaanites to Abraham alone?4337 or the men of Sodom to Lot?4338 or the Midianites
to Moses,4339 when each of these was a pilgrim and a stranger? How do the three hundred
men with Gideon, who bravely lapped,4340 compare with the thousands who were put to
flight? Or the servants of Abraham, who scarcely exceeded them in number, with the many
kings and the army of tens of thousands whom, few as they were, they overtook and defeated?4341 Or how do you understand the passage that though the number of the children
of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved?4342 And again, I have left me
seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to Baal?4343 This is not the case; it is
not? God has not taken pleasure in numbers.

8. Thou countest tens of thousands, God counts those who are in a state of salvation;
thou countest the dust which is without number, I the vessels of election. For nothing is so
magnificent in God's sight as pure doctrine, and a soul perfect in all the dogmas of the
truth.-For there is nothing worthy of Him Who made all things, of Him by Whom are all
things, and for Whom are all things,4344 so that it can be given or offered to God: not merely
the handiwork or means of any individual, but even if we wished to honour Him, by uniting
together all the property and handiwork of all mankind. Do not I fill heaven and earth?4345
saith the Lord! and what house will ye build Me? or what is the place of My rest?4346 But,
since man must needs fall short of what is worthy, I ask of you, as approaching it most
nearly, piety, the wealth which is common to all and equal in My eyes, wherein the poorest
may, if he be nobleminded, surpass the most illustrious. For this kind of glory depends
upon purpose, not upon affluence. These things be well assured, I will accept at your
hands.4347 To tread4348 My courts ye shall not proceed, but the feet of the meek4349 shall

S. Matt. xviii. 20.

4337 Gen. xii. 6; xiii. 12.

Ib. xix. 1.

Exod. ii. 15.

Judg. vii. 5.

4341 Gen. xiv. 14.

Isai. x. 22; Rom. ix. 27.

1 Kings xix. 18; Rom. xi. 4.

1 Cor. viii. 6.

Jer. xxiii. 24.

Isai. lxvi. 1.

Ib. i. 12.

To tread, etc. The Arians for a time had been in possession of the churches of Constantinople.

Isai. xxvi. 6 (LXX.).

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

tread them, who have duly and sincerely acknowledged Me, and My only-begotten Word,
and the Holy Spirit. How long will ye inherit My holy Mountain?4350 How long shall My
ark be among the heathen?4351 Now for a little longer ye indulge yourselves in that which
belongs to others, and gratify your desires. For as ye have devised to reject Me, so will I also
reject you,4352 saith the Lord Almighty.

9. This I seemed to hear Him say, and to see Him do, and besides, to hear Him shouting
to His people, which once were few and scattered and miserable, and have now become
many, and compact enough and enviable, Go through4353 My gates4354 and be ye enlarged. 
Must you always be in trouble and dwell in tents, while those who vex you rejoice exceedingly? And to the presiding Angels, for I believe, as John teaches me in his Revelation, that
each Church has its guardian,4355 Prepare ye the way of My people, and cast away the stones
from the way,4356 that there may be no stumblingblock or hindrance for the people4357 in
the divine road and entrance, now, to the temples made with hands,4358 but soon after, to
Jerusalem above,4359 and the Holy of holies there,4360 which will, I know, be the end of
suffering and struggle to those who here bravely travel on the way. Among whom are ye
also called to be Saints,4361 a people of possession, a royal priesthood,4362 the most excellent
portion of the Lord, a whole river from a drop, a heavenly lamp from a spark, a tree from a
grain of mustard seed,4363 on which the birds come and lodge.

10. These we present to you, dear shepherds, these we offer to you, with these we welcome our friends, and guests, and fellow pilgrims. We have nothing fairer or more splendid
to offer to you, for we have selected the greatest of all our possessions, that you may see that,
strangers as we are, we are not in want, but though poor are making many rich.4364 If these

Ib. lvii. 13; lxv. 9.

1 Sam. vi. 1.

4352 Hos. iv. 6.

4353 Go through, etc. This passage refers to the restoration of the churches to the orthodox by Theodosius,

Jan. 10, a.d. 381.

Isai. lxii. 10.

4355 Rev. ii. 1.

Isai. lxii. 10.

Ib. lvii. 14.

4358 Acts vii. 48.

4359 Gal. iv. 26.

4360 Heb. ix. 3, 24.

4361 Rom. i. 6.

1 Pet. ii. 9.

S. Matt. xiii. 21.

2 Cor. vi. 10.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

things are small and unworthy of notice, I would fain learn what is greater and of more account. For, if it be no great thing to have established and strengthened with wholesome
doctrines a city which is the eye of the universe, in its exceeding strength by sea and land,
which is, as it were, the link between the Eastern and Western shores, in which the extremities
of the world from every side meet together, and from which, as the common mart of the
faith, they take their rise, a city borne hither and thither on the eddying currents of so many
tongues, it will be long ere anything be considered great or worthy of esteem. But if it be
indeed a subject for praise, allow to us some glory on this account, since we have contributed
in some portion to these results which ye see.

11. Lift up thine eyes round about, and see,4365 thou critic of my words! See the crown
which has been platted in return for the hirelings of Ephraim4366 and the crown of insolence;
see the assembly of the presbyters, honoured for years and wisdom, the fair order of the
deacons, who are not far from the same Spirit, the good conduct of the readers, the people's
eagerness for teaching, both of men and women, who are equally renowned for virtue: the
men, whether philosophers or simple folk, being alike wise in divine things, whether rulers
or ruled, being all in this respect duly under rule; whether soldiers or nobles, students or
men of letters, being all soldiers4367 of God, though in all other respects meek, ready to fight
for the Spirit, all reverencing the assembly above, to which we obtain an entrance, not by
the mere letter, but by the quickening Spirit, all in very deed being men of reason, and
worshippers of Him Who is in truth the Word: the women, if married, being united by a
Divine rather than by a carnal bond; if unwedded and free, being entirely dedicated to God;
whether young or old, some honourably advancing towards old age, others eagerly striving
to remain immortal, being renewed by the best of hopes.

12. To those who platted this crown-that which I speak, I speak it not after the Lord,4368
nevertheless I will say it-I also have given assistance. Some of them are the result of my
words, not of those which we have uttered at random, but of those which we have loved-nor
again of those which are meretricious, though the language and manners of the harlot have
been slanderously attributed to me, but of those which are most grave. Some of them are
the offspring and fruit of my Spirit, as the Spirit can beget those who rise superior to the
body. To this I have no doubt that those who are kindly among you, nay all of you, will
testify, since I have been the husbandman of all: and my sole reward is your confession. 
For we neither have, nor have had, any other object. For virtue, that it may remain virtue,
is without reward, its eyes fixed alone on that which is good.

Isai. lx. 4.

Ib. xxviii. 1 (LXX.).

2 Tim. ii. 3.

2 Cor. xi. 17.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

13. Would you have me say something still more venturesome? Do you see the tongues
of the enemy made gentle, and those who made war upon the Godhead against me tranquillised? This also is the result of our Spirit, of our husbandry. For we are not undisciplined
in our exercise of discipline, nor do we hurl insults, as many do, who assail not the argument
but the speaker, and sometimes strive by their invective to hide the weakness of their reasoning; as the cuttlefish are said to cast forth ink before them, in order to escape from their
pursuers, or themselves to hunt others when unperceived. But we show that our warfare is
in behalf of Christ by fighting as Christ, the peaceable and meek,4369 Who has borne our
infirmities, fought.4370 Though peaceable, we do not injure the word of truth, by yielding
a jot, to gain a reputation for reasonableness; for we do not pursue that which is good by
means of ill: and we are peaceable by the legitimate character of our warfare, confined as
it is to our own limits, and the rules of the Spirit. Upon these points, this is my decision,
and I lay down the law for all stewards of souls and dispensers of the Word: neither to exasperate others by their harshness, nor to render them arrogant by submissiveness: but to
be of good words in treating of the Word, and in neither direction to overstep the mean.

14. But you are perhaps longing for me to give an exposition of the faith, in so far as I
am able. For I shall myself be sanctified by the effort of memory, and the people also will
be benefited, by its special delight in such discussions, and you will fully acknowledge
it-unless we are the objects of groundless envy, as the rivals, in the manifestation of the
truth, of those whom we do not excel. For as, of deep waters, some in the depths are utterly
hidden, some foam against any obstruction, and hesitate a while before breaking (as they
promise to our ears), some do actually break; so also, of those who are professors of the
Divine philosophy-setting aside the utterly misguided-some keep their piety entirely
secret and hidden within themselves, some are not far from the birth pangs, avoiding impiety,
yet not speaking out their piety, either from cautious reserve in their teaching, or under
pressure of fear, being themselves sound, as they say, in mind, but not making sound their
people, as if they had been entrusted with the government of their own souls, but not of
those of others; while there are some who make public their treasure, unable to restrain
themselves from giving birth to their piety, and not considering that to be salvation which
saves themselves alone, without bestowing upon others the overflow of their blessings. 
Among these would I range myself, and all who by my side have nobly dared to confess the
truth.

15. One concise proclamation of our teaching, an inscription intelligible to all, is this
people, which so sincerely worships the Trinity, that it would sooner sever anyone from this
life, than sever one of the three from the Godhead: of one mind, of equal zeal, and united

S. Matt. xi. 29.

Ib. viii. 17; Isai. liii. 4.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

to one another, to us and to the Trinity by unity of doctrine. Briefly to run over its details: 
That which is without beginning, and is the beginning, and is with the beginning, is one
God. For the nature of that which is without beginning does not consist in being without
beginning or being unbegotten, for the nature of anything lies, not in what it is not but in
what it is. It is the assertion of what is, not the denial of what is not. And the Beginning is
not, because it is a beginning, separated from that which has no beginning. For its beginning
is not its nature, any more than the being without beginning is the nature of the other. For
these are the accompaniments of the nature, not the nature itself. That again which is with
that which has no beginning, and with the beginning, is not anything else than what they
are. Now, the name of that which has no beginning is the Father, and of the Beginning the
Son, and of that which is with the Beginning, the Holy Ghost, and the three have one
Nature-God. And the union is the Father from Whom and to Whom the order of Persons
runs its course, not so as to be confounded, but so as to be possessed, without distinction
of time, of will, or of power. For these things in our case produce a plurality of individuals,
since each of them is separate both from every other quality, and from every other individual
possession of the same quality. But to Those who have a simple nature, and whose essence
is the same, the term One belongs in its highest sense.

16. Let us then bid farewell to all contentious shiftings and balancings of the truth on
either side, neither, like the Sabellians, assailing the Trinity in the interest of the Unity, and
so destroying the distinction by a wicked confusion; nor, like the Arians, assailing the Unity
in the interest of the Trinity, and by an impious distinction overthrowing the Oneness. For
our object is not to exchange one evil for another, but to ensure our attainment of that which
is good. These are the playthings of the Wicked One, who is ever swaying our fortunes towards the evil. But we, walking along the royal road which lies between the two extremes,
which is the seat of the virtues, as the authorities say, believe in the Father, the Son and the
Holy Ghost, of one Substance and glory; in Whom also baptism has its perfection, both
nominally and really (thou knowest who hast been initiated!); being a denial of atheism and
a confession of Godhead; and thus we are regenerated, acknowledging the Unity in the Essence and in the undivided worship, and the Trinity in the Hypostases or Persons (which
term some prefer.) And let not those who are contentious on these points utter their scandalous taunts, as if our faith depended on terms and not on realities. For what do you mean
who assert the three Hypostases? Do you imply three Essences by the term? I am assured
that you would loudly shout against those who do so. For you teach that the Essence of the
Three is One and the same. What do you mean, who assert the Three Persons? Do you
imagine a single compound sort of being, with three faces,4371 or of an entirely human

4371 With three faces (or masks). A play upon the word πρόσωπον which is used in theology in the sense of

Person.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

form? Perish the thought! You too will loudly reply that he who thinks thus, will never see
the face of God, whatever it may be. What is the meaning of the Hypostases of the one
party, of the Persons of the other, to ask this further question? That They are three, Who
are distinguished not by natures, but by properties.4372 Excellent. How could men agree
and harmonize better than you do, even if there be a difference between the syllables you
use? You see what a reconciler I am, bringing you back from the letter to the sense, as we
do with the Old and New Testaments.

17. But, to resume: let us speak of the Unbegotten, the Begotten, and the Proceeding,
if anyone likes to create names: for we shall have no fear of bodily conceptions attaching
to Those who are not embodied, as the calumniators of the Godhead think. For the creature
must be called God's, and this is for us a great thing, but God never. Otherwise I shall admit
that God is a creature, if I become God, in the strict sense of the term. For this is the truth. 
If God, He is not a creature; for the creature ranks with us who are not Gods. And if a
creature, he is not God, for he had a beginning in time. And there was a time when he who
had a beginning was not. And that of which non-existence was its prior condition, has not
being in the strict sense of the term. And how can that, which strictly has not being, be
God? Not one single one, then, of the Three is a creature, nor, what is worse, came into
being for my sake; for in that case he would be not only a creature, but inferior in honour
to us. For, if I am for the glory of God, and he is for my sake, as the tongs for the waggon,
the saw for the door, I am his superior in causality. For in whatever degree God is superior
to creatures, in the same degree is he, who came into being for my sake, inferior to me who
exist for God's sake.

18. Moreover, the Moabites and Ammonites must not even be allowed to enter4373
into the Church of God, I mean those sophistical, mischievous arguments which enquire
curiously into the generation and inexpressible procession of God, and rashly set themselves
in array against the Godhead: as if it were necessary that those things which it is beyond
the power of language to set forth, must either be accessible to them alone, or else have no
existence because they have not comprehended them. We however, following the Divine
Scriptures, and removing out of the way of the blind the stumbling blocks contained in
them, will cling to salvation, daring any and every thing rather than arrogance against God. 
As for the evidences, we leave them to others, since they have been set forth by many, and
by ourselves also with no little care. And indeed, it would be a very shameful thing for me
at this time to be gathering together proofs for what has all along been believed. For it is
not the best order of things, first to teach and then to learn, even in matters which are small
and of no consequence, and much more in those which are Divine and of such great import-

Properties. Cf. xliii. 30, note.

4373 Deut. xxiii. 3.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

ance. Nor, again, is it proper to the present occasion to explain and disentangle the difficulties
of Scripture, a task requiring fuller and more careful consideration than our present purpose
will allow. Such then, to sum up, is our teaching. I have entered into these details, with no
intention of contending against the adversaries: for I have already often, even if it be imperfectly, fought out the question with them: but in order that I might exhibit to you the
character of my teaching, that you might see whether I have not a share in the defence of
your own, and do not take my stand on the same side, and opposed to the same enemies as
yourselves.

19. You have now, my friends, heard the defence of my presence here: if it be deserving
of praise, thanks are due for it to God, and to you who called me; if it has fallen below your
expectation, I give thanks even on this behalf. For I am assured that it has not been altogether
deserving of censure, and am confident that you also admit this. Have we at all made a
gain4374 of this people? Have we consulted at all our own interests, as I see is most often
the case? Have we caused any vexation to the Church? To others possibly, with whose idea
that they had gained judgment against us by default, we have joined issue in our argument;
but in no wise, as far as I am aware, to you. I have taken no ox of yours,4375 says the great
Samuel, in his contention against Israel on the subject of the king, nor any propitiation for
your souls, the Lord is witness among you, nor this, nor that, proceeding at greater length,
that I may not count up every particular; but I have kept the priesthood pure and unalloyed. 
And if I have loved power, or the height of a throne, or to tread Kings' courts, may I never
possess any distinction, or if I gain it, may I be hurled from it.

20. What then do I mean? I am no proficient in virtue without reward, having not attained to so high a degree of virtue. Give me the reward of my labours. What reward? Not
that which some, prone to any suspicion would suppose, but that which it is safe for me to
seek. Give me a respite from my long labours; give honour to my foreign service; elect another in my place, the one who is being eagerly sought on your behalf, someone who is clean
of hands, someone who is not unskilled in voice, someone who is able to gratify you on all
points, and share with you the ecclesiastical cares; for this is especially the time for such. 
But behold, I pray you, the condition of this body, so drained by time, by disease, by toil. 
What need have you of a timid and unmanly old man, who is, so to speak, dying day by day,
not only in body, but even in powers of mind, who finds it difficult to enter into these details
before you? Disobey not the voice of your teacher: for indeed you have never yet disobeyed
it. I am weary of being charged with my gentleness. I am weary of being assailed in words
and in envy by enemies, and by our own. Some aim at my breast, and are less successful in
their effort, for an open enemy can be guarded against. Others lie in wait for my back, and

2 Cor. xii. 17.

1 Kings xii. 2.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

give greater pain, for the unsuspected blow is the more fatal. If again I have been a pilot, I
have been one of the most skilful; the sea has been boisterous around us, boiling about the
ship, and there has been considerable uproar among the passengers, who have always been
fighting about something or another, and roaring against one another and the waves. What
a struggle I have had, seated at the helm, contending alike with the sea and the passengers,
to bring the vessel safe to land through this double storm? Had they in every way supported
me, safety would have been hardly won, and when they were opposed to me, how has it
been possible to avoid making shipwreck?

21. What more need be said? But how can I bear this holy war? For there has been
said to be a holy, as well as a Persian, war.4376 How shall I unite and join together the hostile
occupants of sees, and hostile pastors, and the people broken up along with, and opposed
to them, as if by some chasms caused by earthquakes between neighbouring and adjoining
places; or as, in pestilential diseases, befalls servants and members of the family, when the
sickness readily attacks in succession one after another; and besides the very quarters of the
globe are affected by the spirit of faction, so that East and West are arrayed on opposite
sides, and bid fair to be severed in opinion no less than in position. How long are parties
to be mine and yours, the old and the new, the more rational and the more spiritual, the
more noble and the more ignoble, the more and the less numerous? I am ashamed of my
old age, when, after being saved by Christ, I am called by the name of others.

22.4377 I cannot bear your horse races and theatres, and this rage for rivalry in expense
and party spirit. We unharness, and harness ourselves on the other side, we neigh against
each other, we almost beat the air, as they do, and fling the dust towards heaven, like those
which are excited; and under other masks satisfy our own rivalry, and become evil arbiters
of emulation, and senseless judges of affairs. To-day sharing the same thrones and opinions,
if our leaders thus carry us along; to-morrow hostile alike in position and opinion, if the
wind blows in the contrary direction. Amid the variations of friendship and hatred, our
names also vary: and what is most terrible, we are not ashamed to set forth contrary doctrines
to the same audience; nor are we constant to the same objects, being rendered different at
different times by our contentiousness. They are like the ebb and flow of some narrow
strait.4378 For as when the children are at play in the midst of the market place, it would be
most disgraceful and unbecoming for us to leave our household business, and join them;
for children's toys are not becoming for old age: so, when others are contending, even if I
am better informed than the majority, I could not allow myself to be one of them, rather

4376 A Holy War. That against the Phocians to avenge their sacrilege at Delphi.

§ 22 is a comparison of Ecclesiastical partisanship to the emulation and party spirit connected with the

horse races in the amphitheatre.

4378 Narrow strait, lit. Euripus.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

than, as I now do, enjoy the freedom of obscurity. For, besides all this, my feeling is that I
do not, on most points, agree with the majority, and cannot bear to walk in the same way. 
Rash and stupid though it may be, such is my feeling. That which is pleasant to others causes
pain to me, and I am pleased with what is painful to others. So that I should not be surprised
if I were even imprisoned as a disagreeable man, and thought by most men to be out of my
senses, as is said to have been the case with one of the Greek philosophers, whose moderation
exposed him to the charge of madness, because he laughed at everything, since he saw that
the objects of the eager pursuit of the majority were ridiculous; or even be thought full of
new wine as were in later days the disciples of Christ, because they spoke with tongues,4379
since men knew not that it was the power of the Spirit, and not a distraction of mind.

23. Now, consider the charges laid against us. You have been ruler of the church, it is
said, for so long, and favoured by the course of time, and the influence of the sovereign, a
most important matter. What change have we been able to notice? How many men have
in days gone by used us outrageously? What sufferings have we failed to undergo? Ill-usage? 
Threats? Banishment? Plunder? Confiscation? The burning4380 of priests at sea? The
desecration of temples by the blood of the saints, till, instead of temples, they became charnelhouses? The public slaughter of aged Bishops, to speak more accurately, of Patriarchs? The
denial of access to every place in the case of the godly alone? In fact any kind of suffering
which could be mentioned? And for which of these have we requited the wrongdoers? For
the wheel of fortune gave us the power of rightly treating those who so treated us, and our
persecutors ought to have received a lesson. Apart from all other things, speaking only of
our experiences, not to mention your own, have we not been persecuted, maltreated, driven
from churches, houses, and, most terrible of all, even from the deserts? Have we not had
to endure an enraged people, insolent governors, the disregard of Emperors and their decrees? What was the result? We became stronger, and our persecutors took to flight. That
was actually the case. The power to requite them seemed to me a sufficient vengeance on
those who had wronged us. These men thought otherwise; for they are exceedingly exact
and just in requiting: and accordingly they demand4381 what the state of things permits. 
What governor, they say, has been fined? What populace chastised? What ringleaders of
the populace? What fear of ourselves have we been able to inspire for the future?

24. Perhaps4382 we may be reproached, as we have been before, with the exquisite
character of our table, the splendour of our apparel, the officers who precede us, our

4379 Acts ii. 4.

The burning, etc., cf. This was by order of Valens.

4381 Demand. After all these persecutions, some thought S. Gregory ought to have used his influence with

Theodosius to requite or punish the former persecutors of the orthodox.

Perhaps, an ironical passage.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

haughtiness to those who meet us. I was not aware that we ought to rival the consuls, the
governors, the most illustrious generals, who have no opportunity of lavishing their incomes;
or that our belly ought to hunger for the enjoyment of the goods of the poor, and to expend
their necessaries on superfluities, and belch forth over the altars. I did not know that we
ought to ride on splendid horses, and drive in magnificent carriages, and be preceded by a
procession and surrounded by applause, and have everyone make way for us, as if we were
wild beasts, and open out a passage so that our approach might be seen afar. If these sufferings have been endured, they have now passed away: Forgive me this wrong.4383 Elect another who will please the majority: and give me my desert, my country life, and my God,
Whom alone I may have to please, and shall please by my simple life. It is a painful thing
to be deprived of speeches and conferences, and public gatherings, and applause like that
which now lends wings to my thoughts, and relatives, and friends and honours, and the
beauty and grandeur of the city, and its brilliancy which dazzles those who look at the surface
without investigating the inner nature of things; but yet not so painful as being clamoured
against and besmirched amid public disturbances and agitations, which trim their sails to
the popular breeze. For they seek not for priests, but for orators, not for stewards of souls,
but for treasurers of money, not for pure offerers of the sacrifice, but for powerful patrons. 
I will say a word in their defence: we have thus trained them, by becoming all things to all
men,4384 whether to save or destroy all, I know not.

25. What say you? Are you persuaded, have you been overcome by my words? Or
must I use stronger terms in order to persuade you? Yea by the Trinity Itself, Whom you
and I alike worship, by our common hope, and for the sake of the unity of this people, grant
me this favour; dismiss me with your prayers; let this be the proclamation of my contest;
give me my certificate of retirement, as sovereigns do to their soldiers; and, if you will, with
a favourable testimony, that I may enjoy the honour of it; if not, just as you please; this will
make no difference to me, until God sees what my case really is. What successor then shall
we elect? God will provide Himself4385 a shepherd for the office, as He once provided a
lamb for a burnt-offering. I only make this further request,-let him be one who is the object
of envy, not the object of pity; not one who yields everything to all, but one who can on
some points offer resistance for the sake of what is best: for though the one is most pleasant,
the other is most profitable. So do you prepare for me your addresses of dismissal: I will
now bid you farewell.

2 Cor. xii. 13.

1 Cor. ix. 22.

4385 Gen. xxii. 8.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

26. Farewell my Anastasia,4386 whose name is redolent of piety: for thou hast raised
up for us the doctrine which was in contempt: farewell, scene of our common victory,
modern Shiloh,4387 where the tabernacle was first fixed, after being carried about in its
wanderings for forty years in the wilderness. Farewell likewise, grand and renowned temple,
our new inheritance, whose greatness is now due to the Word, which once wast a Jebus,4388
and hast now been made by us a Jerusalem. Farewell, all ye others, inferior only to this in
beauty, scattered through the various parts of the city, like so many links, uniting together
each your own neighbourhood, which have been filled with worshippers of whose existence
we had despaired, not by me, in my weakness, but by the grace which was with me.4389 
Farewell, ye Apostles,4390 noble settlers here, my masters in the strife; if I have not often
kept festival with you, it has been possibly due to the Satan4391 which I, like S. Paul,4392
who was one of you, carry about in my body for my own profit, and which is the cause of
my now leaving you. Farewell, my throne, envied and perilous height; farewell assembly of
high priests, honoured by the dignity and age of its priests, and all ye others ministers of
God round the holy table, drawing nigh to the God Who draws nigh to you.4393 Farewell,
choirs of Nazarites, harmonies of the Psalter, night-long stations, venerable virgins, decorous
matrons, gatherings of widows and orphans, and ye eyes of the poor, turned towards God
and towards me. Farewell, hospitable and Christ-loved dwellings, helpers of my infirmity. 
Farewell, ye lovers of my discourses, in your eagerness and concourse, ye pencils seen and
unseen, and thou balustrade, pressed upon by those who thrust themselves forward to hear
the word. Farewell, Emperors, and palace, and ministers and household of the Emperor,
whether faithful or not to him, I know not, but for the most part, unfaithful to God. Clap
your hands, shout aloud, extol your orator to the skies. This pestilent and garrulous tongue
has ceased to speak to you. Though it will not utterly cease to speak: for it will fight with
hand and ink: but for the present we have ceased to speak.

27. Farewell, mighty Christ-loving city. I will testify to the truth, though thy zeal be
not according to knowledge.4394 Our separation renders us more kindly. Approach the

4386 Anastasia. The little church "of the Resurrection" in which the orthodox Christians worshipped with

S. Gregory at first on his arrival, while the churches of the city were held by the heretics.

Josh. xviii. 1.

1 Chron. xi. 4.

1 Cor. xv. 10.

4390 Apostles. The Church of the Holy Apostles, to which Constantius translated the relics of SS. Andrew,

Luke and Timothy.

Satan, i.e., "thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan"-in S. Gregory's case serious ill health.

2 Cor. xii. 7.

S. James iv. 8.

4394 Rom. x. 2.

The Last Farewell in the Presence of the One Hundred and Fifty Bishops.

truth: be converted at this late hour. Honour God more than you have been wont to do. 
It is no disgrace to change, while it is fatal to cling to evil. Farewell, East and West, for whom
and against whom I have had to fight; He is witness, Who will give you peace, if but a few
would imitate my retirement. For those who resign their thrones will not also lose God,
but will have the seat on high, which is far more exalted and secure. Last of all, and most
of all, I will cry,-farewell ye Angels, guardians of this church, and of my presence and pilgrimage, since our affairs are in the hands of God. Farewell, O Trinity, my meditation, and
my glory. Mayest Thou be preserved by those who are here, and preserve them, my people: 
for they are mine, even if I have my place assigned elsewhere; and may I learn that Thou art
ever extolled and glorified in word and conduct. My children, keep, I pray you, that which
is committed to your trust.4395 Remember my stonings.4396 The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all. Amen.

1 Tim. vi. 20.

4396 Col. iv. 18.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

Oration XLIII.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

S. Basil died January 1, a.d. 379. A serious illness, in addition to other causes, prevented
S. Gregory from being present at his funeral (Epist. 79). Benoît holds that an expression
(Epitaph, cxix. 38) in which S. Gregory says that his "lips are fettered" proves that he was still
in retirement at Seleucia. This is an unwarranted deduction. In this Oration, § 2, the Saint,
alluding to his illness in disparaging terms, alleges his labours at Constantinople as a more
pressing reason for his absence: and says that he undertook the task according to the judgment
of S. Basil. This implies that S. Gregory went to Constantinople before the death of S. Basil,
or that he had then been influenced by his friend's advice and was on the point of setting
out-more probably the former, as we may be sure that, if S. Gregory had been still at Seleucia,
no reason but physical incapacity would have kept him from his friend's side. His pressing
duties at Constantinople and the difficulties of the long journey were the "other causes" of his
letter to S. Gregory of Nyssa: and we know that he suffered from serious illness at Constantinople (Carm. xi. 887. Orat. xxiii. 1). S. Gregory left Constantinople in June, a.d. 381,
and Tillemont places the date of this Oration soon after his return to Nazianzus. Benoît thinks
that it was probably delivered on the anniversary of S. Basil's death. The Oration, as all critics
are agreed, is one of great power and beauty. Its length (62 pages folio), the physical weakness
of the speaker, and the limits of the endurance of even an interested audience, incline us to
suppose that it was not spoken in its present form. We cannot well set aside expressions which
clearly point to actual delivery, but it may have been amplified later.

1. It has then been ordained that the great Basil, who used so constantly to furnish me
with subjects for my discourses, of which he was quite as proud as any other man of his
own, should himself now furnish me with the grandest subject which has ever fallen to the
lot of an orator. For I think that if anyone desired, in making trial of his powers of eloquence,
to test them by the standard of that one of all his subjects which he preferred (as painters
do with epoch-making pictures), he would choose that which stood first of all others, but
would set aside this as beyond the powers of human eloquence. So great a task is the praise
of such a man, not only to me, who have long ago laid aside all thought of emulation, but
even to those who live for eloquence, and whose sole object is the gaining of glory by subjects
like this. Such is my opinion, and, as I persuade myself, with perfect justice. But I know
not what subject I can treat with eloquence, if not this; or what greater favour I can do to
myself, to the admirers of virtue, or to eloquence itself, than express our admiration for this
man. To me it is the discharge of a most sacred debt. And our speech is a debt beyond all
others due to those who have been gifted, in particular, with powers of speech. To the ad-

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

mirers of virtue a discourse is at once a pleasure and an incentive to virtue. For when4397
I have learned the praises of men, I have a distinct idea of their progress: now, there is none
of us all, within whose power it is not to attain to any point whatsoever in that progress. 
As for eloquence itself, in either case, all must go well with it. For, if the discourse be almost
worthy of its subject-eloquence will have given an exhibition of its power: if it fall far short
of it, as must be the case when the praises of Basil are being set forth, by an actual demonstration of its incapacity, it will have declared the superiority of the excellences of its subject
to all expression in words.

2. These are the reasons which have urged me to speak, and to address myself to this
contest. And at my late appearance, long after his praises have been set forth by so many,
who have publicly and privately done him honour, let no one be surprised. Yea, may I be
pardoned by that divine soul, the object of my constant reverence! And as, when he was
amongst us, he constantly corrected me in many points, according to the rights of a friend
and the still higher law; for I am not ashamed to say this, for he was a standard of virtue to
us all; so now, looking down upon me from above, he will treat me with indulgence. I ask
pardon too of any here who are among his warmest admirers, if indeed anyone can be
warmer than another, and we are not all abreast in our zeal for his good fame. For it is not
contempt which has caused me to fall short of what might have been expected of me: nor
have I been so regardless of the claims of virtue or of friendship; nor have I thought that to
praise him befitted any other more than me. No! my first reason was, that I shrunk from
this task, for I will say the truth, as priests4398 do, who approach their sacred duties before
being cleansed both in voice and mind. In the second place, I remind you, though you know
it well, of the task4399 in which I was engaged on behalf of the true doctrine, which had been
properly forced upon me, and had carried me from home, according, as I suppose, to the
will of God, and certainly according to the judgment of our noble champion of the truth,
the breath of whose life was pious doctrine alone, such as promotes the salvation of the
whole world. As for my bodily health, I ought not, perhaps, to dare to mention it, when my
subject is a man so doughty in his conquest of the body, even before his removal hence, and
who maintained that no powers of the soul should suffer hindrance from this our fetter.4400 
So much for my defence. I do not think I need labour it further, in speaking of him to you
who know so clearly my affairs. I must now proceed with my eulogy, commending myself
to his God, in order that my commendations may not prove an insult to the man, and that

For when, etc. This seems to be the sense of an admittedly difficult sentence.

4398 As priests, or, more generally, "as those who approach our temples." In the E. there were lavers at the

entrance to the churches for the ablutions of intending worshippers.

4399 Of the task, i.e., of restoring the orthodox faith in Constantinople.

Fetter, i.e., the body.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

I may not lag far behind all others; even though we all equally fall as far short of his due, as
those who look upon the heavens or the rays of the Sun.

3. Had I seen him to be proud of his birth, and the rights of birth, or any of those infinitely little objects of those whose eyes are on the ground, we should have had to inspect a
new catalogue of the Heroes. What details as to his ancestors might I not have laid under
contribution! Nor would even history have had any advantage over me, since I claim this
advantage, that his celebrity depends, not upon fiction or legend, but upon actual facts attested by many witnesses. On his father's side Pontus offers to me many details, in no wise
inferior to its wonders of old time, of which all history and poesy are full;4401 there are many
others concerned with this my native land, of illustrious men of Cappadocia, renowned for
its youthful progeny,4402 no less than for its horses. Accordingly we match with his father's
family that of his mother. What family owns more numerous, or more illustrious generals
and governors, or court officials, or again, men of wealth, and lofty thrones, and public
honours, and oratorical renown? If it were permitted me to wish to mention them, I would
make nothing of the Pelopidae and Cecropidae, the Alcmaeonids, the Aeacidae, and Heracleidae,
and other most noble families: inasmuch as they, in default of public merit in their house,
betake themselves to the region of uncertainty, claiming demigods and divinities, merely
mythical personages, as the glory of their ancestors, whose most vaunted details are incredible,
and those which we can believe are an infamy.

4. But since our subject is a man who has maintained that each man's nobility is to be
judged of according to his own worth, and that, as forms and colours, and likewise our most
celebrated and most infamous horses, are tested by their own properties, so we too ought
not to be depicted in borrowed plumes; after mentioning one or two traits, which, though
inherited from his ancestors, he made his own by his life, and which are specially likely to
give pleasure to my hearers, I will then proceed to deal with the man himself. Different
families and individuals have different points of distinction and interest, great or small,
which, like a patrimony of longer or shorter descent, come down to posterity: the distinction
of his family on either side was piety, which I now proceed to display.

5. There was a persecution, the most frightful and severe of all; I mean, as you know,
the persecution of Maximinus, which, following closely upon those which immediately
preceded it, made them all seem gentle, by its excessive audacity, and by its eagerness to win
the crown of violence in impiety. It was overcome by many of our champions, who wrestled
with it to the death, or well-nigh to the death, with only life enough left in them to survive
their victory, and not pass away in the midst of the struggle; remaining to be trainers4403

4401 History and poesy, e.g., Xenophon, Polybius, and Apollonius.

Renowned, etc. Cf. Homer, Od. ix. 27.

4403 Trainers, lit. "anointers"-those who physically and by their advice prepared athletes for their exercises.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

in virtue, living witnesses, breathing trophies, silent exhortations, among whose numerous
ranks were found Basil's paternal ancestors, upon whom, in their practice of every form of
piety, that period bestowed many a fair garland. So prepared and determined were they to
bear readily all those things on account of which Christ crowns those who have imitated
His struggle on our behalf.

6. But since their strife must needs be lawful, and the law of martyrdom alike forbids
us voluntarily to go to meet it (in consideration for the persecutors, and for the weak) or to
shrink from it if it comes upon us; for the former shows foolhardiness, the latter cowardice;
in this respect they paid due honour to the Lawgiver; but what was their device, or rather,
to what were they led by the Providence which guided them in all things? They betook
themselves to a thicket on the mountains of Pontus, of which there are many deep ones of
considerable extent, with very few comrades of their flight, or attendants upon their needs. 
Let others marvel at the length of time, for their flight was exceedingly prolonged, to about
seven years, or a little more, and their mode of life, delicately nurtured as they were, was
straitened and unusual, as may be imagined, with the discomfort of its exposure to frost
and heat and rain: and the wilderness allowed no fellowship or converse with friends: a
great trial to men accustomed to the attendance and honour of a numerous retinue. But I
will proceed to speak of what is still greater and more extraordinary: nor will anyone fail
to credit it, save those who, in their feeble and dangerous judgment, think little of persecutions and dangers for Christ's sake.

7. These noble men, suffering from the lapse of time, and feeling a distaste for ordinary
food, felt a longing for something more appetising. They did not indeed speak as Israel
did,4404 for they were not murmurers4405 like them, in their afflictions in the desert, after
the escape from Egypt-that Egypt would have been better for them than the wilderness,
in the bountiful supply of its flesh-pots, and other dainties which they had left behind them
there, for the brickmaking and the clay seemed nothing to them then in their folly-but in
a more pious and faithful manner. For why, said they, is it incredible that the God of wonders, who bountifully fed4406 in the wilderness his homeless and fugitive people, raining
bread upon them, and abounding in quails, nourishing them not only with necessaries, but
even with luxuries: that He, Who divided the sea,4407 and stayed the sun,4408 and parted
the river, with all the other things that He has done; for under such circumstances the mind
is wont to recur to history, and sing the praises of God's many wonders: that He, they went

Exod. xvi. 2 et seq.

1 Cor. x. 10.

Exod. xvi. 13.

Ib. xiv. 21.

Josh. iii. 16; x. 12.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

on, should feed us champions of piety with dainties to-day? Many animals which have escaped the tables of the rich, have their lairs in these mountains, and many eatable birds fly
over our longing heads, any of which can surely be caught at the mere fiat of Thy will! At
these words, their quarry lay before them, with food come of its own accord, a complete
banquet prepared without effort, stags appearing all at once from some place in the hills. 
How splendid they were! how fat! how ready for the slaughter! It might almost be imagined
that they were annoyed at not having been summoned earlier. Some of them made signs
to draw others after them, the rest followed their lead. Who pursued and drove them? No
one. What riders? What kind of dogs, what barking, or cry, or young men who had occupied
the exits according to the rules of the chase? They were the prisoners of prayer and righteous
petition. Who has known such a hunt among men of this, or any day?

8. O what a wonder! They were themselves stewards of the chase; what they would,
was caught by the mere will to do so; what was left, they sent away to the thickets, for another
meal. The cooks were extemporised, the dinner exquisite, the guests were grateful for this
wonderful foretaste of their hopes. And hence they grew more earnest in their struggle, in
return for which they had received this blessing. Such is my history. And do thou, my
persecutor, in thy admiration for legends, tell of thy huntresses,4409 and Orions, and Actaeons,
those ill-fated hunters, and the hind substituted for the maiden,4410 if any such thing rouses
thee to emulation, and if we grant that this story is no legend. The sequel of the tale is too
disgraceful. For what is the benefit of the exchange, if a maiden is saved to be taught to
murder her guests, and learn to requite humanity with inhumanity? Let this one instance,
such as it is, chosen out of many, represent the rest, as far as I am concerned. I have not
related it to contribute to his reputation: for neither does the sea stand in need of the rivers
which flow into it, many and great though they be, nor does the present subject of my praises
need any contributions to his fair fame. No! my object is to exhibit the character of his ancestors, and the example before his eyes, which he so far excelled. For if other men find it
a great additional advantage to receive somewhat of their honour from their forefathers, it
is a greater thing for him to have made such an addition to the original stock that the stream
seems to have run uphill.

9. The union of his parents, cemented as it was by a community of virtue, no less than
by cohabitation, was notable for many reasons, especially for generosity to the poor, for
hospitality, for purity of soul as the result of self-discipline, for the dedication to God of a
portion of their property, a matter not as yet so much cared for by most men, as it now has
grown to be, in consequence of such previous examples, as have given distinction to it, and
for all those other points, which have been published throughout Pontus and Cappadocia,

4409 Huntresses, esp. Artemis, a passion for whom was fatal to Orion and Actaeon.

The maiden, Iphigenia, daughter of Agamemnon.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

to the satisfaction of many: in my opinion, however, their greatest claim to distinction is
the excellence of their children. Legend indeed has its instances of men whose children
were many and beautiful, but it is practical experience which has presented to us these parents, whose own character, apart from that of their children, was sufficient for their fair
fame, while the character of their children would have made them, even without their own
eminence in virtue, to surpass all men by the excellence of their children. For the attainment
of distinction by one or two of their offspring might be ascribed to their nature; but when
all are eminent, the honour is clearly due to those who brought them up. This is proved by
the blessed roll of priests and virgins, and of those who, when married, have allowed nothing
in their union to hinder them from attaining an equal repute, and so have made the distinction between them to consist in the condition, rather than in the mode of their life.

10. Who has not known Basil, our archbishop's father, a great name to everyone, who
attained a father's prayer, if anyone, I will not say as no one, ever did? For he surpassed all
in virtue, and was only prevented by his son from gaining the first prize. Who has not
known Emmelia, whose name was a forecast of what she became, or else whose life was an
exemplification of her name? For she had a right to the name which implies gracefulness,
and occupied, to speak concisely, the same place among women, as her husband among
men. So that, when it was decided that he, in whose honour we are met, should be given to
men to submit to the bondage of nature, as anyone of old has been given by God for the
common advantage, it was neither fitting that he should be born of other parents, nor that
they should possess another son: and so the two things suitably concurred. I have now, in
obedience to the Divine law which bids us to pay all honour to parents, bestowed the firstfruits of my praises upon those whom I have commemorated, and proceed to treat of Basil
himself, premising this, which I think will seem true to all who knew him, that we only need
his own voice to pronounce his eulogium. For he is at once a brilliant subject for praise,
and the only one whose powers of speech make him worthy of treating it. Beauty indeed
and strength and size, in which I see that most men rejoice, I concede to anyone who
will-not that even in these points he was inferior to any of those men of small minds who
busy themselves about the body, while he was still young, and had not yet reduced the flesh
by austerity-but that I may avoid the fate of unskilful athletes, who waste their strength in
vain efforts after minor objects, and so are worsted in the crucial struggle, whose results are
victory and the distinction of the crown. The praise, then, which I shall claim for him is
based upon grounds which no one, I think, will consider superfluous, or beyond the scope
of my oration.

11. I take it as admitted by men of sense, that the first of our advantages is education;
and not only this our more noble form of it, which disregards rhetorical ornaments and
glory, and holds to salvation, and beauty in the objects of our contemplation: but even that
external culture which many Christians ill-judgingly abhor, as treacherous and dangerous,

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

and keeping us afar from God. For as we ought not to neglect the heavens, and earth, and
air, and all such things, because some have wrongly seized upon them, and honour God's
works instead of God: but to reap what advantage we can from them for our life and enjoyment, while we avoid their dangers; not raising creation, as foolish men do, in revolt against
the Creator, but from the works of nature apprehending the Worker,4411 and, as the divine
apostle says, bringing into captivity every thought to Christ:4412 and again, as we know that
neither fire, nor food, nor iron, nor any other of the elements, is of itself most useful, or
most harmful, except according to the will of those who use it; and as we have compounded
healthful drugs from certain of the reptiles; so from secular literature we have received
principles of enquiry and speculation, while we have rejected their idolatry, terror, and pit
of destruction. Nay, even these have aided us in our religion, by our perception of the
contrast between what is worse and what is better, and by gaining strength for our doctrine
from the weakness of theirs. We must not then dishonour education, because some men
are pleased to do so, but rather suppose such men to be boorish and uneducated, desiring
all men to be as they themselves are, in order to hide themselves in the general, and escape
the detection of their want of culture. But come now, and, after this sketch of our subject
and these admissions, let us contemplate the life of Basil.

12. In his earliest years he was swathed and fashioned, in that best and purest fashioning
which the Divine David speaks of as proceeding day by day,4413 in contrast with that of the
night, under his great father, acknowledged in those days by Pontus, as its common teacher
of virtue. Under him then, as life and reason grew and rose together, our illustrious friend
was educated: not boasting of a Thessalian mountain cave, as the workshop of his virtue,
nor of some braggart Centaur,4414 the tutor of the heroes of his day: nor was he taught
under such tuition to shoot hares, and run down fawns, or hunt stags, or excel in war, or in
breaking colts, using the same person as teacher and horse at once; nor nourished on the
fabulous marrows of stags and lions, but he was trained in general education, and practised
in the worship of God, and, to speak concisely, led on by elementary instructions to his future
perfection. For those who are successful in life or in letters only, while deficient in the other,
seem to me to differ in nothing from one-eyed men, whose loss is great, but their deformity
greater, both in their own eyes, and in those of others. While those who attain eminence
in both alike, and are ambidextrous, both possess perfection, and pass their life with the
blessedness of heaven. This is what befell him, who had at home a model of virtue in welldoing, the very sight of which made him excellent from the first. As we see foals and calves

4411 Rom. i. 20, 25.

2 Cor. x. 5.

Ps. cxxxix. 16.

4414 Centaur. Alluding to Chiron, the tutor of Achilles.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

skipping beside their mothers from their birth, so he too, running close beside his father in
foal-like wantonness, without being left far behind in his lofty impulses toward virtue, or,
if you will, sketching out and showing traces of the future beauty of his virtue, and drawing
the outlines of perfection before the time of perfection arrived.

13. When sufficiently trained at home, as he ought to fall short in no form of excellence,
and not be surpassed by the busy bee, which gathers what is most useful from every flower,
he set out for the city of Caesarea,4415 to take his place in the schools there, I mean this illustrious city of ours, for it was the guide and mistress of my studies, the metropolis of letters,
no less than of the cities which she excels and reigns over: and if any one were to deprive
her of her literary power, he would rob her of her fairest and special distinction. Other cities
take pride in other ornaments, of ancient or of recent date, that they may have something
to be described or to be seen. Letters form our distinction here, and are our badge, as if
upon the field of arms or on the stage. His subsequent life let those detail who trained him,
or enjoyed his training, as to what he was to his masters, what he was to his classmates,
equalling the former, surpassing the latter in every form of culture, what renown he won in
a short time from all, both of the common people, and of the leaders of the state; by showing
both a culture beyond his years, and a steadfastness of character beyond his culture. An
orator among orators, even before the chair of the rhetoricians,4416 a philosopher among
philosophers, even before the doctrines of philosophers: highest of all a priest among
Christians even before the priesthood. So much deference was paid to him in every respect
by all. Eloquence was his by-work, from which he culled enough to make it an assistance
to him in Christian philosophy, since power of this kind is needed to set forth the objects
of our contemplation. For a mind which cannot express itself is like the motion of a man
in a lethargy. His pursuit was philosophy, and breaking from the world, and fellowship
with God, by concerning himself, amid things below, with things above, and winning, where
all is unstable and fluctuating, the things which are stable and remain.

14. Thence to Byzantium, the imperial city of the East, for it was distinguished by the
eminence of its rhetorical and philosophic teachers, whose most valuable lessons he soon
assimilated by the quickness and force of his powers: thence he was sent by God, and by
his generous craving for culture, to Athens the home of letters. Athens, which has been to
me, if to any one, a city truly of gold, and the patroness of all that is good. For it brought
me to know Basil more perfectly, though he had not been unknown to me before; and in
my pursuit of letters, I attained to happiness; and in another fashion had the same experience
as Saul,4417 who, seeking his father's asses, found a kingdom, and gained incidentally what

Caesarea, the Cappadocian city, as seems plain from the context. Yet Tillemont and Billius incline to

think Caesarea in Palestine is meant.

4416 Chair, etc., Before he had studied rhetoric and philosophy.

1 Sam. ix. 3.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

was of more importance than the object which he had in view. Hitherto my course has been
clear, leading me in my encomiums along a level and easy, in fact, a king's highway: 
henceforth I know not how to speak or whither to turn: for my task is becoming arduous. 
For here I am anxious, and seize this opportunity to add from my own experience somewhat
to my speech, and to dwell a little upon the recital of the causes and circumstances which
originated our friendship, or to speak more strictly, our unity of life and nature. For as our
eyes are not ready to turn from attractive objects, and, if we violently tear them away, are
wont to return to them again; so do we linger in our description of what is most sweet to
us. I am afraid of the difficulty of the undertaking. I will try, however, to use all possible
moderation. And if I am at all overpowered by my regret, pardon this most righteous of all
feelings, the absence of which would be a great loss, in the eyes of men of feeling.

15. We were contained by Athens, like two branches of some river-stream, for after
leaving the common fountain of our fatherland, we had been separated in our varying pursuit
of culture, and were now again united by the impulsion of God no less than by our own
agreement. I preceded him by a little, but he soon followed me, to be welcomed with great
and brilliant hope. For he was versed in many languages, before his arrival, and it was a
great thing for either of us to outstrip the other in the attainment of some object of our
study. And I may well add, as a seasoning to any speech, a short narrative, which will be a
reminder to those who know it, a source of information to those who do not. Most of the
young men at Athens in their folly are mad after rhetorical skill-not only those who are
ignobly born and unknown, but even the noble and illustrious, in the general mass of young
men difficult to keep under control. They are just like men devoted to horses and exhibitions,
as we see, at the horse-races; they leap,4418 they shout, raise clouds of dust, they drive in
their seats, they beat the air, (instead of the horses) with their fingers as whips, they yoke
and unyoke the horses, though they are none of theirs: they readily exchange with one another drivers, horses, positions, leaders: and who are they who do this? Often poor and
needy fellows, without the means of support for a single day. This is just how the students
feel in regard to their own tutors, and their rivals, in their eagerness to increase their own
numbers and thereby enrich them. The matter is absolutely absurd and silly. Cities, roads,
harbours, mountain tops, coastlines, are seized upon-in short, every part of Attica, or of
the rest of Greece, with most of the inhabitants; for even these they have divided between
the rival parties.

16. Whenever any newcomer arrives, and falls into the hands of those who seize upon
him, either by force or willingly, they observe this Attic law, of combined jest and earnest. 
He is first conducted to the house of one of those who were the first to receive him, or of

They leap, etc. This passage refers to the spectators who unite in sympathy with, and imitate as far as

possible, in their excitement, the actions of, those who drive the chariots in the races.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

his friends, or kinsmen, or countrymen, or of those who are eminent in debating power,
and purveyors of arguments, and therefore especially honoured among them; and their reward consists in the gain of adherents. He is next subjected to the raillery of any one who
will, with the intention I suppose, of checking the conceit of the newcomers, and reducing
them to subjection at once. The raillery is of a more insolent or argumentative kind, according to the boorishness or refinement of the railer: and the performance, which seems very
fearful and brutal to those who do not know it, is to those who have experienced it very
pleasant and humane: for its threats are feigned rather than real. Next, he is conducted in
procession through the market place to the bath. The procession is formed by those who
are charged with it in the young man's honour, who arrange themselves in two ranks separated by an interval, and precede him to the bath. But when they have approached it, they
shout and leap wildly, as if possessed, shouting that they must not advance, but stay, since
the bath will not admit them; and at the same time frighten the youth by furiously knocking
at the doors: then allowing him to enter, they now present him with his freedom, and receive
him after the bath as an equal, and one of themselves. This they consider the most pleasant
part of the ceremony, as being a speedy exchange and relief from annoyances. On this occasion I not only refused to put to shame my friend the great Basil, out of respect for the
gravity of his character, and the ripeness of his reasoning powers, but also persuaded all the
rest of the students to treat him likewise, who happened not to know him. For he was from
the first respected by most of them, his reputation having preceded him. The result was
that he was the only one to escape the general rule, and be accorded a greater honour than
belongs to a freshman's position.

17. This was the prelude of our friendship. This was the kindling spark of our union: 
thus we felt the wound of mutual love. Then something of this kind happened, for I think
it right not to omit even this. I find the Armenians to be not a simple race, but very crafty
and cunning. At this time some of his special comrades and friends, who had been intimate
with him even in the early days of his father's instruction, for they were members of his
school, came up to him under the guise of friendship, but with envious, and not kindly intent,
and put to him questions of a disputations rather than rational kind, trying to overwhelm
him at the first onset, having known his original natural endowments, and unable to brook
the honour he had then received. For they thought it a strange thing that they who had put
on their gowns, and been exercised in shouting, should not get the better of one who was a
stranger and a novice. I also, in my vain love for Athens, and trusting to their professions
without perceiving their envy, when they were giving way, and turning their backs, since I
was indignant that in their persons the reputation of Athens should be destroyed, and so
speedily put to shame, supported the young men, and restored the argument; and by the
aid of my additional weight, for in such cases a small addition makes all the difference, and,

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

as the poet says, "made equal their heads in the fray."4419 But, when I perceived the secret
motive of the dispute, which could no longer be kept under, and was at last clearly exposed,
I at once drew back, and retired from their ranks, to range myself on his side, and made the
victory decisive. He was at once delighted at what had happened, for his sagacity was remarkable, and being filled with zeal, to describe him fully in Homer's language, he pursued
in confusion4420 with argument those valiant youths, and, smiting them with syllogisms,
only ceased when they were utterly routed, and he had distinctly won the honours due to
his power. Thus was kindled again, no longer a spark, but a manifest and conspicuous blaze
of friendship.

18. Their efforts having thus proved fruitless, while they severely blamed their own
rashness, they cherished such annoyance against me that it broke out into open hostility,
and a charge of treachery, not only to them, but to Athens herself: inasmuch as they had
been confuted and put to shame at the first onset, by a single student, who had not even had
time to gain confidence. He moreover, according to that human feeling, which makes us,
when we have all at once attained to the high hopes which we have cherished, look upon
their results as inferior to our expectation, he, I say, was displeased and annoyed, and could
take no delight in his arrival. He was seeking for what he had expected, and called Athens
an empty happiness. I however tried to remove his annoyance, both by argumentative encounter, and by the enchantments of reasoning; alleging, as is true, that the disposition of
a man cannot at once be detected, without a long time and more constant association, and
that culture likewise is not made known to those who make trial of her, after a few efforts
and in a short time. In this way I restored his cheerfulness, and by this mutual experience,
he was the more closely united to me.

19. And when, as time went on, we acknowledged our mutual affection, and that
philosophy4421 was our aim, we were all in all to one another, housemates, messmates, intimates, with one object in life, or an affection for each other ever growing warmer and
stronger. Love for bodily attractions, since its objects are fleeting, is as fleeting as the flowers
of spring. For the flame cannot survive, when the fuel is exhausted, and departs along with
that which kindles it, nor does desire abide, when its incentive wastes away. But love which
is godly and under restraint, since its object is stable, not only is more lasting, but, the fuller
its vision of beauty grows, the more closely does it bind to itself and to one another the
hearts of those whose love has one and the same object. This is the law of our superhuman
love. I feel that I am being unduly borne away, and I know not how to enter upon this point,
yet I cannot restrain myself from describing it. For if I have omitted anything, it seems,

4419 Homer Il. xi. 72.

Ib. xi. 496.

Philosophy, here, a truly Christian life.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

immediately afterwards, of pressing importance, and of more consequence than what I had
preferred to mention. And if any one would carry me tyrannically forward, I become like
the polyps, which when they are being dragged from their holes, cling with their suckers to
the rocks, and cannot be detached, until the last of these has had exerted upon it its necessary
share of force. If then you give me leave, I have my request, if not I must take it from myself.
20. Such were our feelings for each other, when we had thus supported, as Pindar4422
has it, our "well-built chamber with pillars of gold," as we advanced under the united influences of God's grace and our own affection. Oh! how can I mention these things without
tears.

We were impelled by equal hopes, in a pursuit especially obnoxious to envy, that of
letters. Yet envy we knew not, and emulation was of service to us. We struggled, not each
to gain the first place for himself, but to yield it to the other; for we made each other's
reputation to be our own. We seemed to have one soul, inhabiting two bodies. And if we
must not believe those whose doctrine is "All things4423 are in all;" yet in our case it was
worthy of belief, so did we live in and with each other. The sole business of both of us was
virtue, and living for the hopes to come, having retired from this world, before our actual
departure hence. With a view to this, were directed all our life and actions, under the
guidance of the commandment, as we sharpened upon each other our weapons of virtue;
and if this is not a great thing for me to say, being a rule and standard to each other, for the
distinction between what was right and what was not. Our associates were not the most
dissolute, but the most sober of our comrades; not the most pugnacious, but the most
peaceable, whose intimacy was most profitable: knowing that it is more easy to be tainted
with vice, than to impart virtue; just as we can more readily be infected with a disease, than
bestow health. Our most cherished studies were not the most pleasant, but the most excellent;
this being one means of forming young minds in a virtuous or vicious mould.

21. Two ways were known to us, the first of greater value, the second of smaller consequence: the one leading to our sacred buildings and the teachers there, the other to secular
instructors. All others we left to those who would pursue them-to feasts, theatres, meetings,
banquets. For nothing is in my opinion of value, save that which leads to virtue and to the
improvement of its devotees. Different men have different names, derived from their fathers,
their families, their pursuits, their exploits: we had but one great business and name-to
be and to be called Christians of which we thought more than Gyges4424 of the turning of

4422 Olymp. Od. vi. 1.

4423 All things, etc., i.e. Empedocles and Anaxagoras.

4424 Gyges is said to have had a ring by means of which he could make himself invisible, and by thus using

it was able to seize on the Kingdom of Lydia.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

his ring, if this is not a legend, on which depended his Lydian sovereignty: or than Midas4425
did of the gold through which he perished, in answer to his prayer that all he had might
turn to gold-another Phrygian legend. For why should I speak of the arrow of the Hyperborean Abaris,4426 or of the Argive Pegasus,4427 to whom flight through the air was not of
such consequence as was to us our rising to God, through the help of, and with each other? 
Hurtful as Athens was to others in spiritual things, and this is of no slight consequence to
the pious, for the city is richer in those evil riches-idols-than the rest of Greece, and it is
hard to avoid being carried along with their devotees and adherents, yet we, our minds being
closed up and fortified against this, suffered no injury. On the contrary, strange as it may
seem, we were thus the more confirmed in the faith, from our perception of their trickery
and unreality, which led us to despise these divinities in the very home of their worship. 
And if there is, or is believed to be, a river4428 flowing with fresh water through the sea, or
an animal4429 which can dance in fire, the consumer of all things, such were we among all
our comrades.

22. And, best of all, we were surrounded by a far from ignoble band, under his instruction and guidance, and delighting in the same objects, as we ran on foot beside that Lydian
car,4430 his own course and disposition: and so we became famous, not only among our
own teachers and comrades, but even throughout Greece, and especially in the eyes of its
most distinguished men. We even passed beyond its boundaries, as was made clear by the
evidence of many. For our instructors were known to all who knew Athens, and all who
knew them, knew us, as the subject of conversation, being actually looked upon, or heard
of by report, as an illustrious pair. Orestes and Pylades4431 were in their eyes nothing to
us, or the sons of Molione,4432 the wonders of the Homeric scroll, celebrated for their union
in misfortune, and their splendid driving, as they shared in reins and whip alike. But I have
been unawares betrayed into praising myself, in a manner I would not have allowed in another. And it is no wonder that I gained here in some advantage from his friendship, and

4425 Midas, said to have had the power granted of turning everything he touched to gold. Accordingly, as

this power took effect on his food, he died of hunger.

4426 Abaris, a Hyperborean priest of Apollo, who was said to have given him an arrow, on which he rode

through the air.

Pegasus, called Argive, because caught near to Argos, the winged horse, by the aid of which Bellerophon

was said to have destroyed the Chimaera.

4428 A river, etc. The Alpheus, a river of Arcadia.

4429 Animal. The salamander, a lizard said to be impervious to the action of fire. Plin. N. H. x. 67.

Lydian car, proverbial expression for anything whose speed distances all competitors.

4431 Orestes and Pylades, types of close comradeship in Greek tragedies.

Sons of Molione, Eurytus and Cteatus, Hom. Il. ii. 621. Their father was Actor.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

that, as in life he aided me in virtue, so since his departure he has contributed to my renown. 
But I must return to my proper course.

23. Who possessed such a degree of the prudence of old age, even before his hair was
gray? Since it is by this that Solomon defines old age.4433 Who was so respectful to both
old and young, not only of our contemporaries, but even of those who long preceded him? 
Who, owing to his character, was less in need of education? Yet who, even with his character,
was so imbued with learning? What branch of learning did he not traverse; and that with
unexampled success, passing through all, as no one else passed through any one of them: 
and attaining such eminence in each, as if it had been his sole study? The two great sources
of power in the arts and sciences, ability and application, were in him equally combined. 
For, because of the pains he took, he had but little need of natural quickness, and his natural
quickness made it unnecessary for him to take pains; and such was the cooperation and
unity of both, that it was hard to see for which of the two he was more remarkable. Who
had such power in Rhetoric, which breathes4434 with the might of fire, different as his disposition was from that of rhetoricians? Who in Grammar, which perfects our tongues in
Greek and compiles history, and presides over metres and legislates for poems? Who in
Philosophy, that really lofty and high reaching science, whether practical and speculative,
or in that part of it whose oppositions and struggles are concerned with logical demonstrations; which is called Dialectic, and in which it was more difficult to elude his verbal toils,
if need required, than to escape from the Labyrinths?4435 Of Astronomy, Geometry, and
numerical proportion he had such a grasp, that he could not be baffled by those who are
clever in such sciences: excessive application to them he despised, as useless to those whose
desire is godliness: so that it is possible to admire what he chose more than what he neglected,
or what he neglected more than what he chose. Medicine, the result of philosophy and laboriousness, was rendered necessary for him by his physical delicacy, and his care of the
sick. From these beginnings he attained to a mastery of the art, not only in its empirical
and practical branches, but also in its theory and principles. But what are these, illustrious
though they be, compared with the moral discipline of the man? To those who have had
experience of him, Minos and Rhadamanthus4436 were mere trifles, whom the Greeks
thought worthy of the meadows of Asphodel and the Elysian plains, which are their representations of our Paradise, derived from those books of Moses which are also ours, for though
their terms are different, this is what they refer to under other names.

4433 Wisd. iv. 8.

4434 Which breathes, a phrase used Hom. Il. vi. 182 of the Chimaera.

Labyrinths, the mythical mazes of Crete, the home of the Minotaur.

4436 Minos and Rhadamanthus, Kings of Crete and Lycia, fabled to have been made judges in the lower world

because of their justice when on earth.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

24. Such was the case, and his galleon was laden with all the learning attainable by the
nature of man; for beyond Cadiz4437 there is no passage. There was left no other need but
that of rising to a more perfect life, and grasping those hopes upon which we were agreed. 
The day of our departure was at hand, with its attendant speeches of farewell, and of escort,
its invitations to return, its lamentations, embraces and tears. For there is nothing so painful
to any one, as is separation from Athens and one another, to those who have been comrades
there. On that occasion was seen a piteous spectacle, worthy of record. Around us were
grouped our fellow students and classmates and some of our teachers, protesting amid entreaties, violence, and persuasion, that, whatever happened, they would not let us go; saying
and doing everything that men in distress could do. And here I will bring an accusation
against myself, and also, daring though it be, against that divine and irreproachable soul. 
For he, by detailing the reasons of his anxiety to return home, was able to prevail over their
desire to retain him, and they were compelled, though with reluctance, to agree to his departure. But I was left behind at Athens, partly, to say the truth, because I had been prevailed
on-partly because he had betrayed me, having been persuaded to forsake and hand over
to his captors one who refused to forsake him. A thing incredible, before it happened. For
it was like cutting one body into two, to the destruction of either part, or the severance of
two bullocks who have shared the same manger and the same yoke, amid pitiable bellowings
after one another in protest against the separation. However, my loss was not of long duration, for I could not long bear to be seen in piteous plight, nor to have to account to every
one for our separation: so, after a brief stay at Athens, my longing desire made me, like the
horse in Homer, to burst the bonds of those who restrained me, and prancing o'er the plains,
rush to my mate.

25. Upon our return, after a slight indulgence to the world and the stage, sufficient to
gratify the general desire, not from any inclination to theatrical display, we soon became
independent, and, after being promoted from the rank of beardless boys to that of men,
made bold advances along the road of philosophy, for though no longer together, since envy
would not allow this, we were united by our eager desire. The city of Caesarea took possession
of him, as a second founder and patron, but in course of time he was occasionally absent,
as a matter of necessity due to our separation, and with a view to our determined course of
philosophy. Dutiful attendance on my aged parents, and a succession of misfortunes kept
me apart from him, perhaps without right or justice, but so it was. And to this cause I am
inclined to ascribe all the inconsistency and difficulty which have befallen my life, and the
hindrances in the way of philosophy, which have been unworthy of my desire and purpose. 
But as for my fate, let it lead whither God pleases, only may its course be the better for his
intercessions. As regards himself, the manifold love of God toward man,4438 and His

Beyond Cadiz. The Atlantic Ocean beyond Cadiz was reputed impassable by the ancients.

4438 Tit. iii. 4.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

providential care for our race did, after shewing forth his merits under many intervening
circumstances with ever greater brilliancy, set him up as a conspicuous and celebrated light
for the Church, by advancing him to the holy thrones of the priesthood, to blaze forth,
through the single city of Caesarea, to the whole world. And in what manner? Not by precipitate advancement, nor by at once cleansing and making him wise, as is the wont of many
present candidates for preferment: but bestowing upon him the honour in the due order
of spiritual advancement.

26. For I do not praise the disorder and irregularity which sometimes exist among us,
even in those who preside over the sanctuary. I do not venture, nor is it just, to accuse them
all. I approve the nautical custom, which first gives the oar to the future steersman, and afterward leads him to the stern, and entrusts him with the command, and seats him at the
helm, only after a long course of striking the sea and observing the winds. As is the case
again in military affairs: private, captain, general. This order is the best and most advantageous for their subordinates. And if it were so in our case, it would be of great service. 
But, as it is, there is a danger of the holiest of all offices being the most ridiculous among
us. For promotion depends not upon virtue, but upon villany; and the sacred thrones fall
not to the most Worthy, but to the most powerful. Samuel, the seer into futurity, is among
the prophets: but Saul, the rejected one, is also there. Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, is
among the kings, but so also is Jeroboam, the slave and apostate. And there is not a physician,
or a painter who has not first studied the nature of diseases, or mixed many colours, or
practised drawing: but a prelate is easily found, without laborious training, with a reputation
of recent date, being sown and springing up in a moment, as the legend4439 of the giants
goes. We manufacture those who are holy in a day, and bid those to be wise, who have had
no instruction, and have contributed nothing before to their dignity, except the will. So one
man is content with an inferior position, and abides in his low estate, who is worthy of a
lofty one, and has meditated much on the inspired words, and has reduced the flesh by many
laws into subjection to the spirit: while the other haughtily takes precedence, and raises his
eyebrow over his betters, and does not tremble at his position, nor is he appalled at the sight,
seeing the disciplined man beneath him; and wrongly supposes himself to be his superior
in wisdom as well as in rank, having lost his senses under the influence of his position.

27. Not so our great and illustrious Basil. In this grace, as in all others, he was a public
example. For he first read to the people the sacred books, while already able to expound
them, nor did he deem himself worthy of this rank4440 in the sanctuary, and thus proceeded
to praise the Lord in the seat of the Presbyters,4441 and next in that of the Bishops, attaining

The legend, i.e., of Cadmus who sowed at Thebes the dragon's teeth from which sprung giants.

This rank, i.e., the office of Lector, or Reader.

Ps. cvii. 32.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

the office neither by stealth nor by violence, instead of seeking for the honour, being sought
for by it, and receiving it not as a human favour, but as from God and divine. The account
of his bishopric must be deferred: over his subordinate ministry let us linger a while, for
indeed it had almost escaped me, in the midst of my discourse.

28. There arose a disagreement between him and his predecessor4442 in the rule over
this Church: its source and character it is best to pass over in silence, yet it arose. He was
a man in other respects far from ignoble, and admirable for his piety, as was proved by the
persecution of that time, and the opposition to him, yet his feeling against Basil was one to
which men are liable. For Momus seizes not only upon the common herd, but on the best
of men, so that it belongs to God alone to be utterly uninfluenced by and proof against such
feelings. All the more eminent and wise portion of the Church was roused against him, if
those are wiser than the majority who have separated themselves from the world and consecrated their life to God. I mean the Nazarites4443 of our day, and those who devote
themselves to such pursuits. They were annoyed that their chief4444 should be neglected,
insulted, and rejected, and they ventured upon a most dangerous proceeding. They determined to revolt and break off from the body of the Church, which admits of no faction,
severing along with themselves no small fraction of the people, both of the lower ranks, and
of those of position. This was most easy, owing to three very strong reasons. In the first
place, the man was held in repute, beyond any other, I think, of the philosophers of our
time, and able, if he wished, to inspire with courage the conspirators. Next, his opponent4445
was suspected by the city, in consequence of the tumult which accompanied his institution,
of having obtained his preferment in an arbitrary manner, not according to the laws and
canons. Also there were present some of the bishops4446 of the West, drawing to themselves
all the orthodox members of the Church.

29. What then did our noble friend, the disciple of the Peaceable One? It was not his
habit to resist his traducers or partisans, nor was it his part to fight, or rend the body of the
Church, which was from other reasons the subject of attack, and hardly bestead, from the
great power of the heretics. With my advice and earnest encouragement on the point, he
set out from the place with me into Pontus, and presided over the abodes of contemplation
there. He himself too founded one4447 worthy of mention, as he welcomed the desert to-

4442 His predecessor, Eusebius, Archbishop of Caesarea.

4443 Nazarites, i.e., the monks.

Their chief, i.e., Basil.

4445 His opponent, lit. "the man who was vexing him," i.e., Eusebius.

Bishops. It is uncertain who these bishops were. Clémencet thinks they were Lucifer and Eusebius of

Vercellae. But a separation had ere this taken place between them in consequence of Lucifer's rash action at

Antioch. Nor is it certain that Eusebius had not already returned to Italy.

4447 One, a monastery. The rule of S. Basil is widely observed to this day in Eastern monasteries. Cf. § 34.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

gether with Elijah and John,4448 those professors of austerity; thinking this to be more
profitable for him than to form any design in reference to the present juncture unworthy
of his philosophy, and to ruin in a time of storm the straight course which he was making,
where the surges of disputation were lulled to a calm. Yet wonderfully philosophic though
his retirement was, we shall find his return still more wonderful. For thus it was.

30. While we were thus engaged, there suddenly arose a cloud full of hail, with destructive roar, overwhelming every Church upon which it burst and seized: an Emperor,4449
most fond of gold and most hostile to Christ, infected with these two most serious diseases,
insatiate avarice and blasphemy; a persecutor in succession to the persecutor, and, in succession to the apostate, not indeed an apostate, though no better to Christians, or rather, to
the more devout and pure party of Christians, who worship the Trinity, which I call the
only true devotion and saving doctrine. For we do not measure out the Godhead into portions, nor banish from Itself by unnatural estrangements the one and unapproachable
Nature; nor cure one evil by another, destroying the godless confusion of Sabellius by a
more impious severance and division; which was the error of Arius, whose name declares
his madness,4450 the disturber and destroyer of a great part of the Church. For he did not
honour the Father, by dishonouring His offspring with his unequal degrees of Godhead.
 But we recognize one glory4451 of the Father, the equality of the Only-begotten; and one
glory of the Son, that of the Spirit. And we hold that, to subordinate any of the Three, is to
destroy the whole. For we worship and acknowledge Them as Three in their properties,4452
but One in their Godhead. He however had no such idea, being unable to look up, but being
debased by those who led him, he dared to debase along with himself even the Nature of
the Godhead, and became a wicked creature reducing Majesty to bondage, and aligning
with creation the uncreated and timeless Nature.

31. Such was his mind, and with such impiety he took the field against us. For we must
consider it to be nothing else than a barbaric inroad which, instead of destroying walls, cities
and houses, and other things of little worth, made with hands and capable of restoration,

John, Saint John Baptist.

4449 An Emperor, Valens.

4450 Madness, cf. ii. 37, Note.

4451 Glory. The word δόξα means both "doctrine" and "glory."

Properties. ἰδιότητες. Petav. de Trin. iv. Proem. § 2 gives other Greek equivalent terms. The Latin terms

are "notiones" (S. Thom. Aq. Summa. I. xxxii. qu. 2), "proprietates" or relationes. They denote those relative

"attributes ad intra" which distinguish the Persons, if they do not actually constitute the Personality of each of

the Three Divine Persons. They are five in number, Unbegottenness, Paternity, Filiation, active and passive

Spiration. Perhaps the nearest English equivalent is "characteristic (or distinctive) relations."-Cf. Orat. xlii.

15.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

spent its ravages upon men's souls. A worthy army joined in his assault, the evil rulers of
the Churches, the bitter governors of his world-wide Empire. Some of the Churches they
now held, some they were assaulting, others they hoped to gain by the already exercised
influence of the Emperor, and the violence which he threatened. But in their purpose of
perverting our own, their confidence was specially based on the smallness of mind of those
whom I have mentioned, the inexperience of our prelate, and the infirmities which prevailed
among us. The struggle would be fierce: the zeal of numerous troops was far from ignoble,
but their array was weak, from the want of a leader and strategist to contend for them with
the might of the Word and of the Spirit. What then did this noble and magnanimous and
truly Christ-loving soul? No need of many words to urge his presence and aid. At once
when he saw me on my mission, for the struggle on behalf of the faith was common to us
both, he yielded to my entreaty; and decided by a most excellent distinction, based on spiritual reasons, that the time for punctiliousness (if indeed we may give way to such feelings
at all) is a time of security, but that forbearance is required in the hour of necessity. He
immediately returned with me from Pontus, and as a zealous volunteer took his place in
the fight for the endangered truth, and devoted himself to the service of his mother, the
Church.

32. Did then his actual efforts fall short of his preliminary zeal? Were they directed by
courage, but not by prudence, or by skill, while he shrank from danger? Or, in spite of their
unexampled perfection on all these points, was there left in him some trace of irritation? 
Far from it. He was at once completely reconciled, and took part in every plan and effort. 
He removed all the thorns and stumbling blocks which were in our way, upon which the
enemy relied in their attack upon us. He took hold of one, grasped another, thrust away a
third. He became to some a stout wall and rampart,4453 to others an axe breaking the rock
in pieces,4454 or a fire among the thorns,4455 as the divine Scripture says, easily destroying
those fagots who were insulting the Godhead. And if his Barnabas, who speaks and records
these things, was of service to Paul in the struggle, it is to Paul that thanks are due, for
choosing and making him his comrade in the strife.

33. Thus the enemy failed, and, base men as they were, for the first time were then
basely put to shame and worsted, learning not to be ready to despise the Cappadocians, of
all men in the world, whose special qualities are firmness in the faith, and loyal devotion to
the Trinity; to Whom is due their unity and strength, and from Whom they receive an even
greater and stronger assistance than they are able to give. Basil's next business and purpose
was to conciliate the prelate, to allay suspicion, to persuade all men that the irritation which

Jer. i. 18.

Ib. xxiii. 29.

Ps. cxviii. 12.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

had been felt was due to the temptation and effort of the Evil one, in his envy of virtuous
concord: carefully complying with the laws of obedience and spiritual order. Accordingly
he visited him, with instruction and advice. While obedient to his wishes, he was everything
to him, a good counsellor, a skilful assistant, an expounder of the Divine Will, a guide of
conduct, a staff for his old age, a support of the faith, most trusty of those within, most
practical of those without, in a word, as much inclined to goodwill, as he had been thought
to hostility. And so the power of the Church came into his hands almost, if not quite, to an
equal degree with the occupant of the see. For in return for his good-will, he was requited
with authority. And their harmony and combination of power was wonderful. The one
was the leader of the people, the other of their leader, like a lion-keeper, skilfully soothing
the possessor of power. For, having been recently installed in the see, and still somewhat
under the influence of the world, and not yet furnished with the things of the Spirit, in the
midst of the eddying tide of enemies assaulting the Church, he was in need of some one to
take him by the hand and support him. Accordingly he accepted the alliance, and imagined
himself the conqueror of one who had conquered him.

34. Of his care for and protection of the Church, there are many other tokens; his
boldness towards the governors and other most powerful men in the city: the decisions of
disputes, accepted without hesitation, and made effective by his simple word, his inclination
being held to be decisive: his support of the needy, most of them in spiritual, not a few also
in physical distress: for this also often influences the soul and reduces it to subjection by
its kindness; the support of the poor, the entertainment of strangers, the care of maidens;
legislation4456 written and unwritten for the monastic life: arrangements of prayers,4457
adornments of the sanctuary, and other ways in which the true man of God, working for
God, would benefit the people: one being especially important and noteworthy. There was
a famine, the most severe one ever recorded. The city was in distress, and there was no
source of assistance, or relief for the calamity. For maritime cities are able to bear such
times of need without difficulty, by an exchange of their own products for what is imported: 
but an inland city like ours can neither turn its superfluity to profit, nor supply its need, by
either disposing of what we have, or importing what we have not: but the hardest part of
all such distress is, the insensibility and insatiability of those who possess supplies. For they
watch their opportunities, and turn the distress to profit, and thrive upon misfortune: 
heeding not that he who shows mercy to the poor, lendeth to the Lord,4458 nor that he that
withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him:4459 nor any other of the promises to the

Legislation. Cf. § 30.

Prayers. The liturgy of S. Basil together with that of S. Chrysostom are still the authorized liturgies of

the Eastern Church.

Prov. xix. 17.

Ib. xi. 26.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

philanthropic, and threats against the inhuman. But they are too insatiate, in their ill-judged
policy; for while they shut up their bowels against their fellows, they shut up those of God
against themselves, forgetting that their need of Him is greater than others' need of them. 
Such are the buyers and sellers of corn, who neither respect their fellows, nor are thankful
to God, from Whom comes what they have, while others are straitened.

35. He indeed could neither rain bread from heaven by prayer,4460 to nourish an escaped
people in the wilderness,4461 nor supply fountains of food without cost from the depth of
vessels which are filled by being emptied,4462 and so, by an amazing return for her hospitality,
support one who supported him; nor feed thousands of men with five loaves whose very
fragments were a further supply for many tables.4463 These were the works of Moses and
Elijah, and my God, from Whom they too derived their power. Perhaps also they were
characteristic of their time and its circumstances: since signs are for unbelievers not for
those who believe.4464 But he did devise and execute with the same faith things which correspond to them, and tend in the same direction. For by his word and advice he opened
the stores of those who possessed them, and so, according to the Scripture dealt food to the
hungry,4465 and satisfied the poor with bread,4466 and fed them in the time of dearth,4467
and filled the hungry souls with good things.4468 And in what way? for this is no slight addition to his praise. He gathered together the victims of the famine with some who were
but slightly recovering from it, men and women, infants, old men, every age which was in
distress, and obtaining contributions of all sorts of food which can relieve famine, set before
them basins of soup and such meat as was found preserved among us, on which the poor
live. Then, imitating the ministry of Christ, Who, girded with a towel, did not disdain to
wash the disciples' feet, using for this purpose the aid of his own servants, and also of his
fellow servants, he attended to the bodies and souls of those who needed it, combining
personal respect with the supply of their necessity, and so giving them a double relief.

36. Such was our young furnisher of corn, and second Joseph: though of him we can
say somewhat more. For the one made a gain from the famine, and bought up Egypt4469

Exod. xvi. 15.

Ps. lxxviii. 24.

1 Kings xvii. 14.

S. Matt. xiv. 19.

1 Cor. xiv. 22.

Isai. lviii. 7.

Ps. cxxxii. 15.

Ib. xxxiii. 19.

Ib. cvii. 9; S. Luke i. 53.

4469 Gen. xli. 1 et seq.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

in his philanthropy, by managing the time of plenty with a view to the time of famine,
turning to account the dreams of others for that purpose. But the other's services were
gratuitous, and his succour of the famine gained no profit, having only one object, to win
kindly feelings by kindly treatment, and to gain by his rations of corn the heavenly blessings. 
Further he provided the nourishment of the Word, and that more perfect bounty and distribution, which is really heavenly and from on high-if the word be that bread of angels,4470
wherewith souls are fed and given to drink, who are a hungered for God,4471 and seek for
a food which does not pass away or fail, but abides forever. This food he, who was the
poorest and most needy man whom I have known, supplied in rich abundance to the relief
not of a famine of bread, nor of a thirst for water, but a longing for that Word4472 which is
really lifegiving and nourishing, and causes to grow to spiritual manhood him who is duly
fed thereon.

37. After these and similar actions-why need I stay to mention them all?-when the
prelate whose name4473 betokened his godliness had passed away, having sweetly breathed
his last in Basil's arms, he was raised to the lofty throne of a Bishop, not without difficulty
or without the envious struggles of the prelates of his native land, on whose side were found
the greatest scoundrels of the city. But the Holy Spirit must needs win the day-and indeed
the victory was decisive. For He brought from a distance, to anoint him, men4474 illustrious
and zealous for godliness, and with them the new Abraham, our Patriarch, I mean my
father, in regard to whom an extraordinary thing happened. For, failing as he was from the
number of his years, and worn away almost to his last breath by disease, he ventured on the
journey to give assistance by his vote, relying on the aid of the Spirit. In brief, he was placed
in his litter, as a corpse is laid in its tomb, to return in the freshness and strength of youth,
with head erect, having been strengthened by the imposition of hands and unction, and, it
is not too much to say by the head of him who was anointed. This must be added to the
instances of old time, which prove that labour bestows health, zealous purpose raises the
dead, and old age leaps up when anointed by the Spirit.

38. Having thus been deemed worthy of the office of prelate, as it is seemly that men
should who have lived such a life, and won such favour and consideration, he did not disgrace,
by his subsequent conduct, either his own philosophy, or the hopes of those who had trusted
him. But he ever so far surpassed himself as he has been shown hitherto to have surpassed
others, his ideas on this point being most excellent and philosophic. For he held that, while

Ps. lxxviii. 25.

Ib. lxiii. 1; S. Matt. v. 6.

4472 Amos viii. 11.

4473 Name, Eusebius, i.e., "pious," "godly."

4474 Men. Eusebius of Samosaba and S. Gregory the Elder.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

it is virtuous in a private individual to avoid vice, and be to some extent good, it is a vice in
a chief and ruler, especially in such an office, to fail to surpass by far the majority of men,
and by constant progress to make his virtue correspond to his dignity and throne: for it is
difficult for one in high position to attain the mean, and by his eminence in virtue raise up
his people to the golden mean. Or rather to treat this question more satisfactorily, I think
that the result is the same as I see in the case of our Saviour, and of every specially wise man,
I fancy, when He was with us in that form which surpassed us and yet is ours. For He also,
the gospel says, increased in wisdom and favour, as well as in stature,4475 not that these
qualities in Him were capable of growth: for how could that which was perfect from the
first become more perfect, but that they were gradually disclosed and displayed? So I think
that the virtue of Basil, without being itself increased, obtained at this time a wider exercise,
since his power provided him with more abundant material.

39. He first of all made it plain that his office had been bestowed upon him, not by human favour, but by the gift of God. This will also be shown by my conduct. For in what
philosophic research did he not, about that time, join with me? So every one thought that
I should run to meet him after what had happened, and show my delight at it (as would,
perhaps, have been the case with any one else) and claim a share in his authority, rather
than rule beside him, according to the inferences they drew from our friendship. But, in
my exceeding anxiety to avoid the annoyance and jealousy of the time, and specially since
his position was still a painful and troubled one, I remained at home, and forcibly restrained
my eager desire, while, though he blamed me, Basil accepted my excuse. And when, on my
subsequent arrival, I refused, for the same reason the honour of this chair, and a dignified
position4476 among the Presbyters, he kindly refrained from blaming, nay he praised me,
preferring to be charged with pride by a small clique, in their ignorance of our policy, rather
than do anything contrary to reason and his own resolutions. And indeed, how could a
man have better shown his soul to be superior to all fawning and flattery, and his single
object to be the law of right, than by thus treating me, whom he acknowledged as among
the first of his friends and associates?

40. His next task was to appease, and allay by magnanimous treatment, the opposition
to himself: and that without any trace of flattery or servility, but in a most chivalrous and
magnanimous way; with a view, not merely to present exigencies, but also to the fostering
of future obedience. For, seeing that, while tenderness leads to laxity and slackness, severity

S. Luke ii. 52.

4476 Dignified position, known later as that of Vicar General. Thomassin. Disc. Eccl. I. ii. 7. § 3.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

gives rise to stubbornness and self-will, he was able to avoid the dangers of each course by
a combination of both, blending his correction with consideration, and gentleness with
firmness, influencing men in most cases principally by his conduct rather than by argument: 
not enslaving them by art, but winning them by good nature, and attracting them by the
sparing use, rather than by the constant exercise, of his power. And, most important of all,
they were brought to recognize the superiority of his intellect and the inaccessibility of his
virtue, to consider their only safety to consist in being on his side and under his command,
their sole danger to be in opposition to him, and to think that to differ from him involved
estrangement from God. Thus they willingly yielded and surrendered, submitting themselves,
as if in a thunder-clap, and hastening to anticipate each other with their excuses, and exchange the intensity of their hostility for an equal intensity of goodwill, and advance in virtue,
which they found to be the one really effective defence. The few exceptions to this conduct
were passed by and neglected, because their ill-nature was incurable, and they expended
their powers in wearing out themselves, as rust consumes itself together with the iron on
which it feeds.

41. Affairs at home being now settled to his mind, in a way that faithless men who did
not know him would have thought impossible, his designs became greater and took a loftier
range. For, while all others had their eyes on the ground before them, and directed attention
to their own immediate concerns, and, if these were safe, troubled themselves no further,
being incapable of any great and chivalrous design or undertaking; he, moderate as he was
in all other respects, could not be moderate in this, but with head erect, casting his mental
eye about him, took in the whole world over which the word of salvation has made its way. 
And when he saw the great heritage of God, purchased by His own words and laws and
sufferings, the holy nation, the royal priesthood,4477 in such evil plight that it was torn
asunder into ten thousand opinions and errors: and the vine brought out of Egypt and
transplanted,4478 the Egypt of impious and dark ignorance, which had grown to such beauty
and boundless size that the whole earth was covered with the shadow of it, while it overtopped
mountains and cedars, now being ravaged by that wicked wild boar, the devil, he could not
content himself with quietly lamenting the misfortune, and merely lifting up his hands to
God, and seeking from Him the dispersion of the pressing misfortunes, while he himself
was asleep, but felt bound to come to her aid at some expense to himself.

42. For what could be more distressing than this calamity, or call more loudly on one
whose eyes were raised aloft for exertions on behalf of the common weal? The good or ill
success of an individual is of no consequence to the community, but that of the community
involves of necessity the like condition of the individual. With this idea and purpose, he

1 Pet. ii. 9.

Ps. lxxx. 9.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

who was the guardian and patron of the community (and, as Solomon says with truth, a
perceptive heart is a moth to the bones,4479 unsensitiveness is cheerily confident, while a
sympathetic disposition is a source of pain, and constant consideration wastes away the
heart), he, I say, was consequently in agony and distress from many wounds; like Jonah and
David, he wished in himself to die4480 and gave not sleep to his eyes, nor slumber to his
eyelids,4481 he expended what was left of his flesh upon his reflections, until he discovered
a remedy for the evil: and sought for aid from God and man, to stay the general conflagration,
and dissipate the gloom which was lowering over us.

43. One of his devices was of the greatest service. After a period of such recollection
as was possible, and private spiritual conference, in which, after considering all human arguments, and penetrating into all the deep things of the Scriptures, he drew up a sketch of
pious doctrine, and by wrestling with and attacking their opposition he beat off the daring
assaults of the heretics: overthrowing in hand to hand struggles by word of mouth those
who came to close quarters, and striking those at a distance by arrows winged with ink,
which is in no wise inferior to inscriptions on tablets; not giving directions for one small
nation only like that of the Jews, concerning meats and drinks, temporary sacrifices, and
purifications of the flesh;4482 but for every nation and part of the world, concerning the
Word of truth, the source of our salvation. Again, since unreasoning action and unpractical
reasoning are alike ineffectual, he added to his reasoning the succour which comes from
action; he paid visits, sent messages, gave interviews, instructed, reproved, rebuked,4483
threatened, reproached, undertook the defence of nations, cities and individuals, devising
every kind of succour, and procuring from every source specifics for disease: a second
Bezaleel, an architect of the Divine tabernacle,4484 applying every material and art to the
work, and combining all in a harmonious and surpassing beauty.

44. Why need I enter into further detail? We were assailed again by the Anti-Christian
Emperor,4485 that tyrant of the faith, with more abundant impiety and a hotter onset, inasmuch as the dispute must be with a stronger antagonist, like that unclean and evil spirit,
who when sent forth upon his wanderings from man, returns to take up his abode in him
again with a greater number of spirits, as we have heard in the Gospels.4486 This spirit he

Prov. xiv. 30 (LXX.).

Jonah iv. 8.

Ps. cxxxii. 4.

4482 Heb. ix. 10.

2 Tim. iv. 2.

Exod. xxxi. 2.

Emperor. Valens.

S. Luke xi. 24.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

imitated, both in renewing the contest in which he had formerly been worsted, and in adding
to his original efforts. He thought that it was a strange and insufferable thing that he, who
ruled over so many nations and had won so much renown, and reduced under the power
of impiety all those round about him, and overcome every adversary, should be publicly
worsted by a single man, and a single city, and so incur the ridicule not only of those patrons
of ungodliness by whom he was led, but also, as he supposed, of all men.

45. It is said that the King4487 of Persia, on his expedition into Greece, was not only
urged to immoderate threats, by elation at the numbers of every race of men which in his
wrath and pride he was leading against them: but thought to terrify them the more, by
making them afraid of him, in consequence of his novel treatment of the elements. A strange
land and sea were heard of, the work of the new creator; and an army which sailed over the
dry land, and marched over the ocean, while islands were carried off, and the sea was
scourged, and all the other mad proceedings of that army and expedition, which, though
they struck terror into the ignoble, were ridiculous in the eyes of men of brave and steadfast
hearts. There was no need of anything of this kind in the expedition against us, but what
was still worse and more harmful, this was what the Emperor was reported to say and do. 
He stretched forth his mouth unto heaven, speaking blasphemy against the most High, and
his tongue went through the world.4488 Excellently did the inspired David before our days
thus describe him who made heaven to stoop to earth, and reckoned with the creation that
supermundane nature, which the creation cannot even contain, even though in kindness
to man it did to some extent come among us, in order to draw to itself us who were lying
upon the ground.

46. Furious indeed were his first acts of wantonness, more furious still his final efforts
against us. What shall I speak of first? Exiles, banishments, confiscations, open and secret
plots, persuasion, where time allowed, violence, where persuasion was impossible. Those
who clung to the orthodox faith, as we did, were extruded from their churches; others were
intruded, who agreed with the Imperial soul-destroying doctrines, and begged for testimonials of impiety, and subscribed to statements still harder than these. Burnings4489 of
Presbyters at sea, impious generals, not those who conquered the Persians, or subdued the
Scythians, or reduced any other barbaric nation, but those who assailed churches, and danced
in triumph upon altars, and defiled the unbloody sacrifices with the blood of man and victims,
and offered insult to the modesty of virgins. With what object? The extrusion of the Patriarch

4487 King. Xerxes.

Ps. lxxiii. 9.

Burnings, a.d. 370. Eighty ecclesiastics, sent on a mission to Valens at Nicomedia, were by his orders

sent to sea off the coast of Bithynia, and, the vessel being set on fire, were burnt to death.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

Jacob,4490 and the intrusion in his place of Esau, who was hated,4491 even before his birth. 
This is the description of his first acts of wantonness, the mere recollection and mention of
which even now, rouses the tears of most of us.

47. Accordingly, when, after passing through all quarters, he made his attack in order
to enslave this impregnable and formidable mother of the Churches, the only still remaining
unquenched spark of the truth, he discovered that he had been for the first time ill advised. 
For he was driven back like a missile which strikes upon some stronger body, and recoiled
like a broken hawser. Such was the prelate of the Church that he met with, such was the
bulwark by which his efforts were broken and dissipated. Other particulars may be heard
from those who tell and recount them, from their own experience-and none of those who
recount them is destitute of this full experience. But all must be filled with admiration who
are aware of the struggles of that time, the assaults, the promises, the threats, the commissioners sent before him to try to prevail upon us, men of judicial and military rank, men
from the harem, who are men among women, women among men, whose only manliness
consisted in their impiety, and being incapable of natural licentiousness, commit fornication
in the only way they can, with their tongues; the chief cook Nebuzaradan,4492 who threatened
us with the weapons of his art, and was despatched by his own fire. But what especially excites
my wonder, and what I could not, even if I would, pass by, I will describe as concisely as
possible.

48. Who has not heard of the prefect4493 of those days, who, for his own part, treated
us with such excessive arrogance, having himself been admitted, or perhaps committed, to
baptism by the other party; and strove by exceeding the letter of his instructions, and gratifying his master in every particular, to guarantee and preserve his own possession of power. 
Though he raged against the Church, and assumed a lion-like aspect, and roared like a lion
till most men dared not approach him, yet our noble prelate was brought into or rather
entered his court, as if bidden to a feast, instead of to a trial. How can I fully describe, either
the arrogance of the prefect or the prudence with which it was met by the Saint. "What is
the meaning, Sir Basil," he said, addressing him by name, and not as yet deigning to term
him Bishop, "of your daring, as no other dares, to resist and oppose so great a potentate?" 
"In what respect?" said our noble champion, "and in what does my rashness consist? For
this I have yet to learn." "In refusing to respect the religion of your Sovereign, when all
others have yielded and submitted themselves?" "Because," said he, "this is not the will of
my real Sovereign; nor can I, who am the creature of God, and bidden myself to be God,

Jacob, i.e., Athanasius. Esau = George.

4491 Rom. ix. 11.

4492 Nebuzaradan. Demosthenes, a creature of Valens, sent to persuade Basil to yield to the Emperor.

Prefect. Modestus.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

submit to worship any creature." "And what do we," said the prefect, "seem to you to be? 
Are we, who give you this injunction, nothing at all? What do you say to this? Is it not a
great thing to be ranged with us as your associates?" "You are, I will not deny it," said he,
"a prefect, and an illustrious one, yet not of more honour than God. And to be associated
with you is a great thing, certainly; for you are yourself the creature of God; but so it is to
be associated with any other of my subjects. For faith, and not personal importance, is the
distinctive mark of Christianity."

49. Then indeed the prefect became excited, and rose from his seat, boiling with rage,
and making use of harsher language. "What?" said he, "have you no fear of my authority? 
"Fear of what?" said Basil, "How could it affect me?" "Of what? Of any one of the resources
of my power." "What are these?" said Basil, "pray, inform me." "Confiscation, banishment,
torture, death." "Have you no other threat?" said he, "for none of these can reach me." 
"How indeed is that?" said the prefect. "Because," he replied, "a man who has nothing, is
beyond the reach of confiscation; unless you demand my tattered rags, and the few books,
which are my only possessions. Banishment is impossible for me, who am confined by no
limit of place, counting my own neither the land where I now dwell, nor all of that into
which I may be hurled; or, rather, counting it all God's, whose guest and dependent I am. 
As for tortures, what hold can they have upon one whose body has ceased to be? Unless
you mean the first stroke, for this alone is in your power. Death is my benefactor, for it will
send me the sooner to God, for Whom I live, and exist, and have all but died, and to Whom
I have long been hastening."

50. Amazed at this language, the prefect said, "No one has ever yet spoken thus, and
with such boldness, to Modestus." "Why, perhaps," said Basil, "you have not met with a
Bishop, or in his defence of such interests he would have used precisely the same language. 
For we are modest in general, and submissive to every one, according to the precept of our
law. We may not treat with haughtiness even any ordinary person, to say nothing of so
great a potentate. But where the interests of God are at stake, we care for nothing else, and
make these our sole object. Fire and sword and wild beasts, and rakes which tear the flesh,
we revel in, and fear them not. You may further insult and threaten us, and do whatever
you will, to the full extent of your power. The Emperor himself may hear this-that neither
by violence nor persuasion will you bring us to make common cause with impiety, not even
though your threats become still more terrible."

51. At the close of this colloquy, the prefect, having been convinced by the attitude of
Basil, that he was absolutely impervious to threats and influence, dismissed him from the
court, his former threatening manner being replaced by somewhat of respect and deference. 
He himself with all speed obtained an audience of the Emperor, and said: "We have been
worsted, Sire, by the prelate of this Church. He is superior to threats, invincible in argument,
uninfluenced by persuasion. We must make trial of some more feeble character; and in this

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

case resort to open violence, or submit to the disregard of our threatenings." Hereupon the
Emperor, forced by the praises of Basil to condemn his own conduct (for even an enemy
can admire a man's excellence), would not allow violence to be used against him: and, like
iron, which is softened by fire, yet still remains iron, though turned from threatening to
admiration, would not enter into communion with him, being prevented by shame from
changing his course, but sought to justify his conduct by the most plausible excuse he could,
as the sequel will show.

52. For he entered the Church attended by the whole of his train; it was the festival of
the Epiphany, and the Church was crowded, and, by taking his place among the people, he
made a profession of unity. The occurrence is not to be lightly passed over. Upon his entrance he was struck by the thundering roll of the Psalms, by the sea of heads of the congregation, and by the angelic rather than human order which pervaded the sanctuary and its
precincts: while Basil presided over his people, standing erect, as the Scripture says of
Samuel,4494 with body and eyes and mind undisturbed, as if nothing new had happened,
but fixed upon God and the sanctuary, as if, so to say, he had been a statue, while his ministers
stood around him in fear and reverence. At this sight, and it was indeed a sight unparalleled,
overcome by human weakness, his eyes were affected with dimness and giddiness, his mind
with dread. This was as yet unnoticed by most people. But when he had to offer the gifts
at the Table of God, which he must needs do himself, since no one would, as usual, assist
him, because it was uncertain whether Basil would admit him, his feelings were revealed. 
For he was staggering, and had not some one in the sanctuary reached out a hand to steady
his tottering steps, he would have sunk to the ground in a lamentable fall. So much for this.
53. As for the wisdom of his conference with the Emperor, who, in his quasi-communion
with us entered within the veil to see and speak to him, as he had long desired to do, what
else can I say but that they were inspired words, which were heard by the courtiers and by
us who had entered with them? This was the beginning and first establishment of the Emperor's kindly feeling towards us; the impression produced by this reception put an end to
the greater part of the persecution which assailed us like a river.

54. Another incident is not of less importance than those I have mentioned. The wicked
were victorious, and the decree for his banishment was signed, to the full satisfaction of
those who furthered it. The night had come, the chariot was ready, our haters were exultant,
the pious in despair, we surrounded the zealous traveller, to whose honourable disgrace
nothing was wanting. What next? It was undone by God. For He Who smote the firstborn of Egypt,4495 for its harshness towards Israel, also struck the son of the Emperor with
disease. How great was the speed! There was the sentence of banishment, here the decree

1 Sam. xix. 20.

Exod. xii. 29.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

of sickness: the hand of the wicked scribe was restrained, and the saint was preserved, and
the man of piety presented to us, by the fever which brought to reason the arrogance of the
Emperor. What could be more just or more speedy than this? This was the series of events: 
the Emperor's child was sick and in bodily pain. The father was pained for it, for what can
the father do? On all sides he sought for aid in his distress, he summoned the best physicians,
he betook himself to intercessions with the greatest fervour, and flung himself upon the
ground. Affliction humbles even emperors, and no wonder, for the like sufferings of David
in the case of his child are recorded for us.4496 But as no cure for the evil could anywhere
be found, he applied to the faith of Basil, not personally summoning him, in shame for his
recent ill treatment, but entrusting the mission to others of his nearest and dearest friends. 
On his arrival, without the delay or reluctance which any one else might have shown, at
once the disease relaxed, and the father cherished better hopes; and had he not blended salt
water with the fresh, by trusting to the heterodox at the same time that he summoned Basil,
the child would have recovered his health and been preserved for his father's arms. This
indeed was the conviction of those who were present at the time, and shared in the distress.
55. The same mischance is said to have befallen the prefect. He also was obliged by
sickness to bow beneath the hands of the Saint, and, in reality, to men of sense a visitation
brings instruction, and affliction is often better than prosperity. He fell sick, was in tears,
and in pain, he sent for Basil, and entreated him, crying out, "I own that you were in the
right; only save me!" His request was granted, as he himself acknowledged, and convinced
many who had known nothing of it; for he never ceased to wonder at and describe the
powers of the prelate. Such was his conduct in these cases, such its result. Did he then treat
others in a different way, and engage in petty disputes about trifles, or fail to rise to the
heights of philosophy in a course of action which merits no praise and is best passed over
in silence? By no means. He who once stirred up the wicked Hadad against Israel,4497
stirred up against him the prefect4498 of the province of Pontus; nominally, from annoyance
connected with some poor creature of a woman, but in reality as a part of the struggle of
impiety against the truth. I pass by all his other insults against Basil, or, for it is the same
thing, against God; for it is against Him and on His behalf that the contest was waged. One
instance of it, however, which brought special disgrace upon the assailant, and exalted his
adversary, if philosophy and eminence for it be a great and lofty thing, I will describe at
length.

56. The assessor of a judge was attempting to force into a distasteful marriage a lady of
high birth whose husband was but recently dead. At a loss to escape from this high-handed

2 Sam. xii. 16.

1 Kings xi. 14.

The prefect. Eusebius.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

treatment, she resorted to a device no less prudent than daring. She fled to the holy table,
and placed herself under the protection of God against outrage. What, in the Name of the
Trinity Itself, if I may introduce into my panegyric somewhat of the forensic style, ought to
have been done, I do not say, by the great Basil, who laid down the law for us all in such
matters, but by any one who, though far inferior to him, was a priest? Ought he not to have
allowed her claim, to have taken charge of, and cared for, her; to have raised his hand in
defence of the kindness of God and the law which gives honour to the altar? Ought he not
to have been willing to do and suffer anything, rather than take part in any inhuman design
against her, and outrage at once the holy table, and the faith in which she had taken sanctuary? No! said the baffled judge, all ought to yield to my authority, and Christians should
betray their own laws. The suppliant whom he demanded, was at all hazards retained. Accordingly, in his rage, he at last sent some of the magistrates to search the saint's bedchamber,
with the purpose of dishonouring him, rather than from any necessity. What! Search the
house of a man so free from passion, whom the angels revere, at whom women do not
venture even to look? And, not content with this, he summoned him, and put him on his
defence; and that, in no gentle or kindly manner, but as if he were a convict. Upon Basil's
appearance, standing, like my Jesus, before the judgment seat of Pilate, he presided at the
trial, full of wrath and pride. Yet the thunderbolts did not fall, and the sword of God still
glittered, and waited, while His bow, though bent, was restrained. Such indeed is the custom
of God.

57. Consider another struggle between our champion and his persecutor. His ragged
pallium having been ordered to be torn away, "I will also, if you wish it, strip off my coat,"
said he. His fleshless form was threatened with blows, and he offered to submit to be torn
with combs, and he said, "By such laceration you will cure my liver, which, as you see, is
wearing me away." Such was their argument. But when the city perceived the outrage and
the common danger of all-for each one considered this insolence a danger to himself, it
became all on fire with rage; and, like a hive roused by smoke, one after another was stirred
and arose, every race and every age, but especially the men from the small-arms factory and
from the imperial weaving-sheds. For men at work in these trades are specially hot-tempered
and daring, because of the liberty allowed them. Each man was armed with the tool he was
using, or with whatever else came to hand at the moment. Torch in hand, amid showers of
stones, with cudgel's ready, all ran and shouted together in their united zeal. Anger makes
a terrible soldier or general. Nor were the women weaponless, when roused by such an occasion. Their pins were their spears, and no longer remaining women, they were by the
strength of their eagerness endowed with masculine courage. It is a short story. They
thought that they would share among themselves the piety of destroying him, and held him
to be most pious who first laid hands on one who had dared such deeds. What then was
the conduct of this haughty and daring judge? He begged for mercy in a pitiable state of

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

distress, cringing before them to an unparalleled extent, until the arrival of the martyr
without bloodshed, who had won his crown without blows, and now restrained the people
by the force of his personal influence, and delivered the man who had insulted him and now
sought his protection. This was the doing of the God of Saints, Who worketh and changeth
all things for the best, who resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble.4499 And
why should not He, Who divided the sea and stayed the river, and ruled the elements, and
by stretching out set up a trophy, to save His exiled people, why should not He have also
rescued this man from his perils?

58. This was the end and fortunate close, in the Providence of God, of the war with the
world, a close worthy of his faith. But here at once is the beginning of the war with the
Bishops, and their allies, which involved great disgrace, and still greater injury to their subjects. For who could persuade others to be temperate, when such was the conduct of their
prelates? For a long time they had been unkindly disposed towards him, on three grounds. 
They neither agreed with him in the matter of the faith, except in so far as they were absolutely obliged to yield to the majority of the faithful. Nor had they altogether laid aside the
grudge they owed him for his election. And, what was most grievous of all to them, though
they would have been most ashamed to own it-he so far outshone them in reputation. 
There was also a further cause of dissension which stirred up again the others. When our
country had been divided into two provinces and metropolitical sees, and a great part of
the former was being added to the new one, this again roused their factious spirit. The
one4500 thought it right that the ecclesiastical boundaries should be settled by the civil ones: 
and therefore claimed those newly added, as belonging to him, and severed from their former
metropolitan. The other4501 clung to the ancient custom, and to the division which had
come down from our fathers. Many painful results either actually followed, or were struggling
in the womb of the future. Synods were wrongfully gathered by the new metropolitan, and
revenues seized upon. Some of the presbyters of the churches refused obedience, others
were won over. In consequence the affairs of the churches fell into a sad state of dissension
and division. Novelty indeed has a certain charm for men, and they readily turn events to
their own advantage, and it is easier to overthrow something which is already established,
than to restore it when overthrown. What however enraged him most was, that the revenues4502 of the Taurus, which passed along before his eyes, accrued to his rival, as also the
offerings at Saint Orestes',4503 of which he was greatly desirous to reap the fruits. He even

S. James iv. 6.

The one, i.e., Anthimus, Bishop of Tyana.

The other, i.e., Basil.

Revenues. The dues and offerings of the people of the diocese.

4503 Orestes. A chapel dedicated to S. Orestes at the foot of Mt. Taurus, where the offerings were collected.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

went so far as, on one occasion when Basil was riding along his own road, to seize his mules
by the bridle and bar the passage with a robber band. And with how specious a pretext, the
care of his spiritual children and of the souls entrusted to him, and the defence of the
faith-pretexts which veiled that most common vice, insatiable avarice-and further, the
wrongfulness of paying dues to heretics, a heretic being any one who had displeased him.
59. The holy man of God however, metropolitan as he was of the true Jerusalem above,
was neither carried away with the failure of those who fell, nor allowed himself to overlook
this conduct, nor did he desire any inadequate remedy for the evil. Let us see how great and
wonderful it was, or, I would say, how worthy of his soul. He made of the dissension a cause
of increase to the Church, and the disaster, under his most able management, resulted in
the multiplication of the Bishops of the country. From this ensued three most desirable
consequences; a greater care for souls, the management by each city of its own affairs, and
the cessation of the war in this quarter. I am afraid that I myself was treated as an appendage
to this scheme. By no other term can I readily describe the position. Greatly as I admire
his whole conduct, to an extent indeed beyond my powers of expression, of this single particular I find it impossible to approve, for I will acknowledge my feelings in regard to it,
though these are from other sources not unknown to most of you. I mean the change and
faithlessness of his treatment of myself, a cause of pain which even time has not obliterated. 
For this is the source of all the inconsistency and tangle of my life; it has robbed me of the
practice, or at least the reputation, of philosophy; of small moment though the latter be. 
The defence, which you will perhaps allow me to make for him, is this; his ideas were superhuman, and having, before his death, become superior to worldly influences, his only interests
were those of the Spirit: while his regard for friendship was in no wise lessened by his
readiness then, and then only, to disregard its claims, when they were in conflict with his
paramount duty to God, and when the end he had in view was of greater importance than
the interests he was compelled to set aside.

60. I am afraid that, in avoiding the imputation of indifference at the hands of those
who desire to know all that can be said about him, I shall incur a charge of prolixity from
those whose ideal is the golden mean. For the latter Basil himself had the greatest respect,
being specially devoted to the adage "In all things the mean4504 is the best," and acting upon
it throughout his life. Nevertheless, disregarding alike those who desire undue conciseness
or excessive prolixity, I proceed thus with my speech. Different men attain success in different ways, some applying themselves to one alone of the many forms of excellence, but no
one, of those hitherto known to me, arriving at the highest eminence in all respects; he being
in my opinion the best, who has won his laurels on the widest field, or gained the highest
possible renown in some single particular. Such however was the height of Basil's fame,

The mean, etc. A saying of Cleobulus, one of the seven Sages.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

that he became the pride of human kind. Let us consider the matter thus. Is any one devoted
to poverty and a life devoid of property, and free from superfluity? What did he possess
besides his body, and the necessary coverings of the flesh? His wealth was the having
nothing, and he thought the cross, with which he lived, more precious than great riches. 
For no one, however much he may wish, can obtain possession of all things, but any one
can learn to despise, and so prove himself superior to, all things. Such being his mind, and
such his life, he had no need of an altar and of vainglory, nor of such a public announcement
as "Crates4505 sets Crates the Theban free." For his aim was ever to be, not to seem, most
excellent. Nor did he dwell in a tub,4506 and in the midst of the market-place, and so by
luxuriating in publicity turn his poverty into riches: but was poor and unkempt, yet without
ostentation: and taking cheerfully the casting overboard of all that he ever had, sailed lightly
across the sea of life.

61. A wondrous thing is temperance, and fewness of wants, and freedom from the
dominion of pleasures, and from the bondage of that cruel and degrading mistress, the
belly. Who was so independent of food, and, without exaggeration, more free from the
flesh? For he flung away all satiety and surfeit to creatures destitute of reason, whose life is
slavish and debasing. He paid little attention to such things as, next to the appetite, are of
equal rank, but, as far as possible, lived on the merest necessaries, his only luxury being to
prove himself not luxurious, and not, in consequence, to have greater needs: but he looked
to the lilies and the birds,4507 whose beauty is artless, and their food casual, according to
the important advice of my Christ, who made Himself poor4508 in the flesh for our sakes,
that we might enjoy the riches of His Godhead. Hence came his single coat and well worn
cloak, and his bed on the bare ground, his vigils, his unwashedness (such were his decorations) and his most sweet food and relish, bread, and salt, his new dainty, and the sober and
plentiful drink, with which fountains supply those who are free from trouble. The result,
or the accompaniment, of these things were the attendance on the sick and practice of
medicine, our common intellectual pursuit. For, though inferior to him in all other respects,
I must needs be his equal in distress.

62. A great thing is virginity, and celibacy, and being ranked with the angels, and with
the single nature; for I shrink from calling it Christ's, Who, though He willed to be born for
our sakes who are born, by being born of a Virgin, enacted4509 the law of virginity, to lead
us away from this life, and cut short the power of the world, or rather, to transmit one world

4505 Crates. He made this proclamation when he had stripped himself of all his possessions.

In a tub, like Diogenes, the Cynic.

S. Matt. vi. 26.

2 Cor. viii. 9.

Enacted by his religious rule, or as some say by a treatise on Virginity.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

to another, the present to the future. Who then paid more honour to virginity, or had more
control of the flesh, not only by his personal example, but in those under his care? Whose
are the convents, and the written regulations, by which he subdued every sense, and regulated
every member, and won to the real practice of virginity, turning inward the view of beauty,
from the visible to the invisible; and by wasting away the external, and withdrawing fuel
from the flame, and revealing the secrets of the heart to God, Who is the only bridegroom
of pure souls, and takes in with himself the watchful souls, if they go to meet him with lamps
burning and a plentiful supply of oil?4510 Moreover he reconciled most excellently and
united the solitary and the community life. These had been in many respects at variance
and dissension, while neither of them was in absolute and unalloyed possession of good or
evil: the one being more calm and settled, tending to union with God, yet not free from
pride, inasmuch as its virtue lies beyond the means of testing or comparison; the other,
which is of more practical service, being not free from the tendency to turbulence. He
founded cells4511 for ascetics and hermits, but at no great distance from his cenobitic communities, and, instead of distinguishing and separating the one from the other, as if by some
intervening wall, he brought them together and united them, in order that the contemplative
spirit might not be cut off from society, nor the active life be uninfluenced by the contemplative, but that, like sea and land, by an interchange of their several gifts, they might unite
in promoting the one object, the glory of God.

63. What more? A noble thing is philanthropy, and the support of the poor, and the
assistance of human weakness. Go forth a little way from the city, and behold the new
city,4512 the storehouse of piety, the common treasury of the wealthy, in which the superfluities of their wealth, aye, and even their necessaries, are stored, in consequence of his exhortations, freed from the power of the moth,4513 no longer gladdening the eyes of the thief,
and escaping both the emulation of envy, and the corruption of time: where disease is regarded in a religious light, and disaster is thought a blessing, and sympathy is put to the
test. Why should I compare with this work Thebes4514 of the seen portals, and the Egyptian
Thebes, and the walls of Babylon, and the Carian tomb of Mausolus, and the Pyramids, and
the bronze without weight of the Colossus, or the size and beauty of shrines that are no
more, and all the other objects of men's wonder, and historic record, from which their

S. Matt. xxv. 2.

4511 Cells, etc. This passage strongly favours the view of Clemencet that S. Gregory uses μοναστήρια in the

literal sense of "the abodes of solitaries," and that there is no great distinction between κοινωνικοί and μιγάδες. 

Cf. ii. 29. xxi. 10-19.

4512 New city-a hospital for the sick.

S. Matt. vi. 19.

Thebes, etc. The "seven wonders of the world."

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

founders gained no advantage, except a slight meed of fame. My subject is the most wonderful of all, the short road to salvation, the easiest ascent to heaven. There is no longer
before our eyes that terrible and piteous spectacle of men who are living corpses, the greater
part of whose limbs have mortified, driven away from their cities and homes and public
places and fountains, aye, and from their own dearest ones, recognizable by their names
rather than by their features: they are no longer brought before us at our gatherings and
meetings, in our common intercourse and union, no longer the objects of hatred, instead
of pity on account of their disease; composers of piteous songs, if any of them have their
voice still left to them. Why should I try to express in tragic style all our experiences, when
no language can be adequate to their hard lot? He however it was, who took the lead in
pressing upon those who were men, that they ought not to despise their fellowmen, nor to
dishonour Christ, the one Head of all, by their inhuman treatment of them; but to use the
misfortunes of others as an opportunity of firmly establishing their own lot, and to lend to
God that mercy of which they stand in need at His hands. He did not therefore disdain to
honour with his lips this disease, noble and of noble ancestry and brilliant reputation though
he was, but saluted them as brethren, not, as some might suppose, from vainglory, (for who
was so far removed from this feeling?) but taking the lead in approaching to tend them, as
a consequence of his philosophy, and so giving not only a speaking, but also a silent, instruction. The effect produced is to be seen not only in the city, but in the country and beyond,
and even the leaders of society have vied with one another in their philanthropy and magnanimity towards them. Others have had their cooks, and splendid tables, and the devices
and dainties of confectioners, and exquisite carriages, and soft, flowing robes; Basil's care
was for the sick, and the relief of their wounds, and the imitation of Christ, by cleansing
leprosy, not by a word, but in deed.

64. As to all this, what will be said by those who charge him with pride and haughtiness? 
Severe critics they are of such conduct, applying to him, whose life was a standard, those
who were not standards at all. Is it possible that he who kissed the lepers, and humiliated
himself to such a degree, could treat haughtily those who were in health: and, while wasting
his flesh by abstinence, puff out his soul with empty arrogance? Is it possible to condemn
the Pharisee, and expound the debasing effect of haughtiness, to know Christ, Who condescended to the form of a slave, and ate with publicans, and washed the disciples' feet, and
did not disdain the cross, in order to nail my sin to it: and, more incredible still, to see God
crucified, aye, along with robbers also, and derided by the passers by, impassible, and beyond
the reach of suffering as He is; and yet, as his slanderers imagine, soar himself above the
clouds, and think that nothing can be on an equality with him. Nay, what they term pride
is, I fancy, the firmness and steadfastness and stability of his character. Such persons would
readily, it seems to me, call bravery rashness, and the circumspect a coward, and the temperate
misanthropic, and the just illiberal. For indeed this philosophic axiom is excellent, which

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

says that the vices4515 are settled close to the virtues, and are, in some sense, their next-door
neighbours: and it is most easy, for those whose training in such subjects has been defective,
to mistake a man for what he is not. For who honoured virtue and castigated vice more
than he, or showed himself more kind to the upright, more severe to the wrong doers? His
very smile often amounted to praise, his silence to rebuke, racking the evil in the secret
conscience. And if a man have not been a chatterer, and jester, and gossip, nor a general
favourite, because of having pleased others by becoming all things to all men,4516 what of
that? Is he not in the eyes of sensible men worthy of praise rather than of blame? Unless it
is a fault in the lion that he is terrible and royal, and does not look like an ape, and that his
spring is noble, and is valued for its wonderfulness: while stage-players ought to win our
admiration for their pleasant and philanthropic characters, because they please the vulgar,
and raise a laugh by their sounding slaps in the face. And if this indeed be our object, who
was so pleasant when you met him, as I know, who have had the longest experience? Who
was more kindly in his stories, more refined in his wit, more tender in his rebukes? His reproofs gave rise to no arrogance, his relaxation to no dissipation, but avoiding excess in
either, he made use of both in reason and season, according to the rules of Solomon, who
assigns to every business a season.4517

65. But what are these to his renown for eloquence, and his powers of instruction, which
have won the favour of the ends of the world? As yet we have been compassing the foot of
the mountain, to the neglect of its summit, as yet we have been crossing a strait, paying no
heed to the mighty and deep ocean. For I think that if any one ever has become, or can become, a trumpet, in his far sounding resonance, or a voice of God, embracing the universe,
or an earthquake of the world, by some unheard of miracle, it is his voice and intellect which
deserve these titles, for surpassing and excelling all men as much as we surpass the irrational
creatures. Who, more than he, cleansed himself by the Spirit, and made himself worthy to
set forth divine things? Who was more enlightened by the light of knowledge, and had a
closer insight into the depths of the Spirit, and by the aid of God beheld the things of God? 
Whose language could better express intellectual truth, without, as most men do, limping
on one foot, by either failing to express his ideas, or allowing his eloquence to outstrip his
reasoning powers? In both respects he won a like distinction, and showed himself to be his
own equal, and absolutely perfect. To search all things, yea, the deep things of God4518 is,
according to the testimony of S. Paul, the office of the Spirit, not because He is ignorant of
them, but because He takes delight in their contemplation. Now all the things of the Spirit

The vices. This was the doctrine of Menander and Aristotle.

1 Cor. ix. 22.

Eccles. iii. 1.

1 Cor. ii. 10.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

Basil had fully investigated, and hence he drew his instructions for every kind of character,
his lessons in the sublime, and his exhortations to quit things present, and adapt ourselves
to things to come.

66. The sun is extolled by David for its beauty, its greatness, its swift course, and its
power, splendid as a bridegroom, majestic as a giant;4519 while, from the extent of its circuit,
it has such power that it equally sheds its light from one end of heaven to the other, and the
heat thereof is in no wise lessened by distance. Basil's beauty was virtue, his greatness
theology, his course the perpetual motion reaching even to God by its ascents, and his power
the sowing and distribution of the Word. So that I will not hesitate to say even this, his utterance went out into all lands,4520 and the power of his words to the ends of the world: as
S. Paul says of the Apostles,4521 borrowing the words from David. What other charm is
there in any gathering to-day? What pleasure in banquets, in the courts, in the churches? 
What delight in those in authority, and those beneath them? What in the hermits, or the
cenobites? What in the leisured classes, or those busied in affairs? What in profane schools
of philosophy or in our own? There is one, which runs through all, and is the greatest-his
writings and labours. Nor do writers require any supply of matter besides his teaching or
writings. All the laborious studies of old days in the Divine oracles are silent, while the new
ones are in everybody's mouth, and he is the best teacher among us who has the deepest
acquaintance with his works, and speaks of them and explains them in our ears. For he
alone more than supplies the place of all others to those who are specially eager for instruction.

67. I will only say this of him. Whenever I handle his Hexaemeron, and take its words
on my lips, I am brought into the presence of the Creator, and understand the words of
creation, and admire the Creator more than before, using my teacher as my only means of
sight. Whenever I take up his polemical works, I see the fire of Sodom,4522 by which the
wicked and rebellious tongues are reduced to ashes, or the tower of Chalane,4523 impiously
built,4524 and righteously destroyed. Whenever I read his writings on the Spirit, I find the
God Whom I possess, and grow bold in my utterance of the truth, from the support of his
theology and contemplation. His other treatises, in which he gives explanations for those
who are shortsighted, by a threefold inscription on the solid tablets of his heart, lead me on
from a mere literal or symbolical interpretation to a still wider view, as I proceed from one

Ps. xix. 6.

Ps. xix. 5.

4521 Rom. x. 18.

4522 Gen. xix. 24.

4523 Chalane. LXX. for Babel.

4524 Gen. xi. 4.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

depth to another, calling upon deep4525 after deep, and finding light after light, until I attain
the highest pinnacle. When I study his panegyrics on our athletes, I despise the body, and
enjoy the society of those whom he is praising, and rouse myself to the struggle. His moral
and practical discourses purify soul and body, making me a temple fit for God, and an instrument struck by the Spirit, to celebrate by its strains the glory and power of God. In fact,
he reduces me to harmony and order, and changes me by a Divine transformation.

68. Since I have mentioned theology, and his most sublime treatises in this science, I
will make this addition to what I have already said. For it is of great service to the community,
to save them from being injured by an unjustifiably low opinion of him. My remarks are
directed against those evil disposed persons who shelter their own vices under cover of their
calumnies against others. In his defence of orthodox teaching, and of the union and coequal
divinity of the Holy Trinity, to use terms which are, I think, as exact and clear as possible,
he would have eagerly welcomed as a gain, and not a danger, not only expulsion from his
see, in which he had originally no desire to be enthroned, but even exile, and death, and its
preliminary tortures. This is manifest from his actual conduct and sufferings. For when
he had been sentenced to banishment on behalf of the truth, the only notice which he took
of it was, to bid one of his servants to take his writing tablet and follow him. He held it necessary, according to the divine David's advice, to guide his words with discretion,4526 and
to endure for a while the time of war, and the ascendency of the heretics, until it should be
succeeded by a time of freedom and calm, which would admit of freedom of speech. The
enemy were on the watch for the unqualified statement "the Spirit is God;" which, although
it is true, they and the wicked patron of their impiety imagined to be impious; so that they
might banish him and his power of theological instruction from the city, and themselves be
able to seize upon the church, and make it the starting point and citadel, from which they
could overrun with their evil doctrine the rest of the world. Accordingly, by the use of
other terms, and by statements which unmistakably had the same meaning, and by arguments
necessarily leading to this conclusion, he so overpowered his antagonists, that they were
left without reply, and involved in their own admissions,-the greatest proof possible of
dialectical power and skill. His treatise on this subject makes it further manifest, being
evidently written by a pen borrowed from the Spirit's store. He postponed for the time the
use of the exact term, begging as a favour from the Spirit Himself and his earnest champions,
that they would not be annoyed at his economy,4527 nor, by clinging to a single expression,
ruin the whole cause, from an uncompromising temper, at a crisis when religion was in

Ps. xlii. 8.

Ib. cxii. 5.

Economy. In refraining from the express assertion "The Holy Ghost is God"-some have blamed S.

Basil for this: but his conduct has the approval of S. Athanasius. Ep. ad Palladium.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

peril. He assured them that they would suffer no injury from a slight change in their expressions, and from teaching the same truth in other terms. For our salvation is not so much a
matter of words as of actions; for we would not reject the Jews, if they desired to unite with
us, and yet for a while sought to use the term "Anointed" instead of "Christ:" while the
community would suffer a very serious injury, if the church were seized upon by the heretics.
69. That he, no less than any other, acknowledged that the Spirit is God, is plain from
his often having publicly preached this truth, whenever opportunity offered, and eagerly
confessed it when questioned in private. But he made it more clear in his conversations
with me, from whom he concealed nothing during our conferences upon this subject. Not
content with simply asserting it, he proceeded, as he had but very seldom done before, to
imprecate upon himself that most terrible fate of separation from the Spirit, if he did not
adore the Spirit as consubstantial and coequal with the Father and the Son. And if any one
would accept me as having been his fellow labourer in this cause, I will set forth one point
hitherto unknown to most men. Under the pressure of the difficulties of the period, he
himself undertook the economy, while allowing freedom of speech to me, whom no one
was likely to drag from obscurity to trial or banishment, in order that by our united efforts
our Gospel might be firmly established. I mention this, not to defend his reputation, for
the man is stronger than his assailants, if there are any such; but to prevent men from
thinking that the terms found in his writings are the utmost limit of the truth, and so have
their faith weakened, and consider that their own error is supported by his theology, which
was the joint result of the influences of the time and of the Spirit, instead of considering the
sense of his writings, and the object with which they were written, so as to be brought closer
to the truth, and enabled to silence the partisans of impiety. At any rate let his theology be
mine, and that of all dear to me! And so confident am I of his spotlessness in this respect,
that I take him for my partner in this, as in all else: and may what is mine be attributed to
him, what is his to me, both at the hands of God, and of the wisest of men! For we would
not say that the Evangelists are at variance with one another, because some are more occupied
with the human side of the Christ, and others pay attention to His Divinity; some having
commenced their history with what is within our own experience, others with what is above
us; and by thus sharing the substance of their message, they have procured the advantage
of those who receive it, and followed the impressions of the Spirit Who was within them.

70. Come then, there have been many men of old days illustrious for piety, as lawgivers,
generals, prophets, teachers, and men brave to the shedding of blood. Let us compare our
prelate with them, and thus recognize his merit. Adam was honoured by the hand of God,4528
and the delights of Paradise,4529 and the first legislation:4530 but, unless I slander the

4528 Gen. i. 27.

Ib. ii. 8.

Ib. ii. 16.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

reputation of our first parent, he kept not the command. Now Basil both received and observed it, and received no injury from the tree of knowledge, and escaped the flaming sword,
and, as I am well assured, has attained to Paradise. Enos first ventured to call upon the
Lord.4531 Basil both called upon Him himself, and, what is far more excellent, preached
Him to others. Enoch was translated,4532 attaining to his translation as the reward of a little
piety (for the faith was still in shadow) and escaped the peril of the remainder of life, but
Basil's whole life was a translation, and he was completely tested in a complete life. Noah
was entrusted with the ark,4533 and the seeds of a new world committed to a small house
of wood, in their preservation from the waters. Basil escaped the deluge of impiety and
made of his own city an ark of safety, which sailed lightly over the heretics, and afterwards
recovered the whole world.

71. Abraham was a great man, a patriarch, the offerer of the new sacrifice,4534 by
presenting to Him who had given it the promised seed, as a ready offering, eager for
slaughter. But Basil's offering was no slight one, when he offered himself to God, without
any equivalent being given in his stead, (for how could that have been possible?) so that his
sacrifice was consummated. Isaac was promised even before his birth,4535 Basil promised
himself, and took for his spouse Rebekah, I mean the Church, not fetched from a distance
by the mission of a servant,4536 but bestowed upon and entrusted to him by God close at
home: nor was he outwitted in the preference of his children, but bestowed upon each what
was due to him, without any deception, according to the judgment of the Spirit. I extol the
ladder of Jacob,4537 and the pillar which he anointed to God, and his wrestling with Him,
whatever it was; and, in my opinion, it was the contrast and opposition of the human stature
to the height of God, resulting in the tokens of the defeat4538 of his race. I extol also his
clever devices and success in cattle-breeding, and his children, the twelve Patriarchs, and
the distribution of his blessings, with their glorious prophecy of the future. But I still more
extol Basil for the ladder which he did not merely see, but which he ascended by successive
steps towards excellence, and the pillar which he did not anoint, but which he erected to
God, by pillorying the teaching of the ungodly; and the wrestling with which he wrestled,
not with God, but, on behalf of God, to the overthrow of the heretics; and his pastoral care,

Ib. iv. 26.

Ib. v. 21.

4533 Gen. vi. 13.

Ib. xxii. i.

Ib. xviii. 10.

Ib. xxiv. 3.

Ib. xxviii. 12.

4538 Defeat or "loss of generative power."

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

whereby he grew rich, through gaining for himself a number of marked sheep greater than
that of the unmarked, and his illustrious fruitfulness in spiritual children, and the blessing
with which he established many.

72. Joseph was a provider of corn,4539 but in Egypt only, and not frequently, and of
bodily food. Basil did so for all men, and at all times, and in spiritual food, and therefore,
in my opinion, his was the more honourable function. Like Job, the man of Uz,4540 he was
both tempted, and overcame, and at the close of his struggles gained splendid honour,
having been shaken by none of his many assailants, and having gained a decisive victory
over the efforts of the tempter, and put to silence the unreason of his friends, who knew not
the mysterious character of his affliction. "Moses and Aaron among His priests."4541 Truly
was Moses great, who inflicted the plagues upon Egypt,4542 and delivered the people among
many signs and wonders, and entered within the cloud, and sanctioned the double law,
outward in the letter, and inward in the Spirit. Aaron was Moses' brother,4543 both naturally
and spiritually, and offered sacrifices and prayers for the people, as the hierophant of the
great and holy tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.4544 Of both of them Basil
was a rival, for he tortured, not with bodily but with spiritual and mental plagues, the
Egyptian race of heretics, and led to the land of promise4545 the people of possession, zealous
of good works;4546 he inscribed laws, which are no longer obscure, but entirely spiritual,
on tables4547 which are not broken but are preserved; he entered the Holy of holies,4548 not
once a year, but often, I may say every day, and thence he revealed to us the Holy Trinity;
and cleansed the people, not with temporary sprinklings, but with eternal purifications: 
What is the special excellence of Joshua?4549 His generalship, and the distribution of the
inheritance, and the taking possession of the Holy Land. And was not Basil an Exarch?4550 
Was he not a general of those who are saved by faith?4551 Did he not assign the different

4539 Gen. xli. 40.

Job i. 1.

Ps. xcix. 6.

Exod. vii. 8. et seq.

Ib. xxix. 4.

4544 Heb. viii. 2.

Ib. xi. 9.

4546 Tit. ii. 14.

2 Cor. iii. 3.

Exod. xxiv. 8; Heb. ix. 19.

Josh. i. 2.

Exarch or Metropolitan.

Eph. ii. 8.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

inheritances and abodes, according to the will of God, among his followers? So that he too
could use the words, "The lot is fallen unto me in pleasant places;4552 and "my fortunes are
in Thy hands,"4553 fortunes more precious than those which come to us on earth, and can
be snatched away.

73. Further, to run over the Judges, or the most illustrious of the Judges, there is "Samuel
among those that call upon His Name,"4554 who was given to God before his birth,4555 and
sanctified immediately after his birth, and the anointer with his horn of kings and priests.4556 
But was not Basil as an infant consecrated to God from the womb, and offered with a coat4557
at the altar, and was he not a seer of heavenly things, and anointed of the Lord, and the
anointer of those who are perfected by the Spirit? Among the kings, David is celebrated,
whose victories and trophies4558 gained from the enemy are on record, but his most characteristic trait was his gentleness,4559 and, before his kingly office, his power with the harp,
able to soothe even the evil spirit. Solomon asked of God and obtained breadth of heart,4560
making the furthest possible progress in wisdom and contemplation, so that he became the
most famous man of his time. Basil, in my opinion, was in no wise, or but little inferior, to
the one in gentleness, to the other in wisdom, so that he soothed the arrogance of infuriated
sovereigns; and did not merely bring the queen of the south from the ends of the earth, or
any other individual, to visit him because of his renown for wisdom, but made his wisdom
known in all the ends of the world. I pass over the rest of Solomon's life. Even if we spare
it, it is evident to all.

74. Do you praise the courage of Elijah4561 in the presence of tyrants, and his fiery
translation?4562 Or the fair inheritance of Elisha, the sheepskin mantle, accompanied by
the spirit of Elijah?4563 You must also praise the life of Basil, spent in the fire. I mean in
the multitude of temptations, and his escape through fire, which burnt, but did not consume,
the mystery of "the bush,"4564 and the fair cloak of skin from on high, his indifference to

Ps. xvi. 6.

Ib. xxxi. 16.

Ib. cxix. 6.

1 Sam. i. 20.

Ib. xvi. 13.

4557 Cf. 1 Sam. ii. 19.

2 Sam. v. 1.

Ps. cxxxii. 1 (LXX.).

1 Kings iv. 29.

2 Kings i. 1.

Ib. ii. 11.

Ib. ii. 13, 15.

Exod. iii. 1.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

the flesh. I pass by the rest, the three young men bedewed in the fire,4565 the fugitive
prophet praying in the whale's belly,4566 and coming forth from the creature, as from a
chamber; the just man in the den, restraining the lions' rage,4567 and the struggle of the
seven Maccabees,4568 who were perfected with their father and mother in blood, and in all
kinds of tortures. Their endurance he rivalled, and won their glory.

75. I now turn to the New Testament, and comparing his life with those who are here
illustrious, I shall find in the teachers a source of honour for their disciple. Who was the
forerunner of Jesus?4569 John, the voice of the Word,4570 the lamp of the Light,4571 before
Whom he even leaped in the womb,4572 and Whom he preceded to Hades, whither he was
despatched by the rage of Herod,4573 to herald even there Him who was coming. And, if
my language seems audacious to anyone, let me assure him beforehand, that in making this
comparison, I neither prefer Basil, nor imply that he is equal to him who surpasses all who
are born of women,4574 but only show that he was stirred to emulation, and possessed to
some extent his striking features. For it is no slight thing for the earnest to imitate the
greatest of men, even in a slight degree. Is it not indeed manifest that Basil was a copy of
John's asceticism? He also lived in the wilderness, and wore in nightly watchings a ragged
garb, during his shrinking retirement; he also loved a similar food, purifying himself for
God by abstinence; he also was thought worthy to be a herald, if not a forerunner, of Christ,
and there went out to him not only all the region round about,4575 but also that which was
beyond its borders; he also stood between the two covenants, abolishing the letter of the
one by administering the spirit of the other, and bringing about the fulfilment of the hidden
law through the dissolution of that which was apparent.

76. He emulated the zeal of Peter,4576 the intensity of Paul, the faith of both these men
of name and of surname, the lofty utterance of the sons of Zebedee, the frugality and simplicity of all the disciples. Therefore he was also entrusted with the keys of the heavens,4577

4565 Dan. iii. 5.

Jonah ii. 1.

4567 Dan. vi. 22.

2 Macc. vii. 1.

S. Luke i. 76.

Ib. iii. 4.

S. John v. 35; i. 8.

S. Luke ii. 41.

S. Matt. xiv. 10.

S. Matt. xi. 11.

Ib. iii. 5.

4576 Acts iv. 8.

S. Matt. xvi. 1.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

and not only from Jerusalem and round about unto Illyricum,4578 but he embraces a wider
circle in the Gospel; he is not named, but becomes, a Son of thunder; and lying upon the
breast of Jesus, he draws thence the power of his word, and the depth of his thoughts. He
was prevented from becoming a Stephen,4579 eager though he was, since reverence stayed
the hands of those who would have stoned him. I am able to sum up still more concisely,
to avoid treating in detail on these points of each individual. In some respects he discovered,
in some he emulated, in others he surpassed the good. In his many-sided virtues he excelled
all men of this day. I have but one thing left to say, and in few words.

77. So great was his virtue, and the eminence of his fame, that many of his minor
characteristics, nay, even his physical defects, have been assumed by others with a view to
notoriety. For instance his paleness, his beard, his gait, his thoughtful, and generally meditative, hesitation in speaking, which, in the ill-judged, inconsiderate imitation of many,
took the form of melancholy. And besides, the style of his dress, the shape of his bed, and
his manner of eating, none of which was to him a matter of consequence, but simply the
result of accident and chance. So you might see many Basils in outward semblance, among
these statues in outline, for it would be too much to call them his distant echo. For an echo,
though it is the dying away of a sound, at any rate represents it with great clearness, while
these men fall too far short of him to satisfy even their desire to approach him. Nor was it
a slight thing, but a matter with good reason held in the highest estimation, to chance to
have met him or done him some service, or to carry away the souvenir of something which
he had said or done in jest or in earnest: as I know that I have myself often taken pride in
doing; for his improvisations were much more precious and brilliant than the laboured efforts
of other men.

78. But when, after he had finished his course, and kept the faith,4580 he longed to depart,
and the time for his crown was approaching,4581 he did not hear the summons: "Get thee
up into the mountain and die,"4582 but "Die and come up to us." And here again he wrought
a wonder in no wise inferior to those mentioned before. For when he was almost dead, and
breathless, and had lost the greater part of his powers; he grew stronger in his last words,
so as to depart with the utterances of religion, and, by ordaining the most excellent of his
attendants, bestowed upon them both his hand and the Spirit: so that his disciples, who
had aided him in his priestly office, might not be defrauded of the priesthood. The remainder
of my task I approach, but with reluctance, as it would fall more fully from the mouths of

4578 Rom. xv. 1.

4579 Acts vii. 58.

2 Tim. iv. 7.

Phil. i. 23.

4582 Deut. xxxii. 49.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

others than from my own. For I cannot philosophise over my misfortune, even if I greatly
longed to do so, when I recollect that the loss is common to us all, and that the misfortune
has befallen the whole world.

79. He lay, drawing his last breath, and awaited by the choir on high, towards which
he had long directed his gaze. Around him poured the whole city, unable to bear his loss,
inveighing against his departure, as if it had been an oppression, and clinging to his soul,
as though it had been capable of restraint or compulsion at their hands or their prayers. 
Their suffering had driven them distracted, all were eager, were it possible, to add to his life
a portion of their own. And when they failed, for it must needs be proved that he was a
man, and, with his last words "Into thy Hands I commend my spirit,"4583 he had joyfully
resigned his soul to the care of the angels who carried him away; not without having some
religious instructions and injunctions for the benefit of those who were present-then occurred a wonder more remarkable than any which had happened before.

80. The saint was being carried out, lifted high by the hands of holy men, and everyone
was eager, some to seize the hem of his garment,4584 others only just to touch the shadow,4585
or the bier which bore his holy remains (for what could be more holy or pure than that
body), others to draw near to those who were carrying it, others only to enjoy the sight, as
if even this were beneficial. Market places, porticos, houses of two or three stories were
filled with people escorting, preceding, following, accompanying him, and trampling upon
each other; tens of thousands of every race and age, beyond all previous experience. The
psalmody was overborne by the lamentations, philosophic resignation sank beneath the
misfortune. Our own people vied with strangers, Jews, Greeks, and foreigners, and they
with us, for a greater share in the benefit, by means of a more abundant lamentation. To
close my story, the calamity ended in danger; many souls departed along with him, from
the violence of the pushing and confusion, who have been thought happy in their end, departing together with him, "funeral victims," perhaps some fervid orator might call them. 
The body having at last escaped from those who would seize it, and made its way through
those who went before it, was consigned to the tomb of his fathers, the high priest being
added to the priests, the mighty voice which rings in my ears to the heralds, the martyr to
the martyrs. And now he is in heaven, where, if I mistake not, he is offering sacrifices for
us, and praying for the people, for though, he has left us, he has not entirely left us. While
I, Gregory, who am half dead, and, cleft in twain, torn away from our great union, and
dragging along a life of pain which runs not easily, as may be supposed, after separation
from him, know not what is to be my end now that I have lost my guidance. And even now

Ps. xxxi. 6.

S. Luke viii. 44.

4585 Acts v. 15.

Funeral Oration on the Great S. Basil, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia.

I am admonished and instructed in nightly visions, if ever I fall short of my duty. And my
present object is not so much to mingle lamentations with my praises, or to portray the
public life of the man, or publish a picture of virtue common to all time, and an example
salutary to all churches, and to all souls, which we may keep in view, as a living law, and so
rightly direct our lives as to counsel you, who have been completely initiated into his doctrine,
to fix your eyes upon him, as one who sees you and is seen by you, and thus to be perfected
by the Spirit.

81. Come hither then, and surround me, all ye members of his choir, both of the clergy
and the laity, both of our own country and from abroad; aid me in my eulogy, by each supplying or demanding the account of some of his excellences. Regard, ye occupants of the
bench, the lawgiver; ye politicians, the statesman; ye men of the people, his orderliness; ye
men of letters, the instructor; ye virgins, the leader of the bride; ye who are yoked in marriage,
the restrainer; ye hermits, him who gave you wings; ye cenobites, the judge; ye simple men,
the guide; ye contemplatives, the divine; ye cheerful ones, the bridle; ye unfortunate men,
the consoler, the staff of hoar hairs, the guide of youth, the relief of poverty, the steward of
abundance. Widows also will, I imagine, praise their protector, orphans their father, poor
men their friend, strangers their entertainer, brothers the man of brotherly love, the sick
their physician, whatever be their sickness and the healing they need, the healthy the preserver of health, and all men him who made himself all things to all that he might gain the
majority, if not all.

82. This is my offering to thee, Basil, uttered by the tongue which once was the sweetest
of all to thee, of him who was thy fellow in age and rank. If it have approached thy deserts,
thanks are due to thee, for it was from confidence in thee that I undertook to speak of thee. 
But if it fall far short of thy expectations, what must be our feelings, who are worn out with
age and disease and regret for thee? Yet God is pleased, when we do what we can. Yet
mayest thou gaze upon us from above, thou divine and sacred person; either stay by thy
entreaties our thorn in the flesh,4586 given to us by God for our discipline, or prevail upon
us to bear it boldly, and guide all our life towards that which is most for our profit. And if
we be translated, do thou receive us there also in thine own tabernacle, that, as we dwell
together, and gaze together more clearly and more perfectly upon the holy and blessed
Trinity, of Which we have now in some degree received the image, our longing may at last
be satisfied, by gaining this recompense for all the battles we have fought and the assaults
we have endured. Such are our words on thy behalf: who will there be to praise us, since
we leave this life after thee, even if we offer any topic worthy of words or praise in Christ
Jesus our Lord, to Whom be glory forever? Amen.

2 Cor. xii. 7.

The Second Oration on Easter.

The Second Oration on Easter.

Oration XLV.

The Second Oration on Easter.

ThisOration was not, as its title would perhaps lead us to suppose, delivered immediately
after the first; but an interval of many years elapsed between them, and the two have no connection with each other. Chronologically they are the first and last of S. Gregory's Sermons. 
The Second was delivered in the Church of Arianzus, a village near Nazianzus, where he had
inherited some property, to which he withdrew after resigning the Archbishopric of Constantinople, and then, finding the administration even of the little Bishopric of Nazianzus too
much for his advancing years and declining strength, he retired to Arianzus about the end of
a.d. 383, dying there in 389 or 390. "The exordium of this discourse is quite in the style of the
Bible; the Orator here describes and puts words into the mouth of the Angel of the Resurrection. 
His object is to show the importance of the day's solemnities, and to explain allegorically all
the circumstances of the ancient Passover, applying them to Christ and the Christian life. 
Two passages are borrowed verbatim from the discourse on the Nativity, preached at Constantinople" (Benoît).

The Benedictine Editors profess themselves unable to determine whether this repetition

is due to S. Gregory himself-or to the carelessness of some amanuensis.

I. I will stand upon my watch,4587 saith the venerable Habakkuk; and I will take my
post beside him today on the authority and observation which was given me of the Spirit;
and I will look forth, and will observe what shall be said to me. Well, I have taken my stand,
and looked forth; and behold a man riding on the clouds and he is very high, and his
countenance is as the countenance of Angel,4588 and his vesture as the brightness of piercing
lightning; and he lifts his hand toward the East, and cries with a loud voice. His voice is like
the voice of a trumpet; and round about Him is as it were a multitude of the Heavenly Host;
and he saith, Today is salvation come unto the world, to that which is visible, and to that
which is invisible. Christ is risen from the dead, rise ye with Him. Christ is returned again
to Himself, return ye. Christ is freed from the tomb, be ye freed from the bond of sin. The
gates of hell are opened, and death is destroyed, and the old Adam is put aside, and the New
is fulfilled; if any man be in Christ he is a new creature;4589 be ye renewed. Thus he speaks;
and the rest sing out, as they did before when Christ was manifested to us by His birth on
earth, their glory to God in the highest, on earth, peace, goodwill among men.4590 And

4587 Hab. ii. 1.

Judg. xiii. 6.

2 Cor. v. 17.

The reading εὐδοκία of the Received Text is pronounced by Tischendorf to have less authority than

εὐδοκίας, which he adopts on the testimony of important mss., but chiefly on the strength of a citation and

The Second Oration on Easter.

with them I also utter the same words among you. And would that I might receive a voice
that should rank with the Angel's, and should sound through all the ends of the earth.

II. The Lord's Passover, the Passover, and again I say the Passover to the honour of the
Trinity. This is to us a Feast of feasts and a Solemnity of solemnities4591 as far exalted above
all others (not only those which are merely human and creep on the ground, but even those
which are of Christ Himself, and are celebrated in His honour) as the Sun is above the stars. 
Beautiful indeed yesterday was our splendid array, and our illumination, in which both in
public and private we associated ourselves, every kind of men, and almost every rank, illuminating the night with our crowded fires, formed after the fashion of that great light, both
that with which the heaven above us lights its beacon fires, and that which is above the
heavens, amid the angels (the first luminous nature, next to the first nature of all, because
springing directly from it), and that which is in the Trinity, from which all light derives its
being, parted from the undivided light and honoured. But today's is more beautiful and
more illustrious; inasmuch as yesterday's light was a forerunner of the rising of the Great
Light, and as it were a kind of rejoicing in preparation for the Festival; but today we are
celebrating the Resurrection itself, no longer as an object of expectation, but as having
already come to pass, and gathering the whole world unto itself. Let then different persons
bring forth different fruits and offer different offerings at this season, smaller or greater...such
spiritual offerings as are dear to God...as each may have power. For scarcely Angels themselves could offer gifts worthy of its rank, those first and intellectual and pure beings, who
are also eye-witnesses of the Glory That is on high; if even these can attain the full strain of
praise. We will for our part offer a discourse, the best and most precious thing we
have-especially as we are praising the Word for the blessing which He hath bestowed on
the reasoning creation. I will begin from this point. For I cannot endure, when I am engaged
in offering the sacrifice of the lips concerning the Great Sacrifice and the greatest of days,
to fail to recur to God, and to take my beginning from Him. Therefore I pray you, cleanse
your mind and ears and thoughts, all you who delight in such subjects, since the discourse
will be concerning God, and will be divine; that you may depart filled with delights of a sort

comment three times in Origen, and because all the Latin Fathers read bonae voluntatis. Lachmann, Tregelles,

Westcott, and with some hesitation Alford follow him; though Tregelles and Westcott allow εὐδοκίας a place

in the margin. Wordsworth (giving no reason); and Scrivener because he thinks it makes better sense, read

εὐδοκία, and scout εὐδοκίας; which, however, is found in four of the five oldest mss., and in all the Latin versions

and Fathers. The Greek Fathers, however, all but unanimously support the Received Text.

ἑορτὴ ἑορτῶν, καὶ πανήγυρις πανηγύριον. ἑορτή says Nicetas, is one thing, πανήγυρις another. ἑορτή

is the Commemoration of a Saint; πανήγυρις is Easter, or Ascension, or some other mystical festival. Thus

Synesius calls the Paschal Letters of the Alexandrian Patriarch πανηγυρικὰ γράμματα.

The Second Oration on Easter.

that do not pass away into nothingness. And it shall be at once very full and very concise,
so as neither to distress you by its deficiencies, nor to displease you by satiety.

III. God4592 always was and always is, and always will be; or rather, God always Is.4593 
For Was and Will Be are fragments of our time, and of changeable nature. But He is
Eternal Being; and this is the Name He gives Himself when giving the Oracles to Moses in
the Mount. For in Himself He sums up and contains all Being, having neither beginning
in the past nor end in the future...like some great Sea of Being, limitless and unbounded,
transcending all conception of time and nature, only adumbrated by the mind, and that
very dimly and scantily...not by His Essentials but by His Environment,4594 one image being
got from one source and another from another, and combined into some sort of presentation
of the truth, which escapes us before we have caught it, and which takes to flight before we
have conceived it, blazing forth upon our master-part, even when that is cleansed, as the
lightning flash which will not stay its course does upon our sight...in order, as I conceive,
by that part of it which we can comprehend to draw us to itself (for that which is altogether
incomprehensible is outside the bounds of hope, and not within the compass of endeavour);
and by that part of It which we cannot comprehend to move our wonder; and as an object
of wonder to become more an object of desire; and being desired, to purify; and purifying
to make us like God; so that, when we have become like Himself, God may, to use a bold
expression, hold converse with us as God; being united to us, and known by us; and that
perhaps to the same extent as He already knows those who are known to Him.4595 The
Divine Nature, then, is boundless and hard to understand, and all that we can comprehend
of Him is His boundlessness; even though one may conceive that because He is of a simple
Nature He is therefore either wholly incomprehensible or perfectly comprehensible. For
let us farther enquire what is implied by "is of a simple Nature?" For it is quite certain that
this simplicity is not itself its nature, just as composition is not by itself the essence of compound beings.

IV. And when Infinity is considered from two points of view, beginning and end (for
that which is beyond these and not limited by them is Infinity), when the mind looks into
the depths above, not having where to stand, and leans upon phaenomena to form an idea
of God it calls the Infinite and Unapproachable which it finds there by the name of Unori-

4592 This passage to the end of c. ix. occurs verbatim in the oration on the Theophany, cc. vii.-xiii.

"There is no Past in Eternity, and no Future; for that which is past has ceased to be, and that which is

future has not yet come into existence; but Eternity is only Present; it has no Past which does not still exist nor

any Future which does not yet exist" (S. Augustine de Vera Rel., c. 49).

4594 The Environment here spoken of seems to mean those created Existences of which God is the Self-Ex-

istent Cause.

John x. 15; 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

The Second Oration on Easter.

ginate. And when it looks into the depth below and at the future, it calls Him Undying and
Imperishable. And when it draws a conclusion from the whole, it calls Him Eternal. For
Eternity is neither time nor part of time; for it cannot be measured. But what time measured
by the course of the sun is to us, that Eternity is to the Everlasting; namely a sort of timelike
movement and interval, coextensive with Their Existence. This however is all that I must
now say of God; for the present is not a suitable time, as my present subject is not the doctrine
of God, but that of the Incarnation. And when I say God, I mean Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; for Godhead is neither diffused beyond These, so as to introduce a mob of gods, nor
yet bounded by a smaller compass than These, so as to condemn us for a poverty stricken
conception of Deity, either Judaizing to save the Monarchia, or falling into heathenism by
the multitude of our gods. For the evil on either side is the same, though found in contrary
directions. Thus then is the Holy of Holies, Which is hidden even from the Seraphim, and
is glorified with a thrice-repeated Holy meeting in one ascription of the title Lord and God,
as one of our predecessors has most beautifully and loftily reasoned out.

V. But since this movement of Self-contemplation alone could not satisfy Goodness,
but Good must be poured out and go forth beyond Itself, to multiply the objects of Its beneficence (for this was essential to the highest Goodness), He first conceived the Angelic and
Heavenly Powers. And this conception was a work fulfilled by His Word and perfected by
His Spirit. And so the Secondary Splendours came into being, as the ministers of the Primary
Splendour (whether we are to conceive of them as intelligent Spirits, or as Fire of an immaterial and incorporeal kind, or as some other nature approaching this as near as may be). 
I should like to say that they are incapable of movement in the direction of evil, and susceptible only of the movement of good, as being about God and illuminated with the first Rays
from God (for earthly beings have but the second illumination), but I am obliged to stop
short of saying that they are immovable, and to conceive and speak of them as only difficult
to move, because of him who for His Splendour was called Lucifer, but became and is called
Darkness through his pride; and the Apostate Hosts who are subject to him, creators of evil
by their revolt against good, and our inciters.

VI. Thus then and for these reasons, He gave being to the world of thought, as far as I
can reason on these matters, and estimate great things in my own poor language. Then,
when His first Creation was in good order, He conceives a second world, material and visible;
and this a system of earth and sky and all that is in the midst of them; an admirable creation
indeed when we look at the fair form of every part, but yet more worthy of admiration when
we consider the harmony and unison of the whole, and how each part fits in with every
other in fair order, and all with the whole, tending to the perfect completion of the world
as a Unit. This was to shew that He could call into being not only a nature akin to Himself,
but also one altogether alien to Him. For akin to Deity are those natures which are intellectual, and only to be comprehended by mind; but all of which sense can take cognizance are

The Second Oration on Easter.

utterly alien to It; and of these the furthest removed from it are all those which are entirely
destitute of soul and power of motion.

VII. Mind then and sense, thus distinguished from each other, had remained within
their own boundaries, and bore in themselves the magnificence of the Creator-Word, silent
praisers and thrilling heralds of His mighty work. Not yet was there any mingling of both,
nor any mixture of these opposites, tokens of a greater wisdom and generosity in the creation
of natures; nor as yet were the whole riches of goodness made known. Now the CreatorWord, determining to exhibit this, and to produce a single living being out of both (the invisible and the visible creation, I mean) fashions Man; and taking a body from already existing
matter, and placing in it a Breath taken from Himself (which the Word knew to be an intelligent soul, and the image of God), as a sort of second world, great in littleness, He placed
him on the earth, a new Angel, a mingled worshipper, fully initiated into the visible creation,
but only partially into the intellectual; king of all upon earth, but subject to the King above;
earthly and heavenly; temporal and yet immortal; visible and yet intellectual; halfway between
greatness and lowliness; in one person combining spirit and flesh; spirit because of the favour
bestowed on him, flesh on account of the height to which he had been raised; the one that
he might continue to live and glorify his benefactor, the other that he might suffer, and by
suffering be put in remembrance, and be corrected if he became proud in his greatness; a
living creature, trained here and then moved elsewhere; and to complete the mystery, deified
by its inclination to God...for to this, I think, tends that light of Truth which here we possess
but in measure; that we should both see and experience the Splendour of God, which is
worthy of Him Who made us, and will dissolve us, and remake us after a loftier fashion.

VIII. This being He placed in paradise-whatever that paradise may have been (having
honoured him with the gift of free will, in order that good might belong to him as the result
of his choice, no less than to Him Who had implanted the seeds of it)-to till the immortal
plants, by which is perhaps meant the Divine conceptions, both the simpler and the more
perfect; naked in his simplicity and inartificial life; and without any covering or screen; for
it was fitting that he who was from the beginning should be such. And He gave Him a Law,
as material for his free will to act upon. This Law was a commandment as to what plants
he might partake of, and which one he might not touch. This latter was the Tree of Knowledge; not, however, because it was evil from the beginning when planted; nor was it forbidden
because God grudged it to men-let not the enemies of God wag their tongues in that direction, or imitate the serpent. But it would have been good if partaken of at the proper time;
for the Tree was, according to my theory, Contemplation, which it is only safe for those
who have reached maturity of habit to enter upon; but which is not good for those who are
still somewhat simple and greedy; just as neither is solid food good for those who are yet
tender and have need of milk. But when through the devil's malice and the woman's

The Second Oration on Easter.

caprice,4596 to which she succumbed as the more tender, and which she brought to bear
upon the man, as she was the more apt to persuade-alas for my weakness, for that of my
first father was mine; he forgot the commandment which had been given him, and yielded
to the baleful fruit; and for his sin was banished at once from the tree of life, and from
paradise, and from God; and put on the coats of skins, that is, perhaps, the coarser flesh,
both mortal and contradictory. And this was the first thing which he learnt-his own
shame-and he hid himself from God. Yet here too he makes a gain, namely death and the
cutting off of sin, in order that evil may not be immortal. Thus, his punishment is changed
into a mercy, for it is in mercy, I am persuaded, that God inflicts punishment.

IX. And having first been chastened by many means because his sins were many, whose
root of evil sprang up through divers causes and sundry times, by word, by law, by prophets,
by benefits, by threats, by plagues, by waters, by fires, by wars, by victories, by defeats, by
signs in heaven, and signs in the air, and in the earth, and in the sea; by unexpected changes
of men, of cities, of nations (the object of which was the destruction of wickedness) at last
he needed a stronger remedy, for his diseases were growing worse; mutual slaughters,
adulteries, perjuries, unnatural crimes, and that first and last of all evils, idolatry, and the
transfer of worship from the Creator to the creatures. As these required a greater aid, so
they also obtained a greater. And that was that the Word of God Himself, Who is before
all worlds, the Invisible, the Incomprehensible, the Bodiless, the Beginning of beginning,
the Light of Light, the Source of Life and Immortality, the Image of the Archetype, the Immovable Seal, the Unchangeable Image, the Father's Definition and Word, came to His own
Image, and took on Him Flesh for the sake of our flesh, and mingled Himself with an intelligent soul for my soul's sake, purifying like by like; and in all points except sin was made
Man; conceived by the Virgin, who first in body and soul was purified by the Holy Ghost,
for it was needful both That Child-bearing should be honoured and that Virginity should
receive a higher honour. He came forth then, as God, with That which He had assumed;
one Person in two natures, flesh and Spirit, of which the latter deified the former. O new
commingling; O strange conjunction! the Self-existent comes into Being, the Uncreated is
created, That which cannot be contained is contained by the intervention of an intellectual
soul mediating between the Deity and the corporeity of the flesh. And He who gives riches
becomes poor; for He assumes the poverty of my flesh, that I may assume the riches of His
Godhead. He that is full empties Himself; for He empties Himself of His Glory for a short
while, that I may have a share in His Fulness. What is the riches of His Goodness? What
is this mystery that is around me? I had a share in the Image and I did not keep it; He partakes of my flesh that He may both save the Image and make the flesh immortal. He communicates a Second Communion, far more marvellous than the first, inasmuch as then He

4596 Wisd. ii. 24.

The Second Oration on Easter.

imparted the better nature, but now He Himself assumes the worse. This is more godlike
than the former action; this is loftier in the eyes of all men of understanding.

X. But perhaps some one of those who are too impetuous and festive may say, "What
has all this to do with us? Spur on your horse to the goal; talk to us about the Festival and
the reasons for our being here to-day." Yes, this is what I am about to do, although I have
begun at a somewhat previous point, being compelled to do so by the needs of my argument. 
There will be no harm in the eyes of scholars and lovers of the beautiful if we say a few words
about the word Pascha itself, for such an addition will not be useless in their ears. This great
and venerable Pascha is called Phaska by the Hebrews in their own language; and the word
means Passing Over. Historically, from their flight and migration from Egypt into the Land
of Canaan; spiritually, from the progress and ascent from things below to things above and
to the Land of Promise. And we observe that a thing which we often find to have happened
in Scripture, the change of certain nouns from an uncertain to a clearer sense, or from a
coarser to a more refined, has taken place in this instance. For some people, supposing this
to be a name of the Sacred Passion, and in consequence Grecizing the word by changing
Phi and Kappa into Pi and Chi, called the Day Pascha.4597 And custom took it up and
confirmed the word, with the help of the ears of most people, to whom it had a more pious
sound.

XI. But before our time the Holy Apostle declared that the Law was but a shadow of
things to come,4598 which are conceived by thought. And God too, who in still older times
gave oracles to Moses, said when giving laws concerning these things, See thou make all
things according to the pattern shewed thee in the Mount,4599 when He shewed him the
visible things as an adumbration of and design for the things that are invisible. And I am
persuaded that none of these things has been ordered in vain, none without a reason, none
in a grovelling manner or unworthy of the legislation of God and the ministry of Moses,
even though it be difficult in each type to find a theory descending to the most delicate details,
to every point about the Tabernacle itself, and its measures and materials, and the Levites
and Priests who carried them, and all the particulars which were enacted about the Sacrifices
and the purifications and the Offerings;4600 and though these are only to be understood by

Pascha represents the Hebrew PHSKH. Throughout 2 Chron. the LXX. represents the word by Phasek,

which like Pascha is a transliteration of the Hebrew word. The form which the transliteration takes is due to

the fact that the Greek language does not tolerate these two aspirates in juxtapostion. S. Gregory is correct in

remarking that Pascha has no real connection with πάσχω (to suffer), though it might appear to unlearned ears

that it has.

4598 Heb. x. 1.

Exod. xxv. 40.

ἀφαίρεμα is given by the Lexicons as the Heave-Offering, and it is certainly used in that sense among

others (all sacrificial) in the LXX. Suicer, however, follows Suidas in regarding the word as quite general; he

The Second Oration on Easter.

those who rank with Moses in virtue, or have made the nearest approach to his learning. 
For in that Mount itself God is seen by men; on the one hand through His own descent from
His lofty abode, on the other through His drawing us up from our abasement on earth, that
the Incomprehensible may be in some degree, and as far as is safe, comprehended by a
mortal nature. For in no other way is it possible for the denseness of a material body and
an imprisoned mind to come into consciousness of God, except by His assistance. Then
therefore all men do not seem to have been deemed worthy of the same rank and position;
but one of one place and one of another, each, I think, according to the measure of his own
purification. Some have even been altogether driven away, and only permitted to hear the
Voice from on high, namely those whose dispositions are altogether like wild beasts, and
who are unworthy of divine mysteries.

XII. But we, standing midway between those whose minds are utterly dense on the one
side, and on the other those who are very contemplative and exalted, that we may neither
remain quite idle and immovable, nor yet be more busy than we ought, and fall short of and
be estranged from our purpose-for the former course is Jewish and very low, and the latter
is only fit for the dream-soothsayer, and both alike are to be condemned-let us say our say
upon these matters, so far as is within our reach, and not very absurd, or exposed to the ridicule of the multitude. Our belief is that since it was needful that we, who had fallen in
consequence of the original sin, and had been led away by pleasure, even as far as idolatry
and unlawful bloodshed, should be recalled and raised up again to our original position
through the tender mercy of God our Father, Who could not endure that such a noble work
of His own hands as Man should be lost to Him; the method of our new creation, and of
what should be done, was this:-that all violent remedies were disapproved, as not likely to
persuade us, and as quite possibly tending to add to the plague, through our chronic pride;
but that God disposed things to our restoration by a gentle and kindly method of cure. For
a crooked sapling will not bear a sudden bending the other way, or violence from the hand
that would straighten it, but will be more quickly broken than straightened; and a horse of
a hot temper and above a certain age will not endure the tyranny of the bit without some
coaxing and encouragement. Therefore the Law is given to us as an assistance, like a
boundary wall between God and idols, drawing us away from one and to the Other. And
it concedes a little at first, that it may receive that which is greater. It concedes the Sacrifices
for a time, that it may establish God in us, and then when the fitting time shall come may
abolish the Sacrifices also; thus wisely changing our minds by gradual removals, and
bringing us over to the Gospel when we have already been trained to a prompt obedience.

also quotes Zonaras' definition, "Quod offertur ἀφαίρεμα dicitur, quod a toto mactatae animantis corpore ab-

stractum sit." Balsamon, according to the same authority, makes it the portion which was severed from the

carcase of the victim and set apart for the Priest (i.e., the heave-offering, Lev. vii. 14, 32).

The Second Oration on Easter.

XIII. Thus then and for this cause the written Law came in, gathering us into Christ;
and this is the account of the Sacrifices as I account for them. And that you may not be ignorant of the depth of His Wisdom and the riches of His unsearchable judgments,4601 He
did not leave even these unhallowed altogether, or useless, or with nothing in them but mere
blood.4602 But that great, and if I may say so, in Its first nature unsacrificeable Victim, was
intermingled with the Sacrifices of the Law, and was a purification, not for a part of the
world, nor for a short time, but for the whole world and for all time. For this reason a Lamb
was chosen for its innocence, and its clothing of the original nakedness. For such is the
Victim, That was offered for us, Who is both in Name and fact the Garment of incorruption. 
And He was a perfect Victim not only on account of His Godhead, than which nothing is
more perfect; but also on account of that which He assumed having been anointed with
Deity, and having become one with That which anointed It, and I am bold to say, made
equal with God. A Male, because offered for Adam; or rather the Stronger for the strong,
when the first Man had fallen under sin; and chiefly because there is in Him nothing feminine,
nothing unmanly; but He burst from the bonds of the Virgin-Mother's womb with much
power, and a Male was brought forth by the Prophetess,4603 as Isaiah declares the good
tidings. And of a year old, because He is the Sun of Righteousness4604 setting out from
heaven, and circumscribed by His visible Nature, and returning unto Himself.4605 And
"The blessed crown of Goodness,"-being on every side equal to Himself and alike; and not
only this, but also as giving life to all the circle of the virtues, gently commingled and inter-

4601 Rom. xi. 33.

The Jewish Sacrifices had a deep inner meaning and mystery. In a limited sense they may be called

Sacraments of the future Atonement, which they prefigured and appealed to. But only in a limited sense can

they be so called, because they did not convey grace to the soul, but only appealed to the grace to come; and so

the Sin-offerings of the Law are only said to cover, not to take away sin. They removed the spiritual disqualific-

ation for worship; but they did not restore full Spiritual Communion with God. Still they were not altogether

unhallowed or useless like those of the heathen, inasmuch as they did point forward and plead the merits of the

One true Sacrifice.

Isa. xiii. 3.

4604 Mal. iv. 2.

The Greek here is very obscure. The meaning seems to be that which Nicetas suggests, viz.:-that our

Lord in coming to earth and becoming Incarnate did not in His Divine Nature leave Heaven, but was, while still

here on earth in His own words, "The Son of Man Which is in Heaven."

The Second Oration on Easter.

mixed with each other, according to the Law of Love and Order.4606 And Immaculate and
guileless, as being the Healer of faults, and of the defects and taints that come from sin. For
though He both took on Him our sins and bare our diseases,4607 yet He did not Himself
suffer aught that needed healing. For He was tempted in all points like as we are yet without
sin.4608 For he that persecuted the Light that shineth in darkness could not overtake Him.
XIV. What more? The First Month is introduced, or rather the beginning of months,
whether it was so among the Hebrews from the beginning, or was made so later on this account, and became the first in consequence of the Mystery; and the tenth of the Month, for
this is the most complete number, of units the first perfect unit, and the parent of perfection. 
And it is kept until the fifth day, perhaps because the Victim, of Whom I am speaking,
purifies the five senses, from which comes falling into sin, and around which the war rages,
inasmuch as they are open to the incitements to sin. And it was chosen, not only out of the
lambs, but also out of the inferior species, which are placed on the left hand4609-the kids;
because He is sacrificed not only for the righteous, but also for sinners; and perhaps even
more for these, inasmuch as we have greater need of His mercy. And we need not be surprised that a lamb for a house should be required as the best course, but if that could not
be, then one might be obtained by contributions (owing to poverty) for the houses of a
family; because it is clearly best that each individual should suffice for his own perfecting,
and should offer his own living sacrifice holy unto God Who called him, being consecrated
at all times and in every respect. But if that cannot be, then that those who are akin in virtue
and of like disposition should be made use of as helpers. For I think this provision means
that we should communicate of the Sacrifice to those who are nearest, if there be need.

4606 Christ is "a blessed crown of goodness" according to the saying of David, Thou shalt bless the crown of

the year with Thy goodness (Ps. lxv. 11). The idea of a year is taken from the Sun; that of the crown from the

year (for the year is a circle guarded with four seasons), and from the circle again equality. Therefore the crown

is Christ, as adorning and beautifying the minds of believers. But the year of Goodness was that time when

Christ moved by goodness was declaring the Gospel, as Isaiah saith of Him, "He hath sent Me to preach the

Gospel to the poor, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord" (Isa. lxi. 1, 2). Thus the Crown is on every side

equal. For if one draw a line from the upper side to the lower, and the same in a transverse direction, all the

intervals will be equal. And the Crown is like itself, because its figure is seen alike on every side, for on every

side it is seen as a round. Therefore Christ as to His Humanity is called a Crown of Righteousness, as composed

of all the virtues, and having no end of His goodness and righteousness; and of that righteousness one quality

is equality, that is, it allows neither excess nor defect. For excess and defect do not arise from virtue and right-

eousness, but from fault and unrighteousness (Nicetas).

Isa. liii. 4.

4608 Heb. iv. 15.

4609 Matt. xxv. 33.

The Second Oration on Easter.

XV. Then comes the Sacred Night, the Anniversary of the confused darkness of the
present life, into which the primaeval darkness is dissolved, and all things come into life and
rank and form, and that which was chaos is reduced to order. Then we flee from Egypt,
that is from sullen persecuting sin; and from Pharaoh the unseen tyrant, and the bitter
taskmasters, changing our quarters to the world above; and are delivered from the clay and
the brickmaking, and from the husks and dangers of this fleshly condition, which for most
men is only not overpowered by mere husklike calculations. Then the Lamb is slain, and
act and word are sealed with the Precious Blood; that is, habit and action, the sideposts of
our doors; I mean, of course, of the movements of mind and opinion, which are rightly
opened and closed by contemplation, since there is a limit even to thoughts. Then the last
and gravest plague upon the persecutors, truly worthy of the night; and Egypt mourns the
first-born of her own reasonings and actions which are also called in the Scripture the Seed
of the Chaldeans4610 removed, and the children of Babylon dashed against the rocks and
destroyed;4611 and the whole air is full of the cry and clamour of the Egyptians; and then
the Destroyer of them shall withdraw from us in reverence of the Unction. Then the removal
of leaven; that is, of the old and sour wickedness, not of that which is quickening and makes
bread; for seven days, a number which is of all the most mystical,4612 and is co-ordinate
with this present world, that we may not lay in provision of any Egyptian dough, or relic of
Pharisaic or ungodly teaching.

XVI. Well, let them lament; we will feed on the Lamb toward evening-for Christ's
Passion was in the completion of the ages; because too He communicated His Disciples in
the evening with His Sacrament, destroying the darkness of sin; and not sodden, but
roast-that our word may have in it nothing that is unconsidered or watery, or easily made
away with; but may be entirely consistent and solid, and free from all that is impure and
from all vanity. And let us be aided by the good coals,4613 kindling and purifying our minds

Judith v. 6.

Ps. cxxxviii. 9.

4612 We are to part with leaven for seven days (Exod. xii. 15), that is, with sin for the whole week of this life. 

The number Seven Days signifies the passing of time which revolves in weeks. And this number is mystical,

because it is virgin and signifies virginity and the angelic life; for it alone, as arithmeticians teach, of all the

numbers within the decade, is neither a multiple nor a measure, and also contains in itself the Four and the

Three. For there are four elements of the world, and the Trinity is their Creator. He calls it co-ordinate with

the world, because the world was made in seven days, and again because when seven thousand years are completed

the end of the world is to come (Nicetas). S. Augustine (Civ. Dei. c. ii. 31) says that the number Seven often

stands for the Universe, because it is made up of Four which is altogether even (2 and 2 the sum of two even

numbers) and Three which is altogether uneven (1 and 1 and 1).

Isa. vi. 6.

The Second Oration on Easter.

from Him That cometh to send fire on the earth,4614 that shall destroy all evil habits, and
to hasten its kindling. Whatsoever then there be, of solid and nourishing in the Word, shall
be eaten with the inward parts and hidden things of the mind, and shall be consumed and
given up to spiritual digestion; aye, from head to foot, that is, from the first contemplations
of Godhead to the very last thoughts about the Incarnation. Neither let us carry aught of it
abroad, nor leave it till the morning; because most of our Mysteries may not be carried out
to them that are outside, nor is there beyond this night any further purification; and procrastination is not creditable to those who have a share in the Word. For just as it is good and
well-pleasing to God not to let anger last through the day,4615 but to get rid of it before
sunset, whether you take this of time or in a mystical sense, for it is not safe for us that the
Sun of Righteousness should go down upon our wrath; so too we ought not to let such Food
remain all night, nor to put it off till to-morrow. But whatever is of bony nature and not fit
for food and hard for us even to understand, this must not be broken; that is, badly divined
and misconceived (I need not say that in the history not a bone of Jesus was broken, even
though His death was hastened by His crucifiers on account of the Sabbath);4616 nor must
it be stripped off and thrown away, lest that which is holy should be given to the dogs,4617
that is, to the evil hearers of the Word; just as the glorious pearl of the Word is not to be
cast before swine; but it shall be consumed with the fire with which the burnt offerings also
are consumed, being refined and preserved by the Spirit That searcheth and knoweth all
things, not destroyed in the waters, nor scattered abroad as the calf's head which was hastily
made by Israel was by Moses,4618 for a reproach for their hardness of heart.

XVII. Nor would it be right for us to pass over the manner of this eating either, for the
Law does not do so, but carries its mystical labour even to this point in the literal enactment. 
Let us consume the Victim in haste, eating It with unleavened bread, with bitter herbs, and
with our loins girded, and our shoes on our feet, and leaning on staves like old men; with
haste, that we fall not into that fault which was forbidden to Lot4619 by the commandment,
that we look not around, nor stay in all that neighbourhood, but that we escape to the

Luke xii. 49.

Ephes. iv. 26.

S. Gregory does not mean to say that our Lord's death was actually hastened by violent actions on the

part of the Jews, which we know was not the case; but that they were anxious that it should take place before the

Sabbath began. The two thieves, who were still living, received the coup de grace from the Roman soldiers, who

broke their legs; but our Lord, much to their astonishment was dead already, so this course was not taken with

Him, but His side was pierced with a spear.

4617 Matt. vii. 6.

Exod. xxxii. 20.

4619 Gen. xix. 17.

The Second Oration on Easter.

mountain, that we be not overtaken by the strange fire of Sodom, nor be congealed into a
pillar of salt in consequence of our turning back to wickedness; for this is the result of delay. 
With bitter herbs, for a life according to the Will of God is bitter and arduous, especially to
beginners, and higher than pleasures. For although the new yoke is easy and the burden
light,4620 as you are told, yet this is on account of the hope and the reward, which is far more
abundant than the hardships of this life. If it were not so, who would not say that the Gospel
is more full of toil and trouble than the enactments of the Law? For, while the Law prohibits
only the completed acts of sin, we are condemned for the causes also, almost as if they were
acts. The Law says, Thou shalt not commit adultery; but you may not even desire, kindling
passion by curious and earnest looks. Thou shalt not kill, says the Law; but you are not even
to return a blow, but on the contrary are to offer yourself to the smiter. How much more
ascetic is the Gospel than the Law! Thou shalt not forswear thyself is the Law; but you are
not to swear at all, either a greater or a lesser oath, for an oath is the parent of perjury. Thou
shalt not join house to house, nor field to field, oppressing the poor;4621 but you are to set
aside willingly even your just possessions, and to be stripped for the poor, that without encumbrance you may take up the Cross4622 and be enriched with the unseen riches.

XVIII. And let the loins of the unreasoning animals be unbound and loose, for they
have not the gift of reason which can overcome pleasure (it is not needful to say that even
they know the limit of natural movement). But let that part of your being which is the seat
of passion, and which neighs,4623 as Holy Scripture calls it, when sweeping away this
shameful passion, be restrained by a girdle of continence, so that you may eat the Passover
purely, having mortified your members which are upon the earth,4624 and copying the
girdle4625 of John, the Hermit and Forerunner and great Herald of the Truth. Another
girdle I know, the soldierly and manly one, I mean, from which the Euzoni of Syria and
certain Monozoni4626 take their name. And it is in respect of this too that God saith in an
oracle to Job, "Nay, but gird up thy loins like a man, and give a manly answer."4627 With

4620 Matt. xi. 20.

Isa. v. 8.

4622 Mark x. 21.

Jer. v. 8.

4624 Col. iii. 5.

4625 Matt. iii. 4.

The expression is often used in the LXX. to represent the word (cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0), translated A Band, especially in 2

Kings.

Job xxxviii. 3.

The Second Oration on Easter.

this also holy David boasts that he is girded with strength from God,4628 and speaks of God
Himself as clothed with strength4629 and girded about with power-against the ungodly of
course-though perhaps some may prefer to see in this a declaration of the abundance of
His power, and, as it were, its restraint, just as also He clothes Himself with Light as with a
garment.4630 For who shall endure His unrestrained power and light? Do I enquire what
there is common to the loins and to truth? What then is the meaning to S. Paul of the expression, "Stand, therefore, having your loins girt about with truth?"4631 Is it perhaps that
contemplation is to restrain concupiscence, and not to allow it to be carried in another direction? For that which is disposed to love in a particular direction will not have the same
power towards other pleasures.

XIX. And as to shoes, let him who is about to touch the Holy Land which the feet of
God have trodden, put them off, as Moses did upon the Mount,4632 that he may bring there
nothing dead; nothing to come between Man and God. So too if any disciple is sent to
preach the Gospel, let him go in a spirit of philosophy and without excess, inasmuch as he
must, besides being without money and without staff and with but one coat, also be barefooted,4633 that the feet of those who preach the Gospel of Peace and every other good may
appear beautiful.4634 But he who would flee from Egypt and the things of Egypt must put
on shoes for safety's sake, especially in regard to the scorpions and snakes in which Egypt
so abounds, so as not to be injured by those which watch the heel4635 which also we are
bidden to tread under foot.4636 And concerning the staff and the signification of it, my belief
is as follows. There is one I know to lean upon, and another which belongs to Pastors and
Teachers, and which corrects human sheep. Now the Law prescribes to you the staff to lean
upon, that you may not break down in your mind when you hear of God's Blood, and His
Passion, and His death; and that you may not be carried away to heresy in your defence of
God; but without shame and without doubt may eat the Flesh and drink the Blood, if you
are desirous of true life, neither disbelieving His words about His Flesh, nor offended at
those about His Passion. Lean upon this, and stand firm and strong, in nothing shaken by
the adversaries nor carried away by the plausibility of their arguments. Stand upon thy

Ps. xviii. 32.

Ib. xciii. 1.

Ib. civ. 2.

Eph. v. 14.

Exod. iii. 5.

4633 Matt. x. 9.

Isa. lii. 7.

4635 Gen. iii. 15.

Luke x. 19.

The Second Oration on Easter.

High Place; in the Courts of Jerusalem4637 place thy feet; lean upon the Rock, that thy steps
in God be not shaken.

XX. What sayest thou? Thus it hath pleased Him that thou shouldest come forth4638
out of Egypt, the iron furnace; that thou shouldest leave behind the idolatry of that country,
and be led by Moses and his lawgiving and martial rule. I give thee a piece of advice which
is not my own, or rather which is very much my own, if thou consider the matter spiritually. 
Borrow from the Egyptians vessels of gold and silver;4639 with these take thy journey; supply
thyself for the road with the goods of strangers, or rather with thine own. There is money
owing to thee, the wages of thy bondage and of thy brickmaking; be clever on thy side too
in asking retribution; be an honest robber. Thou didst suffer wrong there whilst thou wast
fighting with the clay (that is, this troublesome and filthy body) and wast building cities
foreign and unsafe, whose memorial perishes with a cry.4640 What then? Dost thou come
out for nothing and without wages? But why wilt thou leave to the Egyptians and to the
powers of thine adversaries that which they have gained by wickedness, and will spend with
yet greater wickedness? It does not belong to them: they have ravished it, and have sacrilegiously taken it as plunder from Him who saith, The silver is Mine and the gold is Mine,4641
and I give it to whom I will. Yesterday it was theirs, for it was permitted to be so; to-day
the Master takes it and gives it to thee,4642 that thou mayest make a good and saving use of
it. Let us make to ourselves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness,4643 that when we
fail, they may receive us in the time of judgment.

XXI. If you are a Rachel or a Leah, a patriarchal and great soul, steal whatever idols of
your father you can find;4644 not, however, that you may keep them, but that you may destroy
them; and if you are a wise Israelite remove them to the Land of the Promise, and let the
persecutor grieve over the loss of them, and learn through being outwitted that it was vain
for him to tyrannize over and keep in bondage better men than himself. If thou doest this,
and comest out of Egypt thus, I know well that thou shalt be guided by the pillar of fire and

Ps. cxxii. 2.

ἐξελθεῖν c. acc. loci; a very rare use, but found in classical authors.

Exod. xi. 2.

Ps. ix. 6.

4641 Hag. ii. 8.

4642 Matt. xx. 14.

Luke xvi. 9.

4644 Gen. xxxi. 19.

The Second Oration on Easter.

cloud by night and day.4645 The wilderness shall be tamed for thee, and the Sea divided;4646
Pharaoh shall be drowned;4647 bread shall be rained down:4648 the rock shall become a
fountain;4649 Amalek shall be conquered, not with arms alone, but with the hostile hand of
the righteous forming both prayers and the invincible trophy of the Cross;4650 the River
shall be cut off; the sun shall stand still; and the moon be restrained;4651 walls shall be
overthrown even without engines;4652 swarms of hornets shall go before thee to make a way
for Israel, and to hold the Gentiles in check;4653 and all the other events which are told in
the history after these and with these (not to make a long story) shall be given thee of God. 
Such is the feast thou art keeping to-day; and in this manner I would have thee celebrate
both the Birthday and the Burial of Him Who was born for thee and suffered for thee. Such
is the Mystery of the Passover; such are the mysteries sketched by the Law and fulfilled by
Christ, the Abolisher of the letter, the Perfecter of the Spirit, who by His Passion taught us
how to suffer, and by His glorification grants us to be glorified with Him.

XXII.4654 Now we are to examine another fact and dogma, neglected by most people,
but in my judgment well worth enquiring into. To Whom was that Blood offered that was
shed for us, and why was It shed? I mean the precious and famous Blood of our God and
High priest and Sacrifice. We were detained in bondage by the Evil One, sold under sin,
and receiving pleasure in exchange for wickedness. Now, since a ransom belongs only to
him who holds in bondage, I ask to whom was this offered, and for what cause? If to the
Evil One, fie upon the outrage! If the robber receives ransom, not only from God, but a
ransom which consists of God Himself, and has such an illustrious payment for his tyranny,
a payment for whose sake it would have been right for him to have left us alone altogether. 
But if to the Father, I ask first, how? For it was not by Him that we were being oppressed;
and next, On what principle did the Blood of His Only begotten Son delight the Father,
Who would not receive even Isaac, when he was being offered by his Father, but changed
the sacrifice, putting a ram in the place of the human victim?4655 Is it not evident that the

Exod. xiii. 20.

Ib. xiv. 21.

Exod. xiv. 28.

Ib. xvi. 15.

Ib. xvii. 6.

Ib. xvii. 10, 11.

Josh. iii. 15, 16.

Ib. x. 13.

Ib. vi. 20.

Ib. xxiv. 12.

4655 Gen. xxii. 11, &c.

The Second Oration on Easter.

Father accepts Him, but neither asked for Him nor demanded Him; but on account of the
Incarnation, and because Humanity must be sanctified by the Humanity of God,4656 that
He might deliver us Himself, and overcome the tyrant, and draw us to Himself by the mediation of His Son, Who also arranged this to the honour of the Father, Whom it is manifest
that He obeys in all things? So much we have said of Christ; the greater part of what we
might say shall be reverenced with silence. But that brazen serpent4657 was hung up as a
remedy for the biting serpents, not as a type of Him that suffered for us, but as a contrast;
and it saved those that looked upon it, not because they believed it to live, but because it
was killed, and killed with it the powers that were subject to it, being destroyed as it deserved. 
And what is the fitting epitaph for it from us? "O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where
is thy victory?"4658 Thou art overthrown by the Cross; thou art slain by Him who is the
Giver of life; thou art without breath, dead, without motion, even though thou keepest the
form of a serpent lifted up on high on a pole.

XXIII. Now we will partake of a Passover which is still typical; though it is plainer than
the old one. For that is ever new which is now becoming known. It is ours to learn what is
that drinking and that enjoyment, and His to teach and communicate the Word to His disciples. For teaching is food, even to the Giver of food. Come hither then, and let us partake
of the Law, but in a Gospel manner, not a literal one; perfectly, not imperfectly; eternally,
not temporarily. Let us make our Head, not the earthly Jerusalem, but the heavenly City;4659
not that which is now trodden under foot by armies,4660 but that which is glorified by Angels. 
Let us sacrifice not young calves, nor lambs that put forth horns and hoofs,4661 in which
many parts are destitute of life and feeling; but let us sacrifice to God the sacrifice of praise
upon the heavenly Altar, with the heavenly dances; let us hold aside the first veil; let us approach the second, and look into the Holy of Holies.4662 Shall I say that which is a greater
thing yet? Let us sacrifice ourselves to God; or rather let us go on sacrificing throughout
every day and at every moment. Let us accept anything for the Word's sake. By sufferings
let us imitate His Passion: by our blood let us reverence His Blood: let us gladly mount

4656 Have we not here the germ of the idea, afterwards known as the Scotist, that the Incarnation was the

purpose of God independently of the Fall, for the perfecting of Humanity; but that the Passion and death of

Incarnate God were the direct result of the sin of man?

4657 Num. xxi. 9.

4658 Hos. xiii. 14 and 1 Cor. xv. 55.

4659 Heb. xii. 22.

Luke xxi. 20-24.

Ps. lxiv. 32.

4662 Heb. xiii. 15 and x. 20.

The Second Oration on Easter.

upon the Cross. Sweet are the nails, though they be very painful. For to suffer with Christ
and for Christ is better than a life of ease with others.

XXIV. If you are a Simon of Cyrene,4663 take up the Cross and follow. If you are crucified with Him as a robber,4664 acknowledge God as a penitent robber. If even He was
numbered among the transgressors4665 for you and your sin, do you become law-abiding
for His sake. Worship Him Who was hanged for you, even if you yourself are hanging;
make some gain even from your wickedness; purchase salvation by your death; enter with
Jesus into Paradise,4666 so that you may learn from what you have fallen.4667 Contemplate
the glories that are there; let the murderer die outside with his blasphemies; and if you be a
Joseph of Arimathaea,4668 beg the Body from him that crucified Him, make thine own that
which cleanses the world.4669 If you be a Nicodemus, the worshipper of God by night, bury
Him with spices.4670 If you be a Mary, or another Mary, or a Salome, or a Joanna, weep in
the early morning. Be first to see the stone taken away,4671 and perhaps you will see the
Angels and Jesus Himself. Say something; hear His Voice. If He say to you, Touch Me
not,4672 stand afar off; reverence the Word, but grieve not; for He knoweth those to whom
He appeareth first. Keep the feast of the Resurrection; come to the aid of Eve who was first
to fall, of Her who first embraced the Christ, and made Him known to the disciples. Be a
Peter or a John; hasten to the Sepulchre, running together, running against one another,
vying in the noble race.4673 And even if you be beaten in speed, win the victory of zeal; not
Looking into the tomb, but Going in. And if, like a Thomas, you were left out when the
disciples were assembled to whom Christ shews Himself, when you do see Him be not
faithless;4674 and if you do not believe, then believe those who tell you; and if you cannot
believe them either, then have confidence in the print of the nails. If He descend into
Hell,4675 descend with Him. Learn to know the mysteries of Christ there also, what is the

4663 Mark xv. 21.

Luke xxiii. 42.

Isa. liii. 12.

Luke xxiii. 43.

4667 Rev. ii. 5.

Luke xxiii. 52.

1 John i. 7.

John xix. 39.

Ib. xx. 11, etc.

Ib. xxi. 17.

Ib. xx. 3, 4.

Ib. xx. 25.

1 Pet. iii. 19.

The Second Oration on Easter.

providential purpose of the twofold descent, to save all men absolutely by His manifestation,
or there too only them that believe.

XXV. And if He ascend up into Heaven,4676 ascend with Him. Be one of those angels
who escort Him, or one of those who receive Him. Bid the gates be lifted up,4677 or be made
higher, that they may receive Him, exalted after His Passion. Answer to those who are in
doubt because He bears up with Him His body and the tokens of His Passion, which He
had not when He came down, and who therefore inquire, "Who is this King of Glory?" that
it is the Lord strong and mighty, as in all things that He hath done from time to time and
does, so now in His battle and triumph for the sake of Mankind. And give to the doubting
of the question the twofold answer. And if they marvel and say as in Isaiah's drama Who
is this that cometh from Edom and from the things of earth? Or How are the garments red
of Him that is without blood or body, as of one that treads in the full wine-press?4678 set
forth the beauty of the array of the Body that suffered, adorned by the Passion, and made
splendid by the Godhead, than which nothing can be more lovely or more beautiful.

XXVI.4679 To this what will those cavillers say, those bitter reasoners about Godhead,
those detractors of all things that are praiseworthy, those darkeners of Light, uncultured in
respect of Wisdom, for whom Christ died in vain, unthankful creatures, the work of the
Evil One. Do you turn this benefit into a reproach to God? Will you deem Him little on
this account, that He humbled Himself for your sake, and because to seek for that which
had wandered the Good Shepherd, He who layeth down His life for the sheep,4680 came
upon the mountains and hills upon which you used to sacrifice,4681 and found the wandering
one; and having found it, took it upon His shoulders,4682 on which He also bore the wood;
and having borne it, brought it back to the life above; and having brought it back, numbered
it among those who have never strayed. That He lit a candle,4683 His own flesh, and swept
the house, by cleansing away the sin of the world, and sought for the coin, the Royal Image
that was all covered up with passions, and calls together His friends, the Angelic Powers, at
the finding of the coin, and makes them sharers of His joy, as He had before made them
sharers of the secret of His Incarnation? That the Light that is exceeding bright should follow
the Candle-Forerunner,4684 and the Word, the Voice, and the Bridegroom, the Bridegroom's

Luke xxiv. 51.

Ps. xxiv. 7, 10.

Isa. lxiii. 1.

4679 This passage, to nearly the end of c. XXVII., is taken from the Oration on the Nativity, cc. XIII-XIV.

John x. 11.

John v. 35.

4682 Hos. iv. 13.

Luke xv. 4, 5.

Ib. xv. 8, 9.

The Second Oration on Easter.

friend,4685 that prepared for the Lord a peculiar people4686 and cleansed them by the water4687 in preparation for the Spirit? Do you Reproach God with this? Do you conceive of
Him as less because He girds Himself with a towel and washes His disciples,4688 and shows
that humiliation is the best road to exaltation;4689 because He humbles Himself for the sake
of the soul that is bent down to the ground,4690 that He may even exalt with Himself that
which is bent double under a weight of sin? How comes it that you do not also charge it
upon Him as a crime that He eateth with Publicans4691 and at Publicans' tables, and makes
disciples of Publicans4692 that He too may make some gain. And what gain? The salvation
of sinners. If so, one must blame the physician for stooping over suffering and putting up
with evil smells in order to give health to the sick; and him also who leans over the ditch,
that he may, according to the Law, save the beast that has fallen into it.

XXVII. He was sent, but sent according to His Manhood (for He was of two Natures),
since He was hungry and thirsty and weary, and was distressed and wept, according to the
Laws of human nature. But even if He were sent also as God, what of that? Consider the
Mission to be the good pleasure of the Father, to which He refers all that concerns Himself,
both that He may honour the Eternal Principle, and that He may avoid the appearance of
being a rival God. For He is said on the one hand to have been betrayed, and on the other
it is written that He gave Himself up; and so too that He was raised and taken up by the
Father, and also that of His own power He rose and ascended. The former belongs to the
Good Pleasure, the latter to His own Authority; but you dwell upon all that diminishes Him,
while you ignore all that exalts Him. For instance, you score that He suffered, but you do
not add "of His own Will." Ah, what things has the Word even now to suffer! By some He
is honoured as God but confused with the Father; by others He is dishonoured as Flesh, and
is severed from God. With whom shall He be most angry-or rather which shall He forgive-those who falsely contract Him, or those who divide Him? For the former ought to
have made a distinction, and the latter to have made a Union, the one in number, the other
in Godhead. Do you stumble at His Flesh? So did the Jews. Do you call Him a Samaritan,4693
and the rest which I will not utter? This did not even the demons, O man more unbelieving

Ib. i. 23; iii. 9, 29.

4686 A reminiscence of S. Luke i. 17.

4687 Matt. iii. 11.

John xiii. 4, 5.

4689 Matt. xxiii. 12.

Luke xiii. 10, etc.

4691 Mark ii. 15, 16.

Luke xv. 2.

John viii. 48.

The Second Oration on Easter.

than demons, and more stupid than Jews. The Jews recognized the title Son as expressing
equal rank; and the demons knew that He who drove them out was God, for they were
persuaded by their own experience. But you will not either admit the equality or confess
the Godhead. It would have been better for you to have been circumcised and a demoniac-to reduce the matter to an absurdity-than in uncircumcision and robust health to be
thus ill and ungodly disposed. But for our war with such men, let it be brought to an end
by their returning, however late, to a sound mind, if they will; or else if they will not, let it
be postponed to another occasion, if they continue as they are. Anyhow, we will have no
fear when contending for the Trinity with the help of the Trinity.

XXVIII. It is now needful for us to sum up our discourse as follows: We were created
that we might be made happy. We were made happy when we were created. We were entrusted with Paradise that we might enjoy life. We received a Commandment that we might
obtain a good repute by keeping it; not that God did not know what would take place, but
because He had laid down the law of Free Will. We were deceived because we were the
objects of envy. We were cast out because we transgressed. We fasted because we refused
to fast, being overpowered by the Tree of Knowledge. For the Commandment was ancient,
coeval with ourselves, and was a kind of education of our souls and curb of luxury, to which
we were reasonably made subject, in order that we might recover by keeping it that which
we had lost by not keeping it. We needed an Incarnate God, a God put to death, that we
might live. We were put to death together with Him, that we might be cleansed; we rose
again with Him because we were put to death with Him; we were glorified with Him, because
we rose again with Him.

XXIX. Many indeed are the miracles of that time: God crucified; the sun darkened and
again rekindled; for it was fitting that the creatures should suffer with their Creator; the veil
rent; the Blood and Water shed from His Side; the one as from a man, the other as above
man; the rocks rent for the Rock's sake; the dead raised for a pledge of the final Resurrection
of all men; the Signs at the Sepulchre and after the Sepulchre, which none can worthily celebrate; and yet none of these equal to the Miracle of my salvation. A few drops of Blood
recreate the whole world, and become to all men what rennet is to milk, drawing us together
and compressing us into unity.

XXX. But, O Pascha, great and holy and purifier of all the world-for I will speak to
thee as to a living person-O Word of God and Light and Life and Wisdom and Might-for
I rejoice in all Thy names-O Offspring and Expression and Signet of the Great Mind; O
Word conceived and Man contemplated, Who bearest all things, binding them by the Word
of Thy power; receive this discourse, not now as firstfruits, but perhaps as the completion
of my offerings, a thanksgiving, and at the same time a supplication, that we may suffer no
evil beyond those necessary and sacred cares in which our life has been passed; and stay the
tyranny of the body over us; (Thou seest, O Lord, how great it is and how it bows me down)

The Second Oration on Easter.

or Thine own sentence, if we are to be condemned by Thee. But if we are to be released, in
accordance with our desire, and be received into the Heavenly Tabernacle, there too it may
be we shall offer Thee acceptable Sacrifices upon Thine Altar, to Father and Word and Holy
Ghost; for to Thee belongeth all glory and honour and might, world without end. Amen.

Select Letters of Saint Gregory Nazianzen.

Title Page.

Select Letters of Saint Gregory Nazianzen.

SELECT LETTERS

OF

SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN,

Archbishop of Constantinople.

Letters on the Apollinarian Controversy.

Introduction.

Letters on the Apollinarian Controversy.

A Selection from the Letters of Saint Gregory Nazianzen,

Sometime Archbishop of Constantinople.

------------

Division I.

Letters on the Apollinarian Controversy.

------------

Introduction.

The circumstances which called forth the two letters to Cledonius have already been
described in the first section of the General Prolegomena, and it will not be necessary here
to add much to what was there said. In the letter to Nectarius, his own successor on the
throne of Constantinople, written about a.d. 383, and sometimes reckoned as Orat. XLVI.,
S. Gregory gives extracts from a work of Apollinarius himself, but without mentioning the
title of the book. In this treatise the fundamental errors of the heresy (see Proleg. c. 1, p.
172) are laid down. Apollinarius, according to S. Gregory, declares that the Son of God was
from all eternity clothed with a human body, and not from the time of His conception only
by the Blessed Virgin; but that this humanity of God is without human mind, the place of
which was supplied by the Godhead of the Only-begotten. And he goes even further and
ascribes passibility and mortality to the very Godhead of Christ. Therefore S. Gregory
earnestly protests against any toleration being granted to these heretics, or even permission
to hold their assemblies; for, he says, toleration or permission would certainly be regarded
by them as a condonation of their doctrinal position, and a condemnation of that of the
Church. Dr. Ullman, however, thinks that while S. Gregory was certainly speaking the truth
in saying that he had in his hands a pamphlet by Apollinarius, yet that he, perhaps unconsciously, exaggerated the heretical character of its contents, pushing its statements to consequences which Apollinarius would have repudiated. The one purpose of the latter was,
in Dr. Ullman's view, to safeguard the doctrine of the Unity of Christ; and he thought that
the orthodox expression of Two Whole and Perfect Natures tended to a Nestorian division
of the Person of Christ; and so he used language which certainly seemed to confound the
natures, or at any rate to make the Incarnation imperfect, inasmuch as a Christ in Whom
the human mind is absent, and its place filled up by the Godhead of the Son, cannot be said
to be perfect Man. But while Epiphanius mentions these extravagances of the heresy, and
does so with a lingering feeling of regret for the lapse of so good a man whose services in
the past had been of so much value to the Church, yet, in the spirit common to Ecclesiastical

Introduction.

authorities of the time, he would rather ascribe them to an expansion of Apollinarius'
teaching by his younger disciples who did not really understand what Apollinarius himself
meant.

Olympius, to whom the last of this series is addressed, was Governor of Cappadocia
Secunda in a.d. 382. He was a man for whom S. Gregory had a very high esteem, and with
whom he was upon terms of close friendship, as will be seen from other letters of Gregory
to him in another division of this Selection. The occasion of the present letter was the necessity to appeal to the secular power for aid to punish a sect of Apollinarians at Nazianzus,
who had ventured to take advantage of S. Gregory's absence at the Baths of Xanxaris to
procure the consecration of a Bishop of their own way of thinking. Technically the See was
vacant, but the administration had been committed to Gregory by the Bishops of the
Province, and though he, foreseeing some such attempt on the part of the heretics, had been
very earnest in pressing upon the Metropolitan and his Comprovincials the necessity of
filling this throne by a canonical election, yet he was by no means prepared to hand over
the authority, with which he had been invested, to an irregularly elected and uncanonically
consecrated heretic.

To Nectarius, Bishop of Constantinople.

To Nectarius, Bishop of Constantinople.

To Nectarius, Bishop of Constantinople. (Ep. CCII.)

The Care of God, which throughout the time before us guarded the Churches, seems
to have utterly forsaken this present life. And my soul is immersed to such a degree by
calamities that the private sufferings of my own life hardly seem to be worth reckoning
among evils (though they are so numerous and great, that if they befel anyone else I should
think them unbearable); but I can only look at the common sufferings of the Churches; for
if at the present crisis some pains be not taken to find a remedy for them, things will
gradually get into an altogether desperate condition. Those who follow the heresy of Arius
or Eudoxius (I cannot say who stirred them up to this folly) are making a display of their
disease, as if they had attained some degree of confidence by collecting congregations as if
by permission. And they of the Macedonian party have reached such a pitch of folly that
they are arrogating to themselves the name of Bishops, and are wandering about our districts
babbling of Eleusius4694 as to their ordinations. Our bosom evil, Eunomius, is no longer
content with merely existing; but unless he can draw away everyone with him to his ruinous
heresy, he thinks himself an injured man. All this, however, is endurable. The most grievous
item of all in the woes of the Church is the boldness of the Apollinarians, whom your
Holiness has overlooked, I know not how, when providing themselves with authority to
hold meetings on an equality with myself. However, you being, as you are, thoroughly instructed by the grace of God in the Divine Mysteries on all points, are well informed, not
only as to the advocacy of the true faith, but also as to all those arguments which have been
devised by the heretics against the sound faith; and yet perhaps it will not be unseasonable
that your Excellency should hear from my littleness that a pamphlet by Apollinarius has
come into my hands, the contents of which surpass all heretical pravity. For he asserts that
the Flesh which the Only-begotten Son assumed in the Incarnation for the remodelling of
our nature was no new acquisition, but that that carnal nature was in the Son from the beginning. And he puts forward as a witness to this monstrous assertion a garbled quotation
from the Gospels, namely, No man hath Ascended up into Heaven save He which came
down from Heaven, even the Son of Man which is in Heaven.4695 As though even before
He came down He was the Son of Man, and when He came down He brought with Him
that Flesh, which it appears He had in Heaven, as though it had existed before the ages, and
been joined with His Essence. For he alleges another saying of an Apostle, which he cuts

Eleusius was Bishop of Cyzicus, a prominent leader of the Semi-Arian party. He bore a very high char-

acter for personal holiness, and approached more nearly to orthodoxy than most of his associates, men like Basil

of Ancyra, Eustathius of Sebaste, etc. He obstinately maintained, however, Macedonian views on the Deity of

the Holy Ghost, even after their condemnation by the Council of Constantinople.

John iii. 13.

To Nectarius, Bishop of Constantinople.

off from the whole body of its context, that The Second Man is the Lord from Heaven.4696 
Then he assumes that that Man who came down from above is without a mind, but that the
Godhead of the Only-begotten fulfils the function of mind, and is the third part of this human
composite, inasmuch as soul and body are in it on its human side, but not mind, the place
of which is taken by God the Word. This is not yet the most serious part of it; that which
is most terrible of all is that he declares that the Only-begotten God, the Judge of all, the
Prince of Life, the Destroyer of Death, is mortal, and underwent the Passion in His proper
Godhead; and that in the three days' death of His body, His Godhead also was put to death
with His body, and thus was raised again from the dead by the Father. It would be tedious
to go through all the other propositions which he adds to these monstrous absurdities. 
Now, if they who hold such views have authority to meet, your Wisdom approved in Christ
must see that, inasmuch as we do not approve their views, any permission of assembly
granted to them is nothing less than a declaration that their view is thought more true than
ours. For if they are permitted to teach their view as godly men, and with all confidence to
preach their doctrine, it is manifest that the doctrine of the Church has been condemned,
as though the truth were on their side. For nature does not admit of two contrary doctrines
on the same subject being both true. How then could your noble and lofty mind submit to
suspend your usual courage in regard to the correction of so great an evil? But even though
there is no precedent for such a course, let your inimitable perfection in virtue stand up at
a crisis like the present, and teach our most pious Emperor, that no gain will come from his
zeal for the Church on other points if he allows such an evil to gain strength from freedom
of speech for the subversion of sound faith.

1 Cor. xv. 47.

To Cledonius the Priest Against Apollinarius.

To Cledonius the Priest Against Apollinarius.

To Cledonius the Priest Against Apollinarius. (Ep. CI.)

To our most reverend and God-beloved brother and fellow-priest Cledonius, Gregory, greeting

in the Lord.

I desire to learn what is this fashion of innovation in things Concerning the Church,
which allows anyone who likes, or the passerby,4697 as the Bible says, to tear asunder the
flock that has been well led, and to plunder it by larcenous attacks, or rather by piratical and
fallacious teachings. For if our present assailants had any ground for condemning us in regard of the faith, it would not have been right for them, even in that case, to have ventured
on such a course without giving us notice. They ought rather to have first persuaded us, or
to have been willing to be persuaded by us (if at least any account is to be taken of us as
fearing God, labouring for the faith, and helping the Church), and then, if at all, to innovate;
but then perhaps there would be an excuse for their outrageous conduct. But since our faith
has been proclaimed, both in writing and without writing, here and in distant parts, in times
of danger and of safety, how comes it that some make such attempts, and that others keep
silence?

The most grievous part of it is not (though this too is shocking) that the men instil their
own heresy into simpler souls by means of those who are worse; but that they also tell lies
about us and say that we share their opinions and sentiments; thus baiting their hooks, and
by this cloak villainously fulfilling their will, and making our simplicity, which looked upon
them as brothers and not as foes, into a support of their wickedness. And not only so, but
they also assert, as I am told, that they have been received by the Western Synod, by which
they were formerly condemned, as is well known to everyone. If, however, those who hold
the views of Apollinarius have either now or formerly been received, let them prove it and
we will be content. For it is evident that they can only have been so received as assenting
to the Orthodox Faith, for this were an impossibility on any other terms. And they can
surely prove it, either by the minutes of the Synod, or by Letters of Communion, for this is
the regular custom of Synods. But if it is mere words, and an invention of their own, devised
for the sake of appearances and to give them weight with the multitude through the credit
of the persons, teach them to hold their tongues, and confute them; for we believe that such
a task is well suited to your manner of life and orthodoxy. Do not let the men deceive
themselves and others with the assertion that the "Man of the Lord," as they call Him, Who
is rather our Lord and God, is without human mind. For we do not sever the Man from
the Godhead, but we lay down as a dogma the Unity and Identity of Person, Who of old
was not Man but God, and the Only Son before all ages, unmingled with body or anything
corporeal; but Who in these last days has assumed Manhood also for our salvation; passible

Ps. lxxx. 12.

To Cledonius the Priest Against Apollinarius.

in His Flesh, impassible in His Godhead; circumscript in the body, uncircumscript in the
Spirit; at once earthly and heavenly, tangible and intangible, comprehensible and incomprehensible; that by One and the Same Person, Who was perfect Man and also God, the entire
humanity fallen through sin might be created anew.

If anyone does not believe that Holy Mary is the Mother of God, he is severed from the
Godhead. If anyone should assert that He passed through the Virgin as through a channel,
and was not at once divinely and humanly formed in her (divinely, because without the intervention of a man; humanly, because in accordance with the laws of gestation), he is in
like manner godless. If any assert that the Manhood was formed and afterward was clothed
with the Godhead, he too is to be condemned. For this were not a Generation of God, but
a shirking of generation. If any introduce the notion of Two Sons, one of God the Father,
the other of the Mother, and discredits the Unity and Identity, may he lose his part in the
adoption promised to those who believe aright. For God and Man are two natures, as also
soul and body are; but there are not two Sons or two Gods. For neither in this life are there
two manhoods; though Paul speaks in some such language of the inner and outer man. 
And (if I am to speak concisely) the Saviour is made of elements which are distinct from
one another (for the invisible is not the same with the visible, nor the timeless with that
which is subject to time), yet He is not two Persons. God forbid! For both natures are one
by the combination, the Deity being made Man, and the Manhood deified or however one
should express it. And I say different Elements, because it is the reverse of what is the case
in the Trinity; for There we acknowledge different Persons so as not to confound the persons;
but not different Elements, for the Three are One and the same in Godhead.

If any should say that it wrought in Him by grace as in a Prophet, but was not and is
not united with Him in Essence-let him be empty of the Higher Energy, or rather full of
the opposite. If any worship not the Crucified, let him be Anathema and be numbered
among the Deicides. If any assert that He was made perfect by works, or that after His
Baptism, or after His Resurrection from the dead, He was counted worthy of an adoptive
Sonship, like those whom the Greeks interpolate as added to the ranks of the gods, let him
be anathema. For that which has a beginning or a progress or is made perfect, is not God,
although the expressions may be used of His gradual manifestation. If any assert that He
has now put off His holy flesh, and that His Godhead is stripped of the body, and deny that
He is now with His body and will come again with it, let him not see the glory of His Coming. 
For where is His body now, if not with Him Who assumed it? For it is not laid by in the
sun, according to the babble of the Manichaeans, that it should be honoured by a dishonour;
nor was it poured forth into the air and dissolved, as is the nature of a voice or the flow of
an odour, or the course of a lightning flash that never stands. Where in that case were His
being handled after the Resurrection, or His being seen hereafter by them that pierced Him,
for Godhead is in its nature invisible. Nay; He will come with His body-so I have

To Cledonius the Priest Against Apollinarius.

learnt-such as He was seen by His Disciples in the Mount, or as he shewed Himself for a
moment, when his Godhead overpowered the carnality. And as we say this to disarm suspicion, so we write the other to correct the novel teaching. If anyone assert that His flesh
came down from heaven, and is not from hence, nor of us though above us, let him be
anathema. For the words, The Second Man is the Lord from Heaven;4698 and, As is the
Heavenly, such are they that are Heavenly; and, No man hath ascended up into Heaven save
He which came down from Heaven, even the Son of Man which is in Heaven;4699 and the
like, are to be understood as said on account of the Union with the heavenly; just as that All
Things were made by Christ,4700 and that Christ dwelleth in your hearts4701 is said, not of
the visible nature which belongs to God, but of what is perceived by the mind, the names
being mingled like the natures, and flowing into one another, according to the law of their
intimate union.

If anyone has put his trust in Him as a Man without a human mind, he is really bereft
of mind, and quite unworthy of salvation. For that which He has not assumed He has not
healed; but that which is united to His Godhead is also saved. If only half Adam fell, then
that which Christ assumes and saves may be half also; but if the whole of his nature fell, it
must be united to the whole nature of Him that was begotten, and so be saved as a whole. 
Let them not, then, begrudge us our complete salvation, or clothe the Saviour only with
bones and nerves and the portraiture of humanity. For if His Manhood is without soul,
even the Arians admit this, that they may attribute His Passion to the Godhead, as that
which gives motion to the body is also that which suffers. But if He has a soul, and yet is
without a mind, how is He man, for man is not a mindless animal? And this would necessarily involve that while His form and tabernacle was human, His soul should be that of a
horse or an ox, or some other of the brute creation. This, then, would be what He saves;
and I have been deceived by the Truth, and led to boast of an honour which had been bestowed upon another. But if His Manhood is intellectual and nor without mind, let them
cease to be thus really mindless. But, says such an one, the Godhead took the place of the
human intellect. How does this touch me? For Godhead joined to flesh alone is not man,
nor to soul alone, nor to both apart from intellect, which is the most essential part of man. 
Keep then the whole man, and mingle Godhead therewith, that you may benefit me in my
completeness. But, he asserts, He could not contain Two perfect Natures. Not if you only
look at Him in a bodily fashion. For a bushel measure will not hold two bushels, nor will
the space of one body hold two or more bodies. But if you will look at what is mental and

1 Cor. xv. 47.

John iii. 13.

John i. 3.

Ephes. iii. 17.

To Cledonius the Priest Against Apollinarius.

incorporeal, remember that I in my one personality can contain soul and reason and mind
and the Holy Spirit; and before me this world, by which I mean the system of things visible
and invisible, contained Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. For such is the nature of intellectual
Existences, that they can mingle with one another and with bodies, incorporeally and invisibly. For many sounds are comprehended by one ear; and the eyes of many are occupied
by the same visible objects, and the smell by odours; nor are the senses narrowed by each
other, or crowded out, nor the objects of sense diminished by the multitude of the perceptions. But where is there mind of man or angel so perfect in comparison of the Godhead
that the presence of the greater must crowd out the other? The light is nothing compared
with the sun, nor a little damp compared with a river, that we must first do away with the
lesser, and take the light from a house, or the moisture from the earth, to enable it to contain
the greater and more perfect. For how shall one thing contain two completenesses, either
the house, the sunbeam and the sun, or the earth, the moisture and the river? Here is matter
for inquiry; for indeed the question is worthy of much consideration. Do they not know,
then, that what is perfect by comparison with one thing may be imperfect by comparison
with another, as a hill compared with a mountain, or a grain of mustard seed with a bean
or any other of the larger seeds, although it may be called larger than any of the same kind? 
Or, if you like, an Angel compared with God, or a man with an Angel. So our mind is perfect
and commanding, but only in respect of soul and body; not absolutely perfect; and a servant
and a subject of God, not a sharer of His Princedom and honour. So Moses was a God to
Pharaoh,4702 but a servant of God,4703 as it is written; and the stars which illumine the night
are hidden by the Sun, so much that you could not even know of their existence by daylight;
and a little torch brought near a great blaze is neither destroyed, nor seen, nor extinguished;
but is all one blaze, the bigger one prevailing over the other.

But, it may be said, our mind is subject to condemnation. What then of our flesh? Is
that not subject to condemnation? You must therefore either set aside the latter on account
of sin, or admit the former on account of salvation. If He assumed the worse that He might
sanctify it by His incarnation, may He not assume the better that it may be sanctified by His
becoming Man? If the clay was leavened and has become a new lump, O ye wise men, shall
not the Image be leavened and mingled with God, being deified by His Godhead? And I
will add this also: If the mind was utterly rejected, as prone to sin and subject to damnation,
and for this reason He assumed a body but left out the mind, then there is an excuse for
them who sin with the mind; for the witness of God-according to you-has shewn the
impossibility of healing it. Let me state the greater results. You, my good sir, dishonour

Exod. vii. 1.

4703 Num. xii. 7.

To Cledonius the Priest Against Apollinarius.

my mind (you a Sarcolater, if I am an Anthropolater4704) that you may tie God down to the
Flesh, since He cannot be otherwise tied; and therefore you take away the wall of partition. 
But what is my theory, who am but an ignorant man, and no Philosopher. Mind is mingled
with mind, as nearer and more closely related, and through it with flesh, being a Mediator
between God and carnality.

Further let us see what is their account of the assumption of Manhood, or the assumption
of Flesh, as they call it. If it was in order that God, otherwise incomprehensible, might be
comprehended, and might converse with men through His Flesh as through a veil, their
mask and the drama which they represent is a pretty one, not to say that it was open to Him
to converse with us in other ways, as of old, in the burning bush4705 and in the appearance
of a man.4706 But if it was that He might destroy the condemnation by sanctifying like by
like, then as He needed flesh for the sake of the flesh which had incurred condemnation,
and soul for the sake of our soul, so, too, He needed mind for the sake of mind, which not
only fell in Adam, but was the first to be affected, as the doctors say of illnesses. For that
which received the command was that which failed to keep the command, and that which
failed to keep it was that also which dared to transgress; and that which transgressed was
that which stood most in need of salvation; and that which needed salvation was that which
also He took upon Him. Therefore, Mind was taken upon Him. This has now been
demonstrated, whether they like it or no, by, to use their own expression, geometrical and
necessary proofs. But you are acting as if, when a man's eye had been injured and his foot
had been injured in consequence, you were to attend to the foot and leave the eye uncared
for; or as if, when a painter had drawn something badly, you were to alter the picture, but
to pass over the artist as if he had succeeded. But if they, overwhelmed by these arguments,
take refuge in the proposition that it is possible for God to save man even apart from mind,
why, I suppose that it would be possible for Him to do so also apart from flesh by a mere
act of will, just as He works all other things, and has wrought them without body. Take
away, then, the flesh as well as the mind, that your monstrous folly may be complete. But
they are deceived by the latter, and, therefore, they run to the flesh, because they do not
know the custom of Scripture. We will teach them this also. For what need is there even
to mention to those who know it, the fact that everywhere in Scripture he is called Man, and
the Son of Man?

4704 The Apollinarians seem to have charged the Orthodox with being Anthropolaters, or worshippers of a

mere Man. S. Gregory retorts upon them that if so, they are worse themselves, being actually Sarcolaters, or

worshippers of mere flesh, denying Mind to Him whom they adore as Lord and Saviour.

Exod. iii. 2.

4706 Gen. xviii. 5.

To Cledonius the Priest Against Apollinarius.

If, however, they rely on the passage, The Word was made Flesh and dwelt among us,4707
and because of this erase the noblest part of Man (as cobblers do the thicker part of skins)
that they may join together God and Flesh, it is time for them to say that God is God only
of flesh, and not of souls, because it is written, "As Thou hast given Him power over all
Flesh,"4708 and "Unto Thee shall all Flesh come;"4709 and "Let all Flesh bless His holy
Name,"4710 meaning every Man. Or, again, they must suppose that our fathers went down
into Egypt without bodies and invisible, and that only the Soul of Joseph was imprisoned
by Pharaoh, because it is written, "They went down into Egypt with threescore and fifteen
Souls,"4711 and "The iron entered into his Soul,"4712 a thing which could not be bound. 
They who argue thus do not know that such expressions are used by Synecdoche, declaring
the whole by the part, as when Scripture says that the young ravens call upon God,4713 to
indicate the whole feathered race; or Pleiades, Hesperus, and Arcturus4714 are mentioned,
instead of all the Stars and His Providence over them.

Moreover, in no other way was it possible for the Love of God toward us to be manifested
than by making mention of our flesh, and that for our sake He descended even to our lower
part. For that flesh is less precious than soul, everyone who has a spark of sense will acknowledge. And so the passage, The Word was made Flesh, seems to me to be equivalent to that
in which it is said that He was made sin,4715 or a curse4716 for us; not that the Lord was
transformed into either of these, how could He be? But because by taking them upon Him
He took away our sins and bore our iniquities.4717 This, then, is sufficient to say at the
present time for the sake of clearness and of being understood by the many. And I write it,
not with any desire to compose a treatise, but only to check the progress of deceit; and if it
is thought well, I will give a fuller account of these matters at greater length.

But there is a matter which is graver than these, a special point which it is necessary
that I should not pass over. I would they were even cut off that trouble you,4718 and would

John i. 14.

Ib. xvii. 2.

Ps. lxv. 2.

Ib. cxlv. 21.

4711 Acts vii. 14.

Ps. cv. 18.

Ps. cxlvii. 8.

Job. ix. 9.

2 Cor. v. 21.

4716 Gal. iii. 13.

Isa. liii. 7 LXX.

4718 Galat. v. 12.

To Cledonius the Priest Against Apollinarius.

reintroduce a second Judaism, and a second circumcision, and a second system of sacrifices. 
For if this be done, what hinders Christ also being born again to set them aside, and again
being betrayed by Judas, and crucified and buried, and rising again, that all may be fulfilled
in the same order, like the Greek system of cycles, in which the same revolutions of the stars
bring round the same events? For what the method of selection is, in accordance with which
some of the events are to occur and others to be omitted, let these wise men who glory in
the multitude of their books shew us.

But since, puffed up by their theory of the Trinity, they falsely accuse us of being unsound
in the Faith and entice the multitude, it is necessary that people should know that Apollinarius, while granting the Name of Godhead to the Holy Ghost, did not preserve the Power
of the Godhead. For to make the Trinity consist of Great, Greater, and Greatest, as of Light,
Ray, and Sun, the Spirit and the Son and the Father (as is clearly stated in his writings), is a
ladder of Godhead not leading to Heaven, but down from Heaven. But we recognize God
the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, and these not as bare titles, dividing inequalities
of ranks or of power, but as there is one and the same title, so there is one nature and one
substance in the Godhead.

But if anyone who thinks we have spoken rightly on this subject reproaches us with
holding communion with heretics, let him prove that we are open to this charge, and we
will either convince him or retire. But it is not safe to make any innovation before judgment
is given, especially in a matter of such importance, and connected with so great issues. We
have protested and continue to protest this before God and men. And not even now, be
well assured, should we have written this, if we had not seen that the Church was being torn
asunder and divided, among their other tricks, by their present synagogue of vanity.4719 
But if anyone when we say and protest this, either from some advantage they will thus gain,
or through fear of men, or monstrous littleness of mind, or through some neglect of pastors
and governors, or through love of novelty and proneness to innovations, rejects us as unworthy of credit, and attaches himself to such men, and divides the noble body of the Church,
he shall bear his judgment, whoever he may be,4720 and shall give account to God in the
day of judgment.4721 But if their long books, and their new Psalters, contrary to that of
David, and the grace of their metres, are taken for a third Testament, we too will compose
Psalms, and will write much in metre. For we also think we have the spirit of God,4722 if
indeed this is a gift of the Spirit, and not a human novelty. This I will that thou declare

Ps. xxvi. 4 LXX.

4720 Galat. v. 10.

4721 Matt. xii. 36.

1 Cor. vii. 40.

To Cledonius the Priest Against Apollinarius.

publicly, that we may not be held responsible, as overlooking such an evil, and as though
this wicked doctrine received food and strength from our indifference.

Against Apollinarius; The Second Letter to Cledonius.

Against Apollinarius; The Second Letter to Cledonius.

Against Apollinarius; The Second Letter to Cledonius. (Ep. CII.)

Forasmuch as many persons have come to your Reverence seeking confirmation of their
faith, and therefore you have affectionately asked me to put forth a brief definition and rule
of my opinion, I therefore write to your Reverence, what indeed you knew before, that I
never have and never can honour anything above the Nicene Faith, that of the Holy Fathers
who met there to destroy the Arian heresy; but am, and by God's help ever will be, of that
faith; completing in detail that which was incompletely said by them concerning the Holy
Ghost; for that question had not then been mooted, namely, that we are to believe that the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are of one Godhead, thus confessing the Spirit also to be God. 
Receive then to communion those who think and teach thus, as I also do; but those who are
otherwise minded refuse, and hold them as strangers to God and the Catholic Church. And
since a question has also been mooted concerning the Divine Assumption of humanity, or
Incarnation, state this also clearly to all concerning me, that I join in One the Son, who was
begotten of the Father, and afterward of the Virgin Mary, and that I do not call Him two
Sons, but worship Him as One and the same in undivided Godhead and honour. But if
anyone does not assent to this statement, either now or hereafter, he shall give account to
God at the day of judgment.

Now, what we object and oppose to their mindless opinion about His Mind is this, to
put it shortly; for they are almost alone in the condition which they lay down, as it is through
want of mind that they mutilate His mind. But, that they may not accuse us of having once
accepted but of now repudiating the faith of their beloved Vitalius4723 which he handed in
in writing at the request of the blessed Bishop Damasus of Rome, I will give a short explanation on this point also. For these men, when they are theologizing among their genuine
disciples, and those who are initiated into their secrets, like the Manichaeans among those
whom they call the "Elect," expose the full extent of their disease, and scarcely allow flesh
at all to the Saviour. But when they are refuted and pressed with the common answers about
the Incarnation which the Scripture presents, they confess indeed the orthodox words, but

4723 Vitalius or Vitalis was one of the principal followers of Apollinarius, and by him was consecrated

schismatical Bishop of Antioch, where, while yet orthodox, he had been ordained a priest by Meletius. But he

quarrelled with his Bishop through jealousy of another priest, and then fell under the influence of Apollinarius. 

He was summoned to Rome to clear himself of the charge of heresy; and by a clever manipulation of language

he produced a confession which the Pope, Damasus, accepted as orthodox; but the Pope remitted the whole

case to Paulinus, who was at that time recognized by the Western Church as rightful Bishop. Vitalius, however,

was unable to accept the test required, and seceded. On his return from Rome he had visited Nazianzus, where

S. Gregory received him as a brother in the faith, though further acquaintance compelled him to withdraw from

this position. Vitalius, while admitting that our Lord had both a human body and a human soul, denied Him

a human mind; whose place, according to his teaching, was supplied by Divinity.

Against Apollinarius; The Second Letter to Cledonius.

they do violence to the sense; for they acknowledge the Manhood to be neither without soul
nor without reason nor without mind, nor imperfect, but they bring in the Godhead to
supply the soul and reason and mind, as though It had mingled Itself only with His flesh,
and not with the other properties belonging to us men; although His sinlessness was far
above us, and was the cleansing of our passions.

Thus, then, they interpret wrongly the words, But we have the Mind of Christ,4724 and
very absurdly, when they say that His Godhead is the mind of Christ, and not understanding
the passage as we do, namely, that they who have purified their mind by the imitation of
the mind which the Saviour took of us, and, as far as may be, have attained conformity with
it, are said to have the mind of Christ; just as they might be testified to have the flesh of
Christ who have trained their flesh, and in this respect have become of the same body and
partakers of Christ; and so he says "As we have borne the image of the earth4725 we shall
also bear the image of the heavenly." And so they declare that the Perfect Man is not He
who was in all points tempted like as we are yet without sin;4726 but the mixture of God and
Flesh. For what, say they, can be more perfect than this?

They play the same trick with the word that describes the Incarnation, viz.: He was
made Man, explaining it to mean, not, He was in the human nature with which He surrounded Himself, according to the Scripture, He knew what was in man;4727 but teaching that
it means, He consorted and conversed with men, and taking refuge in the expression which
says that He was seen on Earth and conversed with Men.4728 And what can anyone contend
further? They who take away the Humanity and the Interior Image cleanse by their newly
invented mask only our outside,4729 and that which is seen; so far in conflict with themselves
that at one time, for the sake of the flesh, they explain all the rest in a gross and carnal
manner (for it is from hence that they have derived their second Judaism and their silly
thousand years delight in paradise, and almost the idea that we shall resume again the same
conditions after these same thousand years); and at another time they bring in His flesh as
a phantom rather than a reality, as not having been subjected to any of our experiences, not
even such as are free from sin; and use for this purpose the apostolic expression, understood
and spoken in a sense which is not apostolic, that our Saviour was made in the likeness of
Men and found in fashion as a Man,4730 as though by these words was expressed, not the
human form, but some delusive phantom and appearance.

1 Cor. ii. 16.

1 Cor. xv. 49.

4726 Heb. iv. 15.

John ii. 25.

Baruch iii. 37.

4729 Matt. xxiii. 25, 26.

Phil. ii. 7.

Against Apollinarius; The Second Letter to Cledonius.

Since then these expressions, rightly understood, make for orthodoxy, but wrongly interpreted are heretical, what is there to be surprised at if we received the words of Vitalius
in the more orthodox sense; our desire that they should be so meant persuading us, though
others are angry at the intention of his writings? This is, I think, the reason why Damasus
himself, having been subsequently better informed, and at the same time learning that they
hold by their former explanations, excommunicated them and overturned their written
confession of faith with an Anathema; as well as because he was vexed at the deceit which
he had suffered from them through simplicity.

Since, then, they have been openly convicted of this, let them not be angry, but let them
be ashamed of themselves; and let them not slander us, but abase themselves and wipe off
from their portals that great and marvellous proclamation and boast of their orthodoxy,
meeting all who go in at once with the question and distinction that we must worship, not
a God-bearing Man, but a flesh-bearing God. What could be more unreasonable than this,
though these new heralds of truth think a great deal of the title? For though it has a certain
sophistical grace through the quickness of its antithesis, and a sort of juggling quackery
grateful to the uninstructed, yet it is the most absurd of absurdities and the most foolish of
follies. For if one were to change the word Man or Flesh into God (the first would please
us, the second them), and then were to use this wonderful antithesis, so divinely recognized,
what conclusion should we arrive at? That we must worship, not a God-bearing Flesh, but
a Man-bearing God. O monstrous absurdity! They proclaim to us to-day a wisdom hidden
ever since the time of Christ-a thing worthy of our tears. For if the faith began thirty years
ago, when nearly four hundred years had passed since Christ was manifested, vain all that
time will have been our Gospel, and vain our faith; in vain will the Martyrs have borne their
witness, and in vain have so many and so great Prelates presided over the people; and Grace
is a matter of metres and not of the faith.

And who will not marvel at their learning, in that on their own authority they divide
the things of Christ, and assign to His Manhood such sayings as He was born, He was
tempted, He was hungry, He was thirsty, He was wearied, He was asleep; but reckon to His
Divinity such as these: He was glorified by Angels, He overcame the Tempter, He fed the
people in the wilderness, and He fed them in such a manner, and He walked upon the sea;
and say on the one hand that the "Where have ye laid Lazarus?"4731 belongs to us, but the
loud voice "Lazarus, Come Forth"4732 and the raising him that had been four days dead, is
above our nature; and that while the "He was in an Agony, He was crucified, He was buried,"
belongs to the Veil, on the other hand, "He was confident, He rose again, He ascended,"
belong to the Inner Treasure; and then they accuse us of introducing two natures, separate

John xi. 34.

Ib. xi. 43.

Against Apollinarius; The Second Letter to Cledonius.

or conflicting, and of dividing the supernatural and wondrous Union. They ought, either
not to do that of which they accuse us, or not to accuse us of that which they do; so at least
if they are resolved to be consistent and not to propound at once their own and their opponents' principles. Such is their want of reason; it conflicts both with itself and with the truth
to such an extent that they are neither conscious nor ashamed of it when they fall out with
themselves. Now, if anyone thinks that we write all this willingly and not upon compulsion,
and that we are dissuading from unity, and not doing our utmost to promote it, let him
know that he is very much mistaken, and has not made at all a good guess at our desires,
for nothing is or ever has been more valuable in our eyes than peace, as the facts themselves
prove; though their actions and brawlings against us altogether exclude unanimity.

To Olympius.

To Olympius.

Ep. CXXV. To Olympius.

Even hoar hairs have something to learn; and old age, it would seem, cannot in all respects be trusted for wisdom. I at any rate, knowing better than anyone, as I did, the thoughts
and the heresy of the Apollinarians, and seeing that their folly was intolerable; yet thinking
that I could tame them by patience and soften them by degrees, I let my hopes make me
eager to attain this object. But, as it seems, I overlooked the fact that I was making them
worse, and injuring the Church by my untimely philosophy. For gentleness does not put
bad men out of countenance. And now if it had been possible for me to teach you this myself,
I should not have hesitated, you may be sure, even to undertake a journey beyond my
strength to throw myself at the feet of your Excellency. But since my illness has brought
me too far, and it has become necessary for me to try the hot baths of Xanxaris at the advice
of my medical men, I send a letter to represent me. These wicked and utterly abandoned
men have dared, in addition to all their other misdeeds, either to summon, or to make a
bad use of the passage (I am not prepared to say precisely which) of certain Bishops, deprived
by the whole Synod of the Eastern and Western Church; and, in violation of all Imperial
Ordinances, and of your commands, to confer the name of Bishop on a certain individual
of their own misbelieving and deceitful crew; encouraged to do so, as I believe, by nothing
so much as my great infirmity; for I must mention this. If this is to be tolerated, your Excellency will tolerate it, and I too will bear it, as I have often before. But if it is serious, and not
to be endured by our most august Emperors, pray punish what has been done-though
more mildly than such madness merits.

Correspondence with Saint Basil the Great, Archbishop of Caesarea.

To Basil His Comrade.

Correspondence with Saint Basil the Great, Archbishop of Caesarea.

Division II.

Correspondence with Saint Basil the Great, Archbishop of Caesarea.

Ep. I. To Basil His Comrade.

(Perhaps about a.d. 357 or 358; in answer to a letter which is not now extant.)

I have failed, I confess, to keep my promise. I had engaged even at Athens, at the time
of our friendship and intimate connection there (for I can find no better word for it), to join
you in a life of philosophy. But I failed to keep my promise, not of my own will, but because
one law prevailed against another; I mean the law which bids us honour our parents overpowered the law of our friendship and intercourse. Yet I will not fail you altogether, if you
will accept this offer. I shall be with you half the time, and half of it you will be with me,
that we may have the whole in common, and that our friendship may be on equal terms;
and so it will be arranged in such a way that my parents will not be grieved, and yet I shall
gain you.

Letter II.

Letter II.

Ep. II.

(Written about the same time, in reply to another letter now lost.)

I do not like being joked about Tiberina and its mud and its winters, O my friend, who
are so free from mud, and who walk on tiptoe, and trample on the plains. You who have
wings and are borne aloft, and fly like the arrows of Abaris, in order that, Cappadocian
though you are, you may flee from Cappadocia. Have we done you an injury, because while
you are pale and breathing hard and measuring the sun, we are sleek and well fed and not
pressed for room? Yet this is your condition. You are luxurious and rich, and go to market. 
I do not approve of this. Either then cease to reproach us with our mud (for you did not
build your city, nor we make our winter), or else for our mud we will bring against you your
hucksters, and the rest of the crop of nuisances which infest cities.

Letter IV.

Letter IV.

Ep. IV.

(In answer to Ep. XIV., of Basil, about 361.)

You may mock and pull to pieces my affairs, whether in jest or in earnest. This is a
matter of no consequence; only laugh, and take your fill of culture, and enjoy my friendship. 
Everything that comes from you is pleasant to me, no matter what it may be, and how it
may look. For I think you are chaffing about things here, not for the sake of chaffing, but
that you may draw me to yourself, if I understand you at all; just like people who block up
streams in order to draw them into another channel. That is how your sayings always seem
to me.

For my part I will admire your Pontus and your Pontic darkness, and your dwelling
place so worthy of exile, and the hills over your head, and the wild beasts which test your
faith, and your sequestered spot that lies under them...or as I should say your mousehole
with the stately names of Abode of Thought, Monastery, School; and your thickets of wild
bushes, and crown of precipitous mountains, by which may you be, not crowned but,
cloistered; and your limited air; and the sun, for which you long, and can only see as through
a chimney, O sunless Cimmerians of Pontus, who are condemned not only to a six months'
night, as some are said to be, but who have not even a part of your life out of the shadow,
but all your life is one long night, and a real shadow of death, to use a Scripture phrase. And
admire your strait and narrow road, leading...I know not if it be to the Kingdom, or to
Hades, but for your sake I hope it is the Kingdom...And as for the intervening country,
what is your wish? Am I falsely to call it Eden, and the fountain divided into four heads, by
which the world is watered, or the dry and waterless wilderness (only what Moses will come
to tame it, bringing water out of the rock with his staff)? For all of it which has escaped the
rocks is full of gullies; and that which is not a gully is a thicket of thorns; and whatever is
above the thorns is a precipice; and the road above that is precipitous, and slopes both ways,
exercising the mind of travellers, and calling for gymnastic exercises for safety. And the
river rushes roaring down, which to you is a Strymon of Amphipolis for quietness, and there
are not so many fishes in it as stones, nor does it flow into a lake, but it dashes into abysses,
O my grandiloquent friend and inventor of new names. For it is great and terrible, and
overwhelms the psalmody of those who live above it; like the Cataracts and Catadoupa of
the Nile, so does it roar you down day and night. It is rough and fordless; and it has only
this morsel of kindness about it, that it does not sweep away your dwelling when the torrents
and winter storms make it mad. This then is what I think of those Fortunate Islands and
of you happy people. And you are not to admire the crescent-shaped curves which strangle
rather than cut off the accessible parts of your Highlands, and the strip of mountain ridge
that hangs over your heads, and makes your life like that of Tantalus; and the draughty
breezes, and the vent-holes of the earth, which refresh your courage when it fails; and your

Letter IV.

musical birds that sing (but only of famine), and fly about (but only about the desert). No
one visits it, you say, except for hunting; you might add, and except to look upon your dead
bodies. This is perhaps too long for a letter, but it is too short for a comedy. If you can take
my jokes kindly you will do well, but if not, I will send you some more.

Letter V.

Letter V.

Ep. V.

(Circa a.d. 361.)

Since you do take my jokes kindly, I send you the rest. My prelude is from Homer.

"Come now and change thy theme,
And sing of the inner adornment."

-Od. viii. 492.

Your roofless and doorless hut, your fireless and smokeless hearth, your walls dried by
fire, that we may not be hit by the drops of the mud, condemned like Tantalus thirsting in
the midst of waters, and that pitiable feast with nothing to eat, to which we were invited
from Cappadocia, not as to a Lotus-eater's poverty, but to a table of Alcinous-we young
and miserable survivors of a wreck. For I remember those loaves and the broth (so it was
called), yes, and I shall remember them too, and my poor teeth that slipped on your hunks
of bread, and then braced themselves up, and pulled themselves as it were out of mud. You
yourself will raise these things to a higher strain of tragedy, having learnt to talk big through
your own sufferings...for if we had not been quickly delivered by that great supporter of
the poor-I mean your mother-who appeared opportunely like a harbour to men tossed
by a storm, we should long ago have been dead, rather pitied than admired for our faith in
Pontus. How shall I pass over that garden which was no garden and had no vegetables, and
the Augean dunghill which we cleared out of the house, and with which we filled it up (sc.
the garden), when we drew that mountainous wagon, I the vintager, and you the valiant,
with our necks and hands, which still bear the traces of our labours. "O earth and sun, O
air and virtue" (for I will indulge a little in tragic tones), not that we might bridge the
Hellespont, but that we might level a precipice. If you are not put out by the mention of
the circumstances, no more am I; but if you are, how much more was I by the reality. I pass
by the rest, through respect for the others from whom I received much enjoyment.

Letter VI.

Letter VI.

Ep. VI.

(Written about the same time, in a more serious vein.)

What I wrote before about our stay in Pontus was in joke, not in earnest; what I write
now is very much in earnest. O that one would place me as in the month of those former
days,4733 in which I luxuriated with you in hard living; since voluntary pain is more valuable
than involuntary delight. O that one would give me back those psalmodies and vigils and
those sojournings with God in prayer, and that immaterial, so to speak, and unbodied life. 
O for the intimacy and one-souledness of the brethren who were by you divinized and exalted: O for the contest and incitement of virtue which we secured by written Rules and
Canons; O for the loving labour in the Divine Oracles, and the light we found in them by
the guidance of the Holy Ghost. Or, if I may speak of lesser and slighter matters, O for the
daily courses and experiences; O for the gatherings of wood, and the cutting of stone; O for
the golden plane-tree, more precious than that of Xerxes, under which sat, not a King enfeebled by luxury, but a Monk worn out by hard life, which I planted and Apollos (I mean
your honourable self) watered;4734 but God gave the increase to our honour, that a memorial
might remain among you of my diligence, as in the Ark we read and believe, did Aaron's
rod that budded.4735 To long for all this is very easy, but it is not easy to attain it. But do
you come to me, and conspire with me in virtue, and co-operate with me, and aid me by
your prayers to keep the profit which we used to get together, that I may not perish by little
and little, like a shadow as the day draws to its close. I would rather breathe you than the
air, and only live while I am with you, either actually in your presence, or virtually by your
likeness in your absence.

Job xxix. 2.

1 Cor. iii. 6.

4735 Num. xvii. 8, 10.

Letter VIII.

Letter VIII.

Ep. VIII.

(Written to S. Basil shortly after his Ordination as Priest, probably toward the end of

a.d. 362.)

I approve the beginning of your letter; but what is there of yours that I do not approve? 
And you are convicted of having written just like me;4736 for I, too, was forced into the rank
of the Priesthood, for indeed I never was eager for it. We are to one another, if ever any
men were, trustworthy witnesses of our love for a humble and lowly philosophy. But perhaps
it would have been better that this had not happened, or I know not what to say, as long as
I am in ignorance of the purpose of the Holy Ghost. But since it has come about, we must
bear it, at least so it seems clear to me; and especially when we take the times into consideration, which are bringing in upon us so many heretical tongues, and must not put to shame
either the hopes of those who have trusted us thus, or our own lives.

4736 The Editors render "And you were captured just as I also was circumscribed," etc., but the Greek hardly

bears this rendering.

Letter XIX.

Letter XIX.

Ep. XIX.

(This Epistle should be read in connection with the three addressed to Eusebius of
Caesarea, to which it refers. For the circumstances see General Prolegomena, § 1, p. 194.)

It is a time for prudence and endurance, and that we should not let anyone appear to
be of higher courage than ourselves, or let all our labours and toils be in an instant brought
to nothing. Why do I write this, and wherefore? Our Bishop Eusebius, very dear to God
(for so we must for the future both think and write of him), is very much disposed to
agreement and friendship with us; and as fire softens iron, so has time softened him; and I
think a letter of appeal and invitation will come to you from him, as he intimated to me,
and as many persons who are well acquainted with his affairs assure me. Let us be beforehand
with him then, either by going to him, or by writing to him; or rather by first writing and
then going; in order that we may not by and by be put to shame by being defeated when it
was in our power to secure a victory by being honourably and philosophically beaten, which
so many are asking from us. Be persuaded by me then, and come; both on this account and
on account of the bad times; for a conspiracy of heretics is assailing the Church; some of
them are here now, and are troubling us; and others, rumour says, are coming; and there is
reason to fear lest the Word of Truth should be swept away, unless there be stirred up very
soon the spirit of a Bezaleel, the wise Master builder of such arguments and dogmas. If you
think I ought to go too, to stay with you and travel with you, I will not refuse to do even
this.

(We insert here the three letters to Eusebius, which are so closely connected with the

above as not to seem out of place.)

To Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea.

To Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea.

Ep. XVI. To Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea.

Since I am addressing a man who does not love falsehood, and who is the keenest man
I know at detecting it in another, however it may be twined in skilful and varied labyrinths;
and, moreover, on my own part I will say it, though against the grain I do not like artifice,
either, both from my natural constitution, and because God's Word has formed me so. 
Therefore I write what presents itself to my mind; and I beg you to excuse my plain speaking,
or you will wrong the truth by depriving me of my liberty, and forcing me to restrain within
myself the pain of my grief, like some secret and malignant disease. I rejoice that I have
your respect (for I am a man, as some one has said before), and that I am summoned to
Synods and spiritual conferences. But I am troubled at the slight which has been inflicted
on my most Reverend brother Basil, and is still inflicted on him by Your Reverence; for I
chose him as the companion of my life and words and highest philosophy, and he is so still;
and I never had reason to regret my judgment of him. It is more temperate to speak thus
of him, that I may not seem to be praising myself in admiring him. You, however, I think,
by honouring me and dishonouring him, seem to be acting like a man who should with one
hand stroke a man's head, and with the other hand strike him on the face; or while tearing
up the foundations of a house should paint the walls and decorate the exterior. If then you
will listen to me, this is what you will do, and I claim to be listened to, for this is justice. If
you will pay due attention to him, he will do the like by you. And I will follow him as a
shadow does the body, being of little worth and inclined to peace. For I am not so mean as
to be willing in other respects to philosophize, and to be of the better part, but to overlook
a matter which is the end of all our teaching, namely love; especially in regard to a Priest,
and one of so high a character, and one whom I know of all my acquaintances to be the best
both in life and doctrine and conduct. For my pain shall not obscure the truth.

To Eusebius, Archbishop of Caesarea.

To Eusebius, Archbishop of Caesarea.

Ep. XVII. To Eusebius, Archbishop of Caesarea.

I did not write in an insolent spirit, as you complain of my letter, but rather in a spiritual
and philosophical one, and as was fitting, unless this too wrongs "your most eloquent
Gregory." For though you are my Superior in rank, yet you will grant me something of
liberty and just freedom of speech. Therefore be kinder to me. But if you regard my letter
as coming from a servant, and from one who has not the right even to look you in the face,
I will in this instance accept your stripes and not even shed a tear. Will you blame me for
this also? That would befit anyone rather than your Reverence. For it is the part of a highsouled man to accept more readily the freedom of a friend than the flattery of an enemy.

Letter XVIII. To Eusebius of Caesarea.

Letter XVIII. To Eusebius of Caesarea.

Ep. XVIII. To Eusebius of Caesarea.

I was never meanly disposed towards your Reverence; do not find me guilty. But after
allowing myself a little liberty and boldness, just to relieve and heal my grief, I at once bowed
and submitted, and willingly subjected myself to the Canon. What else could I have done,
knowing both you and the Law of the Spirit? But if I had been ever so mean and ignoble in
my sentiments, yet the present time would not allow such feelings, nor the wild beasts which
are rushing on the Church, nor your own courage and manliness, so purely and genuinely
fighting for the Church. I will come then, if you wish it, and take part with you in prayers
and in conflict, and will serve you, and like cheering boys will stir up the noble athlete by
my exhortations.

To the Great Basil.

To the Great Basil.

Ep. XL. To the Great Basil.

(About the middle of the year 370. On the death of Eusebius Basil seems to have formed
a desire that his friend Gregory should succeed to the vacant Metropolitanate; and so he
wrote to him, without mentioning the death of the Archbishop, to come to him at Caesarea,
representing himself as dangerously ill. Gregory, deeply grieved at the news, set off at once,
but had not proceeded far on his way when he learned that Basil was in his usual health,
and that the Bishops of the Province were assembling at Caesarea for the Election of a Metropolitan. He saw through the artifice at once; and thinking that Basil had wished to secure
his presence at the Metropolis in order that his influence might bring about his own (Basil's)
Election, he wrote him the following indignant letter. Nevertheless both he and his father
felt that no one was so well fitted to succeed to the vacant throne; and so Gregory wrote in
his father's name the three letters which we have placed next, addressed respectively to the
people of Caesarea, to the Bishops attending the Synod, and to Eusebius Bishop of Samosata.)

Do not be surprized if I say something strange, which has not been said before by anyone. 
I think you have the reputation of being a steady safe and strong-minded man, but also of
being more simple than safe in much that you plan and do. For that which is free from evil
is also in proportion slow to suspect evil, as is shewn by what has just occurred. You have
summoned me to the Metropolis at the moment when a council has been called for the
election of a Bishop, and your pretext is very seemly and plausible. You pretend to be very
ill, indeed at your last breath, and to long to see me and to bid me a last farewell; I do not
know with what object, even what my presence can effect in the matter. I started in great
grief at what had happened; for what could be of higher value to me than your life, or more
distressing than your departure? And I shed a fountain of tears; and I wailed aloud; and I
felt myself now for the first time unphilosophically disposed. What did I leave unperformed
of all that befits a funeral? But as soon as I found that the Bishops were assembling at the
City, at once I stopped short in my course; and I wondered first that you had not perceived
what was proper, or guarded against people's tongues, which are so given to slander the
guileless; and secondly that you did not think the same course to be fitting for me as for
yourself, though our life and our rule and everything is common to us both, who have been
so closely associated by God from the first. Thirdly, for I must say this also, I wondered
whether you remembered that such nominations are worthy of the more religious, not of
the more powerful, nor of those most in favour with the multitude. For these reasons then
I backed water, and held back. Now, if you think as I do, come to this determination, to
avoid these public turmoils and evil suspicions. I shall see your Reverence when the matters
are settled and time allows, and I shall have more and graver reproaches to address to you.

Letter XLI. To the People of Caesarea, in His Father's Name.

Letter XLI. To the People of Caesarea, in His Father's Name.

Ep. XLI. To the People of Caesarea, in His Father's Name.

I am a little shepherd, and preside over a tiny flock, and I am among the least of the
servants of the Spirit. But Grace is not narrow, or circumscribed by place. Wherefore let
freedom of speech be given even to the small,-especially when the subject matter is of such
great importance, and one in which all are interested-even to deliberate with men of hoary
hairs, who speak with perhaps greater wisdom than the ordinary run of men. You are deliberating on no ordinary or unimportant matter, but on one by which the common interest
must necessarily be promoted or injured according to the decision at which you arrive. For
our subject matter is the Church, for which Christ died, and the guide who is to present it
and lead it to God. For the light of the body is the eye,4737 as we have heard; not only the
bodily eye which sees and is seen, but that which contemplates and is contemplated spiritually. But the light of the Church is the Bishop, as is evident to you even without our writing
it. As then the straightness or crookedness of the course of the body depends upon the
clearness or dulness of the eye, so must the Church necessarily share the peril or safety incurred by the conduct of its Chief. You must then take thought for the whole Church as
the Body of Christ, but more especially for your own, which was from the beginning and is
now the Mother of almost all the Churches, to which all the Commonwealth looks, like a
circle described round a centre, not only because of its orthodoxy proclaimed of old to all,
but also because of the grace of unanimity so evidently bestowed upon it by God. You then
have summoned us also to your discussion of this matter, and so are acting rightly and canonically. But we are oppressed by age and infirmity, and if we by the strength given us by
the Holy Ghost could be present (nothing is incredible to them that believe), this would be
best for the common welfare and most pleasant to ourselves, that we might confer something
on you, and ourselves have a part of the blessing; but if I should be kept away through
weakness, I will give at any rate whatever can be given by one who is absent.

I believe that there are others among you worthy of the Primacy, both because of the
greatness of your city, and because it has been governed in times past so excellently and by
such great men; but there is one man among you to whom I cannot prefer any, our son well
beloved of God, Basil the Priest (I speak before God as my witness); a man of pure life and
word, and alone, or almost alone, of all qualified in both respects to stand against the present
times, and the prevailing wordiness of the heretics. I write this to men of the priestly and
monastic Orders, and also to the dignitaries and councillors, and to the whole people. If
you should approve it, and my vote should prevail, being so just and right, and given with
God's aid, I am and will be with you in spirit; or rather I have already set my hand to the

4737 Matt. vi. 22.

Letter XLI. To the People of Caesarea, in His Father's Name.

work and am bold in the Spirit. But if you should not agree with me, but determine something else, and if the matter is to be settled by cliques and relationships, and if the hand of
the mob is again to disturb the sincerity of your vote, do what pleases you-I shall stay at
home.

To the Bishops.

To the Bishops.

Ep. XLIII. To the Bishops.

(The comprovincial Bishops had notified the elder Gregory of their Synod, but without
mentioning its date or purpose or inviting him to take part in it-probably because they
knew how strongly he would support the election of Basil, to which they were unfavourable. 
S. Gregory therefore wrote the following letter in his father's name.)

How sweet and kind you are, and how full of love. You have invited me to the Metropolis, because, as I imagine, you are going to take some counsel about a Bishop. So much
I learn from you, though you have not told me either that I am to be present, or why, or
when, but have merely announced to me suddenly that you were setting out, as though resolved not to respect me, and as not desirous that I should share your counsels, but rather
putting a hindrance in the way of my coming, that you may not meet me even against my
will. This is your way of action, and I will put up with the insult, but I will set before you
my view and how I feel. Various people will put forward various candidates, each according
to his own inclinations and interests, as is usually the case at such times. But I cannot prefer
anyone, for my conscience would not allow it, to my dear son and fellow priest Basil. For
whom of all my acquaintance do I find more approved in his life, or more powerful in his
word, or more furnished altogether with the beauty of virtue? But if you allege weak health
against him, I reply that we are choosing not an athlete but a teacher. And at the same time
is seen in this case the power of Him that strengthens and supports the weak, if such they
be. If you accept this vote I will come and take part, either in spirit or in body. But if you
are marching to a foregone conclusion, and faction is to overrule justice, I shall rejoice to
have been overlooked. The work must be yours; but pray for me.4738

There is here a various reading (the difference being merely the result of itacism) which seems to give

a better sense; "Ours is to pray for you."

To Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata.

To Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata.

Ep. XLII. To Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata.

(There still seemed a probability that intrigues and party spirit would carry the day, and
so the two Gregories determined to call in the aid of Eusebius of Samosata, though he did
not belong to the Province. He had been a conspicuous champion of orthodoxy against the
Arian Emperor Valens, and the Gregories hoped much from his presence at the Synod. He
responded to their appeal, and undertook the three hundred miles of very difficult travelling
to throw in his influence with the cause which they had at heart. He saw, however, that it
was necessary that the aged Bishop of Nazianzus, notwithstanding his years and infirmities,
should make the effort, and he persuaded him to go. The result was all that could be desired;
for Basil was elected by a unanimous vote. The letter, which S. Gregory wrote in his own
name to thank him, will be found later on.)

O that I had the wings of a dove, or that my old age could be renewed, that I might be
able to go to your charity, and to satisfy the longings that I have to see you, and to tell you
the troubles of my soul, and in you to find some comfort for my afflictions. For since the
death of the blessed Bishop Eusebius I am not a little afraid lest they who on a former occasion
set traps for our Metropolis, and wanted to fill it with heretical tares, should now seize the
opportunity, and uproot by their evil teaching the piety which has with so much labour
been sown in the hearts of men, and should tear asunder its unity, as they have done in
many Churches. As soon as I received letters from the Clergy asking me not to forget them
in their present circumstances, I looked round about me, and remembered your love and
your right faith and the zeal with which you are ever possessed for the Churches of God;
and therefore I sent my beloved Eustathius, my Deacon and helper, to warn your Reverence,
and to entreat you, in addition to all your toils for the Churches, to meet me, and both to
refresh my old age by your coming, and to establish in the Orthodox Church that piety
which is so famous, by giving her with us (if we may be deemed worthy to have a share with
you in the good work) a Shepherd according to the will of the Lord, who shall be able to
rule His people. For we have a man before our eyes, and you are not unacquainted with
him; and if we are permitted to obtain him I know that we shall acquire great boldness towards God, and shall confer a very great benefit upon the people who have called upon our
aid. I beg you again and again to put away all delay, and to come to us before the bad
weather of the winter sets in.

To Basil.

To Basil.

Ep. XLV. To Basil.

(After the Consecration every one thought that Gregory would at once join his friend;
and Basil himself much wished for his assistance. But Gregory thought it better to restrain
his desire to see his friend until jealousies had time to calm down. So he wrote the following
letter to explain the reasons for his staying away at this juncture.)

When I learnt that you had been placed on the lofty throne, and that the Spirit had
prevailed to publish the candle upon the candlestick, which even before shone with no dim
light, I was glad, I confess. Why should I not be, seeing as I did that the commonwealth of
the Church was in sorry plight, and needed such a guiding hand? Yet I did not run to you
off hand, nor shall I run to you, not even if you ask me yourself. First, in order that I may
be careful of your dignity, and that you may not seem to be collecting partisans under the
influence of bad taste and hot temper, as your calumniators would say; and secondly that I
may make for myself a reputation for stability, and above illwill. When then will you come,
perhaps you will ask, and how long will you put it off? As long as God shall bid me, and
until the shadow of the present enmity and slander shall have passed away. For the lepers,
I well know, will not hold out very long to keep our David out of Jerusalem.

To Basil.

To Basil.

Ep. XLVI. To Basil.

(The new Archbishop seems not to have been satisfied with the reasons given in Gregory's

last letter; so the latter writes again.)

How can any affairs of yours be mere grape-gleanings to me, O dear and sacred friend?
"What a word has escaped the fence of your teeth," or how could you dare to say such
a thing, if I too may be somewhat daring? How could your mind set it going, or your ink
write it, or your paper receive it, O lectures and Athens and virtues and literary labours! 
You almost make me write a tragedy by what you have written. Do you not know me or
yourself, you eye of the world, and great voice and trumpet and palace of learning? Your
affairs trifles to Gregory? What then on earth could any one admire, if Gregory admire not
you? There is one spring among the seasons, one sun among the stars, and one heaven that
embraces all things; and so your voice is unique among all things, if I am capable of judging
such things, and not deceived by my affection-and this I do not think to be the case. But
if it is because I do not value you according to your worth that you blame me, you must also
blame all mankind; for no one else has or will sufficiently admire you, unless it be yourself,
and your own eloquence, at least if it were possible to praise oneself, and if such were the
custom of our speech. But if you are accusing me of despising you, why not rather of being
mad? Or are you vexed because I am acting like a philosopher? Give me leave to say that
this and this alone is higher than even your conversation.

To Basil.

To Basil.

Ep. XLVII. To Basil.

(The division of the civil Province of Cappadocia into two Provinces in the year 372
was followed by ecclesiastical troubles. Anthimus, the Bishop of Tyana, the civil metropolis
of the new division of Cappadocia Secunda, maintained that the Ecclesiastical divisions
must necessarily follow the civil, and by consequence claimed for himself that the purely
civil action of the State had ipso facto elevated him to the dignity of Metropolitan of the new
Province; and this pretension was supported by the Bishops of that district, who were as a
rule not well disposed towards the great Archbishop. The next three letters are connected
with this dispute.)

I hear that you are being troubled by this fresh innovation, and are being worried by
some sophistical and not unusual officiousness on the part of those in power; and it is not
to be wondered at. For I was not ignorant of their envy, or of the fact that many of those
around you are making use of you to further their own interests, and are kindling the spark
of meanness. I have no fear of seeing you unphilosophically affected by your troubles, or
in any way unworthy of yourself and me. Nay, I think that it is now above all that my Basil
will be known, and that the philosophy which all your life you have been collecting will shew
itself, and will overcome the abuse as with a high wave; and that you will remain unshaken
while others are being troubled. If you think it well, I will come myself and perhaps shall
be able to give you some assistance by my counsel (if the sea needs water, you do counsel!);
but in any case I shall derive benefit, and shall learn philosophy by bearing my part of the
abuse.

To Basil.

To Basil.

Ep. XLVIII. To Basil.

(Shortly after the events described above, Basil determined to strengthen his own hands
by creating a number of new Bishoprics in the disputed Province, to one of which, Sasima,
he consecrated Gregory, very much against the will of the latter, who felt that he had been
hardly used, and did not attempt to disguise his reluctance. See Gen. Prolegg. p. 195.)

Do leave off speaking of me as an ill-educated and uncouth and unfriendly man, not
even worthy to live, because I have ventured to be conscious of the way in which I have been
treated. You yourself would admit that I have not done wrong in any other respect, and
my own conscience does not reproach me with having been unkind to you in either great
or small matters; and I hope it never may. I only know that I saw that I had been deceived-too late indeed, but I saw it-and I throw the blame on your throne, as having on
a sudden lifted you above yourself; and I am weary of being blamed for faults of yours, and
of having to make excuses for them to people who know both our former and our present
relations. For of all that I have to endure this is the most ridiculous or most pitiable thing,
that the same person should have both to suffer the wrong and to bear the blame, and this
is my present case. Different people blame me for different things according to the tastes
of each, or each man's disposition, or the measure of their ill feeling on my account; but the
kindest reproach me with contempt and disdain, and they throw me on one side after
making use of me, like the most valueless vessels, or those frames upon which arches are
built, which after the building is complete are taken down and cast aside. We will let them
be and say what they please; no one shall curb their freedom of speech. And do you, as my
reward, pay off those blessed and empty hopes, which you devised against the evil speakers,
who accused you of insulting me on pretence of honouring me, as though I were lightminded
and easily taken in by such treatment. Now I will plainly speak out the state of my mind,
and you must not be angry with me. For I will tell you just what I said at the moment of
the suffering, not in a fit of anger or so much in the sense of astonishment at what had
happened as to lose my reason or not to know what I said. I will not take up arms, nor will
I learn tactics which I did not learn in former times, when the occasion seemed more suitable,
as every one was arming and in frenzy (you know the illness of the weak), nor will I face the
martial Anthimus, though he be an untimely warrior, being myself unarmed and unwarlike,
and thus the more exposed to wounds. Fight with him yourself if you wish (for necessity
often makes warriors even of the weak), or look out for some one to fight when he seizes
your mules, keeping guard over a defile, and like Amalek of old, barring the way against
Israel. Give me before all things quiet. Why should I fight for sucking pigs and fowls, and
those not my own, as though for souls and canons? Why should I deprive the Metropolis
of the celebrated Sasima, or lay bare and unveil the secret of your mind, when I ought to
join in concealing it? Do you then play the man and be strong and draw all parties to your

To Basil.

own conclusion, as the rivers do the winter torrents, without regard for friendship or intimacy
in good, or for the reputation which such a course will bring you. Give yourself up to the
Spirit alone. I shall gain this only from your friendship, that I shall learn not to trust in
friends, or to esteem anything more valuable than God.

To Basil. (The Praises of Quiet.)

To Basil. (The Praises of Quiet.)

Ep. XLIX. To Basil. (The Praises of Quiet.)

You accuse me of laziness and idleness, because I did not accept your Sasima, and because
I have not bestirred myself like a Bishop, and do not arm you against each other like a bone
thrown into the midst of dogs. My greatest business always is to keep free from business. 
And to give you an idea of one of my good points, so much do I value freedom from business,
that I think I might even be a standard to all men of this kind of magnanimity, and if only
all men would imitate me the Churches would have no troubles; nor would the faith, which
every one uses as a weapon in his private quarrels, be pulled in pieces.

To Basil.

To Basil.

Ep. L. To Basil.

(At the request of Anthimus it would appear that S. Gregory wrote to S. Basil a letter,
not now extant, proposing a conference between the rival Metropolitans. Basil took umbrage
at the well-meant proposal, and wrote a stiff letter to S. Gregory, to which the following is
the reply.)

How hotly and like a colt you skip in your letters. Nor do I wonder that when you have
just become the property of glory you should wish to shew me what you find glory to be, so
that you may make yourself more majestic, like those painters who picture the seasons. But,
to explain the whole matter about the Bishops, and the letter by which you were annoyed;
what was my starting point, and how far I went, and where I stopped, appears to me to be
too long a matter for a letter, and to be a subject not so much for an apology as for a history. 
To explain it to you concisely:-the most noble Anthimus came to us with certain Bishops,
whether to visit my Father (this at least was the pretext), or to act as he did act. He sounded
me in many ways and on many subjects; dioceses, the marshes of Sasima, my ordination,...flattering, questioning, threatening, pleading, blaming, praising, drawing circles round himself,
as though I ought only to look at him and his new Metropolis, as being the greater. Why,
I said, do you draw your line to include our city, for we too deem our Church to be really a
Mother of Churches, and that too from ancient times? In the end he went away without
having gained his object, much out of breath, and reproaching me with Basilism, as if it
were a kind of Philipism. Do you think I did you wrong in this? And now look at the letter
from me, who, you say, insulted you. They fashioned a Synodal summons to me; and when
I declined it and said that the thing was an insult, they then asked as an alternative that
through me you should be invited to deliberate upon these matters. This I promised, in
order to prevent their first plan being carried out; placing the whole matter in your hands,
if you choose to call them together, and where and when. And if I have not injured you in
this, tell me where there is room for injury. If you have to learn this from me, I will read
you the letter which Anthimus sent me, after invading the marshes, notwithstanding my
prohibitions and threats, insulting and reviling me, and as it were singing a song of triumph
over my defeat. And what reason is there that I should offend him for your sake and at the
same time displease you, as though I were currying favour with him? You ought to have
learnt this first, my dear friend; and even if it had been so, you should not have insulted
me,-if only because I am a Priest. But if you are very much disposed to ostentation and
quarrelsomeness, and speak as my Superior-as the Metropolitan to an insignificant Suffragan, or even as to a Bishop without a See-I too have a little pride to set against yours. 
That is very easy to anybody, and is perhaps the most suitable course.

To Basil.

To Basil.

Ep. LVIII. To Basil.

(An attack had been made in Gregory's presence on the orthodoxy of Basil in respect
of the Deity of God the Holy Ghost; and in this letter he gives his friend an account of the
way in which he had defended him. Unfortunately Basil was not pleased with the letter,
taking it as intended to convey reproach under the guise of friendly sympathy.)

From the first I have taken you, and I take you still, for my guide of life and my teacher
of the faith, and for every thing honourable that can be said; and if any one else praises your
merits, he is altogether with me, or even behind me, so far am I surpassed by your piety,
and so thoroughly am I yours. And no wonder; for the longer the intimacy the greater the
experience; and where the experience is more abundant the testimony is more perfect. And
if I get any profit in life it is from your friendship and company. This is my disposition in
regard to these matters, and I hope always will be. What I now write I write unwillingly,
but still I write it. Do not be angry with me, or I shall be very angry myself, if you do not
give me credit for both saying and writing it out of goodwill to you.

Many people have condemned us as not firm in our faith; those, I mean, who think and
think rightly that we thoroughly agree. Some openly charge us with heresy, others with
cowardice; with heresy, those who believe that our language is not sound; with cowardice,
they who blame our reserve. I need not report what other people say; I will tell you what
has recently happened.

There was a party here at which a great many distinguished friends of ours were present,
and amongst them was a man who wore the name and dress which betoken piety (i.e. a
Monk). They had not yet begun to drink, but were talking about us, as often happens at
such parties, and made us rather than anything else the subject of their conversation. They
admired everything connected with you, and they brought me in as professing the same
philosophy; and they spoke of our friendship, and of Athens, and of our conformity of views
and feelings on all points. Our Philosopher was annoyed by this. "What is this, gentlemen?"
he said, with a very mighty shout, "what liars and flatterers you are. You may praise these
men for other reasons if you like, and I will not contradict you; but I cannot concede to you
the most important point, their orthodoxy. Basil and Gregory are falsely praised; the former,
because his words are a betrayal of the faith, the latter, because his toleration aids the treason."
What is this, said I, O vain man and new Dathan and Abiram in folly? Where do you
come from to lay down the law for us? How do you set yourself up as a judge of such great
matters? "I have just come," he replied, "from the festival of the Martyr Eupsychius4739,
(and so it really was), and there I heard the great Basil speak most beautifully and perfectly
upon the Godhead of the Father and the Son, as hardly anyone else could speak; but he

4739 He suffered under the Emperor Hadrian. The Festival was Sept. 7.

To Basil.

slurred over the Spirit." And he added a sort of illustration from rivers, which pass by rocks
and hollow out sand. "As for you my good sir," he said, looking at me, "you do now express
yourself openly on the Godhead of the Spirit," and he referred to some remarks of mine in
speaking of God at a largely attended Synod, as having added in respect of the Spirit that
expression which has made a noise, (how long shall we hide the candle under the bushel?)
"but the other man hints obscurely, and as it were, merely suggests the doctrine, but does
not openly speak out the truth; flooding people's ears with more policy than piety, and
hiding his duplicity by the power of his eloquence."

"It is," I said, "because I (living as I do in a corner, and unknown to most men who do
not know what I say, and hardly that I speak at all) can philosophize without danger; but
his word is of greater weight, because he is better known, both on his own account and on
that of his Church. And everything that he says is public, and the war around him is great,
as the heretics try to snatch every naked word from Basil's lips, to get him expelled from the
Church; because he is almost the only spark of truth left and the vital force, all else around
having been destroyed; so that evil may be rooted in the city, and may spread over the whole
world as from a centre in that Church. Surely then it is better to use some reserve in the
truth, and ourselves to give way a little to circumstances as to a cloud, rather than by the
openness of the proclamation to risk its destruction. For no harm will come to us if we recognize the Spirit as God from other phrases which lead to this conclusion (for the truth
consists not so much in sound as in sense), but a very great injury would be done to the
Church if the truth were driven away in the person of one man." The company present
would not receive my economy, as out of date and mocking them; but they shouted me
down as practising it rather from cowardice than for reason. It would be much better, they
said, to protect our own people by the truth, than by your so-called Economy to weaken
them while failing to win over the others. It would be a long business and perhaps unnecessary to tell you all the details of what I said, and of what I heard, and how vexed I was with
the opponents, perhaps immoderately and contrary to my own usual temper. But, in fine,
I sent them away in the same fashion. But do you O divine and sacred head, instruct me
how far I ought to go in setting forth the Deity of the Spirit; and what words I ought to use,
and how far to use reserve; that I may be furnished against opponents. For if I, who more
than any one else know both you and your opinions, and have often both given and received
assurance on this point, still need to be taught the truth of this matter, I shall be of all men
the most ignorant and miserable.

To Basil.

Ep. LIX. To Basil.

(The reply to Basil's somewhat angry answer to the last.)

To Basil.

This was a case which any wiser man would have foreseen; but I who am very simple
and foolish did not fear it in writing to you. My letter grieved you; but in my opinion neither
rightly nor justly, but quite unreasonably. And whilst you did not acknowledge that you
were hurt, neither did you conceal it, or if you did it was with great skill, as with a mask,
hiding your vexation under an appearance of respect. But as to myself if I acted in this deceitfully or maliciously, I shall be punished not more by your vexation than by the truth itself;
but if in simplicity and with my accustomed goodwill, I will lay the blame on my own sins
rather than on your temper. But it would have been better to have set this matter straight,
rather than to be angry with those who offer you counsel. But you must see to your own
affairs, inasmuch as you are quite capable of giving the same advice to others. You may
look upon me as very ready, if God will, both to come to you, and to join you in the conflict,
and to contribute all that I can. For who would flinch, who would not rather take courage
in speaking and contending for the truth under you and by your side?

To Basil.

To Basil.

Ep. LX. To Basil.

(Gregory was not able, owing to the serious illness of his Mother, to carry out the

promise at the end of Ep. LIX.; so he writes to explain and excuse himself.)

The Carrying Out of your bidding depends partly on me; but partly, and I venture to
think principally, on your Reverence. What depends on me is the good will and eagerness,
for I never yet avoided meeting you, but have always sought opportunities, and at the present
moment am even more desirous of doing so. What depends on your Holiness is that my
affairs be set straight. For I am sitting by my lady Mother, who has for a long time been
suffering from illness. And if I could leave her out of danger you might be well assured that
I would not deprive myself of the pleasure of going to you. So give me the help of your
prayers for her restoration to health, and for my journey to you.

To His Brother Caesarius.

Miscellaneous Letters.

Letter VII.

Miscellaneous Letters.

Division III.

Miscellaneous Letters.

§1. Letters to His Brother Caesarius.

Ep. VII.

(On the death of the Emperor Constantius the undisputed succession devolved on his
cousin Julian the Apostate, who at once began to employ all the power of the Empire to
discourage, while not absolutely persecuting, Christianity, and to restore the supremacy of
the ancient Paganism. One of his first acts was to dismiss all the men who had held high
dignities under his predecessor. S. Caesarius, Gregory's brother, was however to be excepted;
Julian, who had perhaps known and esteemed him at Athens, did all that he could to keep
him at Court, and to attach him to himself. This caused much anxiety to Gregory and other
friends of Caesarius, who foresaw that Julian would do his utmost to shake the young man's
faith, and could not feel sure that he would have courage to resist such assaults. In his
trouble Gregory wrote him the following letter. Shortly afterwards the expected attempt
was made. S. Caesarius bravely held his ground against the Emperor, and after declaring
his unalterable determination to hold firm to his faith, resigned his office at Court and
withdrew to Nazianzus.)

I have had enough to blush for in you; that I was grieved, it is hardly necessary to say
to him who of all men knows me best. But, not to speak of my own feelings, or of the distress
with which the rumour about you filled me (and let me say also the fear), I should have liked
you, had it been possible, to have heard what was said by others, both relations and outsiders,
who are any way acquainted with us (Christians I mean, of course,) about you and me; and
not only some of them, but everyone in turn alike; for men are always more ready to philosophize about strangers than about their own relations. Such speeches as the following have
become a sort of exercise among them: Now a Bishop's son takes service in the army; now
he covets exterior power and fame; now he is a slave of money, when the fire is being rekindled for all, and men are running the race for life; and he does not deem the one only
glory and safety and wealth to be to stand nobly against the times, and to place himself as
far as possible out of reach of every abomination and defilement. How then can the Bishop
exhort others not to be carried along with the times, or to be mixed up with idols? How
can he rebuke those who do wrong in other ways, seeing his own home takes away his right
to speak freely? We have every day to hear this, and even more severe things, some of the
speakers perhaps saying them from a motive of friendship, and others with unfriendly
feelings. How do you think we feel, and what is the state of mind with which we, men professing to serve God, and to deem the only good to be to look forward to the hopes of the

Letter VII.

future, hear such things as these? Our venerable Father is very much distressed by all that
he hears, which even disgusts him with life. I console and comfort him as best I can, by
making myself surety for your mind, and assuring him that you will not continue thus to
grieve us. But if our dear Mother were to hear about you (so far we have kept her in the
dark by various devices), I think she would be altogether inconsolable; being, as a woman,
of a weak mind, and besides unable, through her great piety, to control her feelings on such
matters. If then you care at all for yourself and us, try some better and safer course. Our
means are certainly enough for an independent life, at least for a man of moderate desires,
who is not insatiable in his lust for more. Moreover, I do not see what occasion for your
settling down we are to wait for, if we let this one pass. But if you cling to the same opinion,
and every thing seems to you of small account in comparison with your own desires, I do
not wish to say anything else that may vex you, but this I foretell and protest, that one of
two things must happen; either you, remaining a genuine Christian, will be ranked among
the lowest, and will be in a position unworthy of yourself and your hopes; or in grasping at
honours you will injure yourself in what is more important, and will have a share in the
smoke, if not actually in the fire.

Letter XIV.

Letter XIV.

Ep. XIV. and XXIII.

(Under the Emperor Valens Caesarius returned to public life and was made Quaestor of
Bithynia. While he was in this office the following letters were written to him by his
brother on behalf of two cousins, Eulalius, who afterwards succeeded Gregory in the Bishopric of Nazianzus, and with whom Gregory was on terms of intimate friendship, and
Amphilochius, who, through the roguery of a partner, had got into some trouble at Constantinople about money matters, and for whom he asks aid and advice. Some however
think that this letter is not addressed to his brother (who may have been at Constantinople
at the time), but to some other officer of high rank at the Imperial Court. Amphilochius
soon after retired from the world, and by a.d. 347 was already bishop of the important See
of Iconium. Gregory's letters to him are given later in this division.)

Do a kindness to yourself and to me, of a kind that you will not often have an opportunity
of doing, because opportunities for such kindnesses do not often occur. Undertake a most
righteous protection of my dear cousins, who are worried more than enough about a property
which they bought as suitable for retirement, and capable of providing them with some
means of living; but after having completed the purchase they have fallen into many troubles,
partly through finding the vendors dishonest, and partly through being plundered and
robbed by their neighbours, so that it would be a gain to them to get rid of their acquisition
for the price they gave for it, plus the not small sum they have spent on it besides. If, then,
you would like to transfer the business to yourself, after examining the contract to see how
it may be best and most securely done, this course would be most acceptable both to them
and me; but if you would rather not, the next best course would be to oppose yourself to
the officiousness and dishonesty of the man, that he may not succeed in gaining one advantage over their want of business habits, either by wronging them if they retain their property,
or by inflicting loss upon them if they part with it. I am really ashamed to write to you on
such a subject. All the same, since we owe it to them, on account both of their relationship
and of their profession (for of whom would one rather take care than of such, or what would
one be more ashamed of than of being unwilling to confer such a benefit?) do you either
for your own sake, or for mine, or for the sake of the men themselves, or for all these sakes
put together, by all means do them this kindness.

Letter XXIII.

Letter XXIII.

Ep. XXIII.

Do not be surprized if I ask of you a great favour; for it is from a great man that I am
asking it, and the request must be measured by him of whom it is made; for it is equally
absurd to ask great things from a small man, and small things from a great man, the one
being unseasonable, and the other mean. I therefore present to you with my own hand my
most precious son Amphilochius, a man so famous (even beyond his years) for his gentlemanly bearing, that I myself, though an old man, and a Priest, and your friend, would be
quite content to be as much esteemed. What wonder is it if he was cheated by a man's pretended friendship, and did not suspect the swindle? For not being himself a rogue, he did
not suspect roguery, but thought that correction of language rather than of character was
what was wanted, and therefore entered into partnership with him in business. What blame
can attach to him for this with honest men? Do not then allow wickedness to get the better
of virtue; and do not dishonour my grey hairs, but do honour to my testimony, and add
your kindness to my benedictions, which are perhaps of some account with God before
Whom we stand.

Letter XX.

Letter XX.

Ep. XX.

(In a.d. 368 the City of Nicaea in Bithynia was almost entirely destroyed by a terrible
earthquake. Caesarius lost his house, and his personal escape was almost miraculous. 
Gregory writes (as also did Basil) to congratulate him on his escape, and profits by the occasion to urge upon him retirement from his secular avocations. Caesarius soon resolved to
follow this advice, and was taking steps to carry this resolution into effect, when he died
suddenly, early in a.d. 369, aged only 40. He left the whole of his large property to the poor,
but it fell for a time into the hands of designing persons, and Gregory, who was his brother's
executor, had much difficulty in recovering it for the purpose for which it had been intended. 
(See the letter to Sophronius, Prefect of Constantinople on this subject.) He was buried at
Nazianzus in the Church of the Martyrs, in a vault which his parents had prepared for
themselves. Gregory preached the funeral sermon, which is given in the former part of this
volume. These four are the only letters known to have passed between the brothers.)

Even frights are not without use to the wise; or, as I should say, they are very valuable
and salutary. For, although we pray that they may not happen, yet when they do they instruct
us. For the afflicted soul, as Peter4740 somewhere admirably says, is near to God; and every
man who escapes a danger is brought into nearer relation to Him Who preserved him. Let
us not then be vexed that we had a share in the calamity, but let us give thanks that we were
delivered. And let us not shew ourselves one thing to God in the time of peril, and another
when the danger is over, but let us resolve, whether at home or abroad, whether in private
life or in public office (for I must say this and may not omit it), to follow Him Who has
preserved us, and to attach ourselves to His side, thinking little of the little concerns of earth;
and let us furnish a tale to those who come after us, great for our glory and the benefit of
our soul, and at the same time a very useful lesson to all, that danger is better than security,
and that misfortune is preferable to success, at least if before our fears we belonged to the
world, but after them we belong to God. Perhaps I seem to you somewhat of a bore, by
writing to you so often on the same subject, and you will think my letter a piece not of exhortation but of ostentation, so enough of this. You will know that I desire and wish especially that I might be with you and share your joy at your preservation, and to talk over these
matters later on. But since that cannot be, I hope to receive you here as soon as may be,
and to celebrate our thanksgiving together.

Source of the quotation unknown.

To S. Gregory of Nyssa.

Letter I.

To S. Gregory of Nyssa.

§2. To S. Gregory of Nyssa.

(Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa, was a younger brother of Basil the Great. Ordained a
Reader at an early age he grew tired of his vocation, and became a professor of Rhetoric. 
This gave scandal in the Church and occasioned much grief to his friends. Gregory of
Nazianzus, wrote him the following letter of remonstrance, which was not without effect,
for shortly afterwards he gave up his secular avocation, and retired to the Monastery which
his brother Basil had founded in Pontus. Here he spent several years in the study of Holy
Scripture and the best Commentators.)

Ep. I.

There is one good point in my character, and I will boast myself of one point out of
many. I am equally vexed with myself and my friends over a bad plan. Since, then, all are
friends and kinsfolk who live according to God, and walk by the same Gospel, why should
you not hear from me in plain words what all men are saying in whispers? They do not
approve your inglorious glory (to borrow a phrase from your own art), and your gradual
descent to the lower life, and your ambition, the worst of demons, according to Euripides.4741 
For what has happened to you, O wisest of men, and for what do you condemn yourself,
that you have cast away the sacred and delightful books which you used once to read to the
people (do not be ashamed to hear this), or have hung them up over the chimney, as men
do in winter with rudders and hoes, and have applied yourself to salt and bitter ones, and
preferred to be called a Professor of Rhetoric rather than of Christianity? I, thank God,
would rather be the latter than the former. Do not, my dear friend, do not let this be longer
the case, but, though it is full late, become sober again, and come to yourself once more,
and make your apology to the faithful, and to God, and to His Altars and Sacraments, from
which you have withdrawn yourself. And do not say to me in proud rhetorical style, What,
was I not a Christian when I practised rhetoric? Was I not a believer when I was engaged
among the boys? And perhaps you will call God to witness. No, my friend, not as thoroughly
as you ought to have been, even if I grant it you in part. What of the offence to others given
by your present employment-to others who are prone naturally to evil-and of the opportunity afforded them both to think and to speak the worst of you? Falsely, I grant, but where
was the necessity? For a man lives not for himself alone but also for his neighbour; nor is
it enough to persuade yourself, you must persuade others also. If you were to practise boxing
in public, or to give and receive blows in the theatre, or to writhe and twist yourself shamefully, would you speak of yourself as having a temperate soul? Such an argument does not
befit a wise man; it is frivolous to accept it. If you make a change I shall rejoice even now,

Phoen., 534.

Letter I.

said one of the Pythagorean philosophers, lamenting the fall of a friend; but, he wrote, if
not you are dead to me. But I will not yet say this for your sake. Being a friend, he became
an enemy, yet still a friend, as the Tragedy says. But I shall be grieved (to speak gently), if
you do neither yourself see what is right, which is the highest method of all, nor will follow
the advice of others, which is the next. Thus far my counsel. Forgive me that my friendship
for you makes me grieve, and kindles me both on your behalf and on behalf of the whole
priestly Order, and I may add on that of all Christians. And if I may pray with you or for
you, may God who quickeneth the dead aid your weakness.

Letter LXXII.

Letter LXXII.

Ep. LXXII.

(When S. Gregory was consecrated Bishop of Nyssa the Imperial Throne was occupied
by Valens, an ardent Arian, whose mind was bent on the destruction of the Nicene Faith. 
He appointed, with this object, one Demosthenes, a former clerk of the Imperial Kitchen,
to be Vicar of the civil Diocese of Pontus. An old quarrel with Basil had made this man
unfriendly to Gregory, and after persecuting him in various small ways for some time he
procured, a.d. 275, the summoning of a Synod to enquire into some allegations of irregularity
in his consecration, and to try Gregory on some frivolous charges of malversation of Church
funds. Gregory was unable to attend this Synod, which met at Ancyra, on account of an
attack of pleurisy; and another was summoned to meet at Nyssa itself. Gregory however
refused to appear, and was deposed as contumacious. Thereupon Valens banished him,
and he seems to have fallen into very low spirits, almost into despondency at the apparent
triumph of the heretical party. The three letters which follow throw some light upon his
state at this time. They were written in answer to letters of his now lost, and their object
was to comfort him in his trouble and to encourage him to take heart again in the hope of
a good day coming. This more cheerful tone was justified by the event, for on the death of
Valens, a.d. 378, the exiled Bishops were restored by Gratian, and Gregory was replaced in
his Episcopal Throne, to the great joy of the faithful of his Diocese.)

Do not let your troubles distress you too much. For the less we grieve over things, the
less grievous they are. It is nothing strange that the heretics have thawed, and are taking
courage from the springtime, and creeping out of their holes, as you write. They will hiss
for a short time, I know, and then will hide themselves again, overcome both by the truth
and the times, and all the more so the more we commit the whole matter to God.

Letter LXXIII.

Letter LXXIII.

Ep. LXXIII.

As to the subject of your letter, these are my sentiments. I am not angry at being overlooked, but I am glad when I am honoured. The one is my own desert, the other is a proof
of your respect. Pray for me. Excuse this short letter, for anyhow, though it is short, it is
longer than silence.

Letter LXXIV.

Letter LXXIV.

Ep. LXXIV.

Although I am at home, my love is expatriated with you, for affection makes us have
all things common. Trusting in the mercy of God, and in your prayers, I have great hopes
that all will turn out according to your mind, and that the hurricane will be turned into a
gentle breeze, and that God will give you this reward for your orthodoxy, that you will
overcome your opponents. Most of all I long to see you shortly, and to have a good time
with you, as I pray. But if you delay owing to the pressure of affairs, at any rate cheer me
by a letter, and do not disdain to tell me all about your circumstances, and to pray for me,
as you are accustomed to do. May God grant you health and good spirits in all circumstances,-you who are the common prop of the whole Church.

Letter LXXVI.

Letter LXXVI.

Ep. LXXVI.

(Basil the Great died Jan. 1, a.d. 379. Gregory of Nazianzus was prevented by very serious

illness from attending his funeral, and therefore wrote as follows to Gregory of Nyssa.)

This, then, was also reserved for my sad life, to hear of the death of Basil, and the departure of that holy soul, which has gone from us that it may be with the Lord, for which he
had been preparing himself all his life. And among all the other losses I have had to endure
this is the greatest, that by reason of the bodily sickness from which I am still suffering and
in great danger, I cannot kiss that holy dust, or be with you to enjoy the consolations of a
just philosophy, and to comfort our common friends. But to see the desolation of the
Church, shorn of such a glory, and bereft of such a crown, is what no one, at least no one
of any feeling, can bear to let his eyes look upon, or his ear hearken to. But you, I think,
though you have many friends and will receive many words of condolence, yet will not derive
comfort so much from any as from yourself and your memory of him; for you two were a
pattern to all of philosophy, a kind of spiritual standard, both of discipline in prosperity,
and of endurance in adversity; for philosophy bears prosperity with moderation and adversity
with dignity. This is what I have to say to Your Excellency. But for myself who write so,
what time or what words shall comfort me, except your company and conversation, which
our blessed one has left me in place of all, that seeing his character in you as in a bright and
shining mirror, I may think myself to possess him also!

Letter LXXXI.

Letter LXXXI.

Ep. LXXXI.

You are distressed by your travels, and think yourself unsteady, like a stick carried along
by a stream. But, my dear friend, you must not let yourself feel so at all. For the travels of
the stick are involuntary, but your course is ordained by God, and your stability is in doing
good to others, even though you are not fixed to a place; unless indeed one ought to find
fault with the sun, for going about the world scattering his rays, and giving life to all things
on which he shines; or, while praising the fixed stars, one should revile the planets, whose
very wandering is harmonious.

Letter CLXXXII.

Letter CLXXXII.

Ep. CLXXXII.

(Gregory after his resignation of the Patriarchal See of Constantinople had retired to
Nazianzus, and had been persuaded to undertake the administration of the diocese then
vacant, until the vacancy should be filled. The Bishops of the Province wished him to retain
it altogether, and therefore were in no hurry to proceed to election. At length however they
yielded to the continually expressed wishes of Gregory and chose his cousin Eulalius. Soon
however Gregory's enemies spread abroad a report that this election had been made against
his wishes, and with the intention of unfairly ousting him from the administration of that
Church. The following letter was written in consequence of this slander.)

Woe is me that my sojourning is prolonged, and, which is the greatest of my misfortunes,
that war and dissensions are among us, and that we have not kept the peace which we received
from our holy fathers. This I doubt not you will restore, in the power of the Spirit who upholds you and yours. But let no one, I beg, spread false reports about me and my lords the
bishops, as though they had proclaimed another bishop in my place against my will. But
being in great need, owing to my feeble health, and fearing the responsibility of a Church
neglected, I asked this favour of them, which was not opposed to the Canon Law, and was
a relief to me, that they would give a Pastor to the Church. He has been given to your
prayers, a man worthy of your piety, and I now place him in your hands, the most reverend
Eulalius, a bishop very dear to God, in whose arms I should like to die. If any be of opinion
that it is not right to ordain another in the lifetime of a Bishop, let him know that he will
not in this matter gain any hold upon us. For it is well known that I was appointed, not to
Nazianzus, but to Sasima, although for a short time out of reverence for my father, I as a
stranger undertook the government.

A Letter of Condolence on the Death of His Sister Theosebia.

A Letter of Condolence on the Death of His Sister Theosebia.

Ep. CXCVII. A Letter of Condolence on the Death of His Sister Theosebia.

(The writer of the article on Gregory Nyssen in the Dict. Biogr. supposes her to have
been his wife, but produces no evidence of this beyond the ambiguous expression in this
letter which speaks of her as "the true consort of a priest," but on the other hand she is expressly called his Sister in the same letter. Some writers have imagined that she was the wife
of Gregory Nazianzen himself, but there is no evidence to show that he was ever married. 
The date of her death is uncertain, but it was probably subsequent to a.d. 381. It would
seem that the term Consort might have a general application to those who shared in the
same work, and consequently the Benedictine Editors regard Theosebia as a Deaconess of
the Church of Nyssa.)

I had started in all haste to go to you, and had got as far as Euphemias, when I was
delayed by the festival which you are celebrating in honour of the Holy Martyrs; partly because I could not take part in it, owing to my bad health, partly because my coming at so
unsuitable a time might be inconvenient to you. I had started partly for the sake of seeing
you after so long, and partly that I might admire your patience and philosophy (for I had
heard of it) at the departure of your holy and blessed sister, as a good and perfect man, a
minister of God, who knows better than any the things both of God and man; and who regards as a very light thing that which to others would be most heavy, namely to have lived
with such a soul, and to send her away and store her up in the safe garners, like a shock of
the threshingfloor gathered in due season,4742 to use the words of Holy Scripture; and that
in such time that she, having tasted the joys of life, escaped its sorrows through the shortness
of her life; and before she had to wear mourning for you, was honoured by you with that
fair funeral honour which is due to such as she. I too, believe me, long to depart, if not as
you do, which were much to say, yet only less than you. But what must we feel in presence
of a long prevailing law of God which has now taken my Theosebia (for I call her mine because she lived a godly life; for spiritual kindred is better than bodily), Theosebia, the glory
of the church, the adornment of Christ, the helper of our generation, the hope of woman;
Theosebia, the most beautiful and glorious among all the beauty of the Brethren; Theosebia,
truly sacred, truly consort of a priest, and of equal honour and worthy of the Great Sacraments,4743 Theosebia, whom all future time shall receive, resting on immortal pillars, that
is, on the souls of all who have known her now, and of all who shall be hereafter. And do
not wonder that I often invoke her name. For I rejoice even in the remembrance of the
blessed one. Let this, a great deal in few words, be her epitaph from me, and my word of
condolence for you, though you yourself are quite able to console others in this way through

Job v. 26.

4743 Referring to her office as a Deaconess.

A Letter of Condolence on the Death of His Sister Theosebia.

your philosophy in all things. Our meeting (which I greatly long for) is prevented by the
reason I mentioned. But we pray with one another as long as we are in the world, until the
common end, to which we are drawing nigh, overtake us. Wherefore we must bear all
things, since we shall not for long have either to rejoice or to suffer.

To Eusebius Bishop of Samosata.

Letter XLII.

To Eusebius Bishop of Samosata.

§3. To Eusebius Bishop of Samosata.

Ep. XLII.

(This letter, urging his friend to attend at Caesarea for the election of a Metropolitan in

succession to Eusebius, has been already given in the second division of this Selection.)

Letter XLIV.

Letter XLIV.

Ep. XLIV.

(Eusebius, having in response to the appeal referred to above, betaken himself to Caesarea,
the Elder Gregory, though in very feeble health, resolved to attend the Synod in person, that
Basil's Election might be secured by their joint exertions, Gregory the Younger sent the
following letter by his father to explain to his friend the reason why he had not come too. 
The date is about September of the year 379.)

Whence shall I begin your praises, and by what name shall I give you your right appellation? The pillar and ground of the church, or a light in the world, using the very words
of the apostle, or a crown of glory to the remaining portion of christendom;4744 or a gift of
God, or the bulwark of your country, or the standard of faith, or the ambassador of truth,
or all these at once, and more than all? And these excessive praises I will prove by what we
shall see. What rain ever came so seasonably to a thirsty land, what water flowing out of
the rock to those in the wilderness? What such Bread of Angels did ever man eat? When
did Jesus the common Lord ever so seasonably present Himself to His drowning disciples,
and tame the sea, and save the perishing, as you have shewn yourself to us in our weariness
and distress, and in our immediate danger as it were of shipwreck? I need not speak of
other points, with what courage and joy you filled the souls of the orthodox, and how many
you delivered from despair.

But our mother church, Caesarea I mean, is now really putting off the garments of her
widowhood at the sight of you, and putting on again her robe of cheerfulness, and will be
yet more resplendent when she receives a pastor worthy of herself and of her former Bishops
and of your hands. For you yourself see what is the state of our affairs, and what a miracle
your zeal has wrought, and your toil, and your godly plainness of speech. Age is renewed,
disease is conquered,4745 they leap who were in their beds, and the weak are girded with
power. By all this I guess that our matters too will turn out as we desire. You have my
father, moreover, representing both himself and me, to put a glorious close to his whole life
and to his venerable age by this present struggle on behalf of the Church. And I shall receive
him back, I am well assured, strengthened by your prayers, and with youth renewed, for
one must confidently commit all in faith to them. But if he should end his life in this anxiety,
it would be no calamity to attain to such an end in such a cause. Pardon me, I beg of you,
if I give way a little to the tongues of evil men, and delay a little to come and embrace you,
and to complete in person what I now pass over of the praises due to you.

4744 Alluding to his work in opposing the prevalence of Arianism.

4745 Alluding to the effort made by his father.

Letter LXIV.

Letter LXIV.

Ep. LXIV.

(In the year 374 Eusebius and other orthodox Bishops of the East were banished by
Valens and their thrones filled with Arian intruders. Eusebius was ordered to retire to
Thrace, and his journey lay through Cappadocia, where he saw Basil, but Gregory to his
great grief was too unwell to leave his house and go to meet him. Instead he sent the following
letter.)

When Your Reverence was passing through our country I was so ill as not to be able
even to look out of my house. And I was grieved not so much on account of the illness,
though it brought about the fear of the worst, as by the inability to meet your holiness and
goodness. My longing to see your venerable face was like that which a man would naturally
feel who needed healing of spiritual wounds, and expected to receive it from you. But though
at that time the effect of my sins was that I missed the meeting with you, it is now by your
goodness possible for me to find a remedy for my trouble, for if you will deign to remember
me in your acceptable prayers, this will be to me a store of every blessing from God, both
in this my life and in the age to come. For that such a man, such a combatant for the Faith
of the Gospel, one who has endured such persecutions, and won for himself such confidence
before the all-righteous God by his patience in tribulation-that such a man should deign
to be my patron also in his prayers will gain for me, I am persuaded, as much strength as I
should have gained through one of the holy martyrs. Therefore let me entreat you to remember your Gregory without ceasing in all the matters in which I desire to be worthy of your
remembrance.

Letter LXV.

Letter LXV.

Ep. LXV.

(Eusebius having replied to the former letter Gregory wrote again, having an opportunity
of communicating with his friend through one Eupraxius, a disciple of Eusebius, who passed
through Cappadocia on his way to visit his master. This letter is sometimes attributed to
Basil.)

Our reverend brother Eupraxius has always been dear to me and a true friend, but he
has shewn himself dearer and truer through his affections for you, inasmuch as even at the
present time he has hurried to your reverence, like, to use David's words, a hart to quench
his great and unendurable thirst4746 with a sweet and pure spring at your patience in
tribulations. Deign then to be his patron and mine.

Happy indeed are they who are permitted to come near you, and happier still is he who
can place upon his sufferings for Christ's sake and upon his labours for the truth, a crown
such as few of those who fear God have obtained. For it is not an untested virtue that you
have shown, nor is it only, in a time of calm that you have sailed aright and steered the souls
of others, but you have shone in the difficulties of temptations, and have been greater than
your persecutors, having nobly departed from the land of your birth. Others possess the
threshold of their fathers,-we the heavenly City; others perhaps hold our throne, but we
Christ. O what a profitable exchange! How little we give up, to receive how much! We
went through fire and water, and I believe that we shall also come out into a place of refreshment. For God will not forsake us for ever, or abandon the true faith to persecution, but
according to the multitude of our pains His comforts shall make us glad. This at any rate
we believe and desire. But do you, I beg, pray for our humility. And as often as occasion
shall present itself bless us without hesitation by a letter, and cheer us up by news of yourself,
as you have just been good enough to do.

Ps. xliii. 1.

Letter LXVI.

Letter LXVI.

Ep. LXVI.

(The following letter is sometimes attributed to Basil, and is found in his works as well
as in those of Gregory. The mss. however, with only a single exception, give it to the latter.)

You give me pleasure both by writing and remembering me, and a much greater pleasure
by sending me your blessing in your letter. But if I were worthy of your sufferings and of
your conflicts for Christ and through Christ I should have been counted worthy also to
come to you, to embrace Your Piety, and to take example by your patience in your sufferings. 
But since I am not worthy of this, being troubled with many afflictions and hindrances I do
what is next best. I address Your Perfection, and I beg you not to be weary of remembering
me. For to be deemed worthy of your letters is not only profitable to me, but is also a matter
to boast of to many people, and is an honour, because I am considered by a man of so great
virtue, and such near relations with God, that he can bring others also by word and example
into relation to Him.

To Sophronius, Prefect of Constantinople.

Letter XXI.

To Sophronius, Prefect of Constantinople.

§4. To Sophronius, Prefect of Constantinople.

(Sophronius, a native of the Cappadocian Caesarea, was an early friend and fellow-student
of Gregory and Basil. He entered the Civil Service, and soon rose to high office. In a.d. 365
he was appointed Prefect of Constantinople, as a reward for timely intimation which he
gave to the Emperor Valens of the usurpation attempted by Procopius. He is chiefly known
to us by the letters of Gregory and Basil, invoking his good offices for various persons. Ep.
21 was written in a.d. 369 to commend to him Nicobulus, Gregory's nephew by marriage,
the husband of Alypiana, daughter of his sister Gorgonia. This Nicobulus was a man of
great wealth and ability, but much disinclined for public life. Gregory constantly writes to
one and another high official to get him excused from appointments which had been thrust
upon him.)

Ep. XXI.

Gold is changed and transformed into various forms at various times, being fashioned
into many ornaments, and used by art for many purposes; yet it remains what it is-gold;
and it is not the substance but the form which admits of change. So also, believing that your
kindness will remain unchanged for your friends, although you are ever climbing higher, I
have ventured to send you this request, because I do not more reverence your high rank
than I trust your kind disposition. I entreat you to be favourable to my most respectable
son Nicobulus, who is in all respects allied with me, both by kindred and by intimacy, and,
which is more important, by disposition. In what matters, and to what extent? In whatever
he may ask your aid, and as far as may seem to you to befit your Magnanimity. I on my
part will repay you the best I have. I have the power of speech, and of proclaiming your
goodness, if not nearly according to its worth, at any rate to the best of my ability.

Letter XXII.

Letter XXII.

Ep. XXII.

(Is for Amphilochius, written at the same time and in consequence of the same trouble

as that which we have placed second of the letters to Caesarius.)

As we know gold and stones by their look, so too we may distinguish good men from
bad in the same way, and do not need a very long trial. For I should not have needed many
words in pleading for my most honourable son Amphilochius with Your Magnanimity. I
should rather have expected some strange and incredible thing to happen than that he would
do anything dishonourable, or think of such a thing, in a matter of money; such a universal
reputation has he as a gentleman, and as wiser than his years. But what must he suffer? 
Nothing escapes envy, for some word of blame has touched even him, a man who has fallen
under accusation of crime through simplicity rather than depravity of disposition. But do
not allow it to be tolerable to you to overlook him in his vexations and trouble. Not so, I
entreat your sacred and great mind, but honour your country4747 and aid his virtue, and
have a respect for me who have attained to glory by and through you; and be everything to
this man, adding the will to the power, for I know that there is nothing of equal power with
Your Excellency.

Sophronius and Amphilochius were natives of Caesarea.

Letter XXIX.

Letter XXIX.

Ep. XXIX.

(Of the same year. Here Caesarius had bequeathed all his property to the poor; but his
house had been looted by his servants, and his friends could only find a comparatively small
sum. Besides this a number of persons, shortly afterwards, presented themselves as creditors
of his estate, and their claims, though incapable of proof, were paid. Then others kept
coming forward, until at last the family refused to admit any more. Then a lawsuit was
threatened. Gregory intensely disliking all this, and dreading moreover the scandal which
might be caused by legal proceedings, writes as follows to the Prefect.)

You see how matters stand with me, and how the circle of human affairs goes round,
now some now others flourishing or the reverse, and neither prosperity nor adversity remaining constant with us, as the saying is, but ever changing and altering, so that one might
trust the breezes, or letters written in the waters, rather than human prosperity. For what
reason is this? I think it is in order that by the contemplation of the uncertainty and anomaly
of all these things we may learn the rather to have recourse to God and to the future, giving
scanty thoughts to shadows and dreams. But what has produced this talk, for it is not without
a cause that I thus philosophize, and I am not idly boasting?

Caesarius was once one of your not least distinguished friends; indeed, unless my
brotherly affection deceives me, he was one of your most distinguished, for he was remarkably
well informed, and for gentlemanly conduct was above the average, and was celebrated for
the number of his friends; among the very first of these, as he always thought and as he
persuaded me, Your Excellency held the first place. These are old stories, and you will add
to them of your own accord in rendering honours to his memory; for it is human nature to
add something to the praises of the departed. But now (that you may not pass over this
story without a tear, or that you may weep to some good and useful purpose), he lies dead,
friendless, solitary, pitiable, deemed worthy of a little myrrh (if even of so much), and of
the last small coverings, and it is much that he has found even thus much compassion. But
his enemies, as I hear, have fallen upon his estate, and from all quarters with great violence
are plundering it, or are about to do so. O cruelty! O savagery! And there is no one to
hinder them; but even the kindest of his friends only calls upon the laws as his utmost favour. 
If I may put it concisely, I am become a mere drama, who once was wont to be happy. Do
not let this seem to you to be tolerable, but help me by sympathy and by sharing my indignation, and do right by the dead Caesarius. Yes, in the name of friendship herself; yes, by
all that you hold dearest; by your hope (which may you make secure by shewing yourself
faithful and true to the departed), I pray you do this kindness to the living, and make them
of good hope. Do you think that I am grieved about the money? It would have been a more
intolerable disgrace to me if Caesarius alone, who thought he had so many friends, turned
out to have none. Such is my request, and from such a cause does it arise, for perhaps my

affairs are not altogether matters of indifference to you. In what you will assist me, and by
what means, and how, the matter itself will suggest and your wisdom will consider.

Letter XXIX.

Letter XXXVII.

Letter XXXVII.

Ep. XXXVII.

(A letter of recommendation for Eudoxius a Rhetorician for whom Gregory had a warm

regard.)

To honour a mother is a religious duty. Now, different individuals have different
mothers; but the common mother of all is our country. This mother you have honoured
by the splendour of your whole life; and you will honour her again now by obtaining for
me that which I entreat. And what is my request? You certainly know Eudoxius the Rhetorician, the most learned of her sons. His son, to speak concisely, another Eudoxius both
in life and learning, now approaches you through me. In order then to get yourself a yet
better name, be helpful to him in the matters for which he asks your assistance. For it were
a shame were you, who are the universal Patron of our Country, and who have done good
to so many, and I will add, who will yet continue to do so, should not honour above all him
who is most excellent in learning and in his eloquence, which you ought to honour, if for
no other reason, because he uses it to praise your goodness.

Letter XXXIX.

Letter XXXIX.

Ep. XXXIX.

(About the same date. A recommendation of one Amazonius, whose learning was much

respected by Gregory.)

I wish well to all my friends. And when I speak of friends, I mean honourable and good
men, linked with me in virtue, if indeed I myself have any claim to it. Therefore at the
present time when seeking how I might do a kindness to my excellent brother Amazonius
(for I was very much pleased with the man in some intercourse which has lately taken place
between us), I thought I might return him one favour for all,-in your friendship and protection. For in a short time he shewed proof of an extensive education, both of the kind
which I used once to be very zealous for, when I was shortsighted, and of that for which I
am zealous in its place since I have been able to contemplate the summit of virtue. Whether
I in my turn have appeared to him to be worth anything in respect of virtue is his affair. At
any rate I shewed him the best things I have, namely, my friends to him as my friend. Of
these I reckon you as the first and truest, and want you to shew yourself so to him-as your
common Country demands, and my desire and promise begs; for I promised him your
patronage in return for all his kindness.

Letter XCIII.

Letter XCIII.

Ep. XCIII.

(Written soon after Gregory's resignation of the Archbishopric.)

Our retreat and leisure and quiet have about them something very agreeable to me; but
the fact that they cut me off from your friendship and society is not so advantageous but
rather the other way. Others enjoy your Perfection, to me it would be really a great boon
if I might have just that shadow of conversation which comes in a letter. Shall I see you
again? Shall I embrace again him of whom I am so proud, and shall this be granted to the
remnant of my life? If so, all thanks to God: if not, the best part of my life is over. Pray
remember your friend Gregory and pray for him.

Letter CXXXV.

Letter CXXXV.

Ep. CXXXV.

(About the middle of a.d. 382 Theodosius, on the recommendation of S. Damasus,
summoned a new Synod of Eastern Bishops to meet at Constantinople, to try and heal the
schism which had been embittered by the election of Flavian at Antioch. As soon as Gregory
heard of the convocation of this Synod he wrote to several of his influential friends at Court,
to beg them to do their utmost for the promotion of peace.)

I am philosophizing at leisure. That is the injury my enemies have done me, and I
should be glad if they would do more of the same sort, that I might look upon them still
more as benefactors. For it often happens that those who are wronged get a benefit, while
they, whom we would treat well, suffer injury. That is the state of my affairs. But if I cannot
make every one believe this, I am very anxious, that at all events you, for them all, to whom
I most willingly give an account of my affairs, should know, or rather I feel certain that you
do know it, and can persuade those who do not. You, however, I beg to give all diligence,
now at any rate, if you have not done so before, to bring together to one voice and mind the
sections of the world that are so unhappily divided; and above all if you should perceive, as
I have observed, that they are divided not on account of the Faith, but by petty private interests. To succeed in doing this would earn you a reward; and my retirement would have
less to grieve over if I could see that I did not grasp at it to no purpose, but was like a Jonas,
willingly casting myself into the sea, that the storm might cease and the sailors be saved. If,
however, they are still as storm-tost as ever, I at all events have done what I could.

To Amphilochius the Younger.

Letter IX.

To Amphilochius the Younger.

§5. To Amphilochius the Younger.

Ep. IX.

(Constantine and Constantius had granted exemption from the military tax to all clerics. 
This privilege was, however, abolished by Julian, and was restored by Valentinian and
Valens: but the collectors of revenue often tried to levy it on them in spite of the exemption. 
The collector at Nazianzus tried to do this in the case of a Deacon named Euthalius, in whose
behalf Gregory wrote the following letter to Amphilochius, who was at the time one of the
principal magistrates of the province. The date of the letter is given as a.d. 372, the year of
Gregory's Ordination to the Priesthood. For further particulars about this Amphilochius,
see introd. to letters II. and III. to Caesarius Epp. 22, 23.)

Support a wellbuilt chamber with columns of gold, as Pindar4748 says, and make yourself
from the beginning known to us on the right side in our present anxiety, that you may build
yourself a notable palace, and shew yourself in it with a good fame. But how will you do
this? By honouring God and the things of God, than Whom there can be nothing greater
in your eyes. But how, and by what act can you honour Him? By this one act, by protecting
the servants of God and ministers of the altar. One of these is our fellow deacon Euthalius,
on whom, I know not how, the officers of the Prefecture are trying to impose a payment of
gold after his promotion to the higher rank. Pray do not allow this. Reach a hand to this
deacon and to the whole clergy, and above all to me, for whom you care; for otherwise he
would have to endure a grievous wrong, alone of men deprived of the kindness of the time
and the privilege granted by the Emperor to the Clergy, and would even be insulted and
fined, possibly on account of my weakness. It would be well for you to prevent this even if
others are not well disposed.

4748 Olymp., Od. vi., 1.

Letter XIII.

Letter XIII.

Ep. XIII.

(See the first letter to Sophronius. The nature of the trouble here alluded to is unknown. 
There are several letters to various persons in reference to his troubles and difficulties, many
of them coming from his reluctance to undertake the duties of any public office. He died
at an early age, leaving his widow, Alypiana, with a large family to bring up in very reduced
circumstances. Her troubles and the education of her children were matters of much concern
to Gregory, whose frequent letters on the subject will be found below.)

I approve the statement of Theognis, who, while not praising the friendship which goes

no further than cups and pleasures, praises that which extends to actions in these words,

Beside a full wine cup a man has many friends:
But they are fewer when grave troubles press.

We, however, have not shared winecups with each other, nor indeed have we often met
(though we ought to have been very careful to do so, both for our own sake, and for the sake
of the friendship which we inherited from our fathers), but we do ask for the goodwill which
shews itself in acts. A struggle is at hand, and a very serious struggle. My son Nicobulus
has got into unexpected troubles, from a quarter from which troubles would least be looked
for. Therefore I beg you to come and help us as soon as you can, both to take part in trying
the case, and to plead our cause, if you find that a wrong is being done us. But if you cannot
come, at any rate do not let yourself be previously retained by the other side, or sell for a
small gain the freedom which we know from everybody's testimony has always characterized
you.

Letter XXV.

Letter XXV.

Ep. XXV.

(Amphilochius was acquitted of the charges made against him, referred to in former
letters; but the result of the accusation on his own mind was such that he resigned his office,
and retired to a sort of hermitage at a place called Ozizala, not far from Nazianzus, where
he devoted his hours of labour to the cultivation of vegetables. The four letters which follow
are of no special importance, and are only given as specimens of the lighter style which
Gregory could use with his intimate friends.)

I did not ask you for bread, just as I would not ask for water from the inhabitants of
Ostracine. But if I were to ask for vegetables from a man of Ozizala it were no strange thing,
nor too great a strain on friendship; for you have plenty of them, and we a great dearth. I
beg you then to send me some vegetables, and plenty of them, and the best quality, or as
many as you can (for even small things are great to the poor); for I am going to receive the
great Basil, and you, who have had experience of him full and philosophical, would not like
to know him hungry and irritated.

Letter XXVI.

Letter XXVI.

Ep. XXVI.

What a very small quantity of vegetables you have sent me! They must surely be golden
vegetables! And yet your whole wealth consists of orchards and rivers and groves and gardens, and your country is productive of vegetables as other lands are of gold, and

You dwell among meadowy leafage.

But corn is for you a fabulous happiness, and your bread is the bread of angels, as the
saying is, so welcome is it, and so little can you reckon upon it. Either, then, send me your
vegetables less grudgingly, or-I won't threaten you with anything else, but I won't send
you any corn, and will see whether there is any truth in the saying that grasshoppers live on
dew!

Letter XXVII.

Letter XXVII.

Ep. XXVII.

You make a joke of it; but I know the danger of an Ozizalean starving when he has taken
most pains with his husbandry. There is only this praise to be given them, that even if they
die of hunger they smell sweet, and have a gorgeous funeral. How so? Because they are
covered with plenty of all sorts of flowers.

Letter XXVIII.

Letter XXVIII.

Ep. XXVIII.

In visiting the mountain cities which border on Pamphylia I fished up in the Mountains
a sea Glaucus; I did not drag the fish out of the depths with a net of flax, but I snared my
game with the love of a friend. And having once taught my Glaucus to travel by land, I sent
him as the bearer of a letter to Your Goodness. Please receive him kindly, and honour him
with the hospitality commended in the Bible, not forgetting the vegetables.

Letter LXII.

Letter LXII.

Ep. LXII.

(The Armenian referred to is probably Eustathius Bishop of Sebaste, the capital of Armenia Minor. He had been a disciple of Arius, but more than once professed the Nicene
Faith, changing his opinions with his company. His personal character however stood very
high, and for a long time S. Basil regarded him with affectionate esteem. Indeed S. Basil's
Rule for Monks is based on one drawn up by him. But after Basil's elevation to the Episcopate
Eustathius began to oppose him and to calumniate him on all sides, and even entered openly
into communion with the Arians. It would seem that this man tried to get Amphilochius
round to his side, and through him Gregory.)

The Injunction of your inimitable Honour is not barbaric, but Greek, or rather christian;
but as for the Armenian on whom you pride yourself so, he is a downright barbarian, and
far from our honour.

To Amphilochius the Elder.

To Amphilochius the Elder.

Ep. LXIII. To Amphilochius the Elder.

(In a.d. 374 Amphilochius was made Bishop of Iconium; and his father, a man of the
same name, was deeply aggrieved at being thus deprived of his son, to whom he had looked
to support him in his old age, and accused Gregory of being the cause. Gregory, who had
just lost his own father, writes to undeceive him, and to convince him how much he dreads
the burden of the responsibilities of the episcopate for his friend as well as for himself.)

Are you grieving? I, of course, am full of joy! Are you weeping? I, as you see, am
keeping festival and glorying in the present state of things! Are you grieved because your
son is taken from you and promoted to honour on account of his virtue, and do you think
it a terrible misfortune that he is no longer with you to tend your old age, and, as his custom
is, to bestow on you all due care and service? But it is no grief to me that my father has left
me for the last journey, from which he will return to me no more, and I shall never see him
again! Then I for my part do not blame you, nor do I ask you for due condolence, knowing
as I do that private troubles allow no leisure for those of strangers; for no man is so friendly
and so philosophical as to be above his own suffering and to comfort another when needing
comfort himself. But you on the contrary heap blow on blow, when you blame me, as I hear
you do, and think that your son and my brother is neglected by us, or even betrayed by us,
which is a still heavier charge; or that we do not recognize the loss which all his friends and
relatives have suffered, and I more than all, because I had placed in him my hopes of life,
and looked upon him as the only bulwark, the only good counsellor, and the only sharer of
my piety. And yet, on what grounds do you form this opinion? If on the first, be assured
that I came over to you on purpose, and because I was troubled by the rumour, and I was
ready to share your deliberations while it was still time for consultation about the matter;
and you imparted anything to me rather than this, whether because you were in the same
distress, or with some other purpose, I know not what. But if the last, I was prevented from
meeting you again by my grief, and the honour I owed my father, and his funeral, over which
I could not give anything precedence, and that when my sorrow was fresh, and it would not
only have been wrong but also quite improper to be unseasonably philosophical, and above
human nature. Moreover, I thought that I was previously engaged by the circumstances,
especially as his had come to such a conclusion as seemed good to Him who governs all our
affairs. So much concerning this matter. Now I beg you to put aside your grief, which is
most unreasonable I am sure; and if you have any further grievance, bring it forward that
you may not grieve both me in part and yourself, and put yourself in a position unworthy
of your nobility, blaming me instead of others, though I have done you no wrong, but, if I
must say the truth, have been equally tyrannized over by our common friend, although you
used to think me your only benefactor.

Letter CLXXI.

Letter CLXXI.

Ep. CLXXI. To Amphilochius, Bishop of Iconium.

Scarcely yet delivered from the pains of my illness, I hasten to you, the guardian of my
cure. For the tongue of a priest meditating of the Lord raises the sick. Do then the greater
thing in your priestly ministration, and loose the great mass of my sins when you lay hold
of the Sacrifice of Resurrection. For your affairs are a care to me waking or sleeping, and
you are to me a good plectrum, and have made a welltuned lyre to dwell within my soul,
because by your numerous letters you have trained my soul to science. But, most reverend
friend, cease not both to pray and to plead for me when you draw down the Word by your
word, when with a bloodless cutting you sever the Body and Blood of the Lord, using your
voice for the glaive.4749

4749 A very clear assertion of the Real Presence.

Letter CLXXXIV.

Letter CLXXXIV.

Ep. CLXXXIV.

(Bosporius, Bishop of Colonia in Cappadocia Secunda, who had apparently taken a
prominent part in the election and consecration of Eulalius to the See of Nazianzus, was
accused of heresy by Helladius Archbishop of Caesarea, and a Council met at Parnassus to
try him, a.d. 383. Gregory, not being able personally to attend this Synod, writes to Amphilochius, to beg him to undertake the defence of the accused. The letter is lost, but
Gregory's friend carried out his mission with success, and the following letter is to thank
him for his kindness.)

The Lord fulfil all thy petitions (do not despise a father's prayer), for you have abundantly
refreshed my age, both by having gone to Parnassus, as you were invited to do, and by having
refuted the calumny against the most Reverend and God-beloved Bishop. For evil men love
to set down their own faults to those who convict them. For the age of this man is stronger
than all the accusations, and so is his life, and we too who have often heard from him and
taught others, and those whom he has recovered from error and added to the common body
of the church; but yet the present evil times called for more accurate proof on account of
the slanderers and evil-disposed; and this you have supplied us with, or rather you have
supplied it to those who are of fickler mind and easily led away by such men. But if you will
undertake a longer journey, and will personally give testimony, and settle the matter with
the other bishops, you will be doing a spiritual work worthy of your Perfection. I and those
with me salute your Fraternity.

To Nectarius Archbishop of Constantinople.

Letter LXXXVIII.

To Nectarius Archbishop of Constantinople.

§6. To Nectarius Archbishop of Constantinople.

(Gregory, having failed to persuade the Council of a.d. 381 to end the schism at Antioch
by recognizing Paulinus as successor to Meletius, thought it best for the sake of peace to
resign the Archbishopric. The Council elected in his place Nectarius, a catechumen at the
time, who was Praetor of Constantinople, and he was consecrated and enthroned June 9,
381. Gregory always maintained cordial relations with him; and the following letter was
written in answer to the formal announcement of his election.)

Ep. LXXXVIII.

It was needful that the Royal Image should adorn the Royal City. For this reason it
wears you upon its bosom, as was fitting, with the virtues and the eloquence, and the other
beauties with which the Divine Favour has conspicuously enriched you. Us it has treated
with utter contempt, and has cast away like refuse and chaff or a wave of the sea. But since
friends have a common interest in each other's affairs, I claim a share in your welfare, and
feel myself a partaker in your glory and the rest of your prosperity. Do you also, as is fitting,
partake of the anxieties and reverses of your exiles, and not only (as the tragedians say) hold
and stick to happy circumstances, but also take your part with your friend in troubles; that
you may be perfectly just, living justly and equally in respect of friendship and of your
friends. May good fortune abide with you long, that you may do yet more good; yes, may
it be with you irrevocably and eternally, after your prosperity here, unto the passage to that
other world.

Letter XCI.

Letter XCI.

Ep. XCI.

(A letter of no great importance, except as shewing the friendly feelings which Gregory

continued to maintain towards his successor.)

Affairs with us go on as usual: we are quiet without strifes and disputes, valuing as we
do the reward (which has no risk attaching to it) of silence, beyond everything. And we
have derived some profit from this rest, having by God's mercy fairly recovered from our
illness. Do you ride on and reign, as holy David says,4750 and may God, Who has honoured
you with Priesthood, accompany you throughout, and set it for you above all slander. And
that we may give each other a proof of our courage, and may not suffer any human calamity
as we stand before God, I send this message to you, and do you promptly assent to it. There
are many reasons which make me very anxious about our very dear Pancratius. Be good
enough to receive him kindly, and to commend him to the best of your friends, that he may
attain his object. His object is through some kind of military service to obtain relief from
public office, though there is no single kind of life that is unexposed to the slanders of
worthless men, as you very well know.

Ps. xlv. 4.

Letter CLI.

Letter CLI.

Ep. CLI.

(Written about a.d. 382, commending his friend George, a deacon of Nazianzus, to the
good offices of the Archbishop and the Count of the Domestics, or Master of the Imperial
Household, on account of his private troubles and anxieties.)

People in general make a very good guess at your disposition-or rather, they do not
conjecture, but they do not refuse to believe me when I pride myself on the fact that you
deem me worthy of no small respect and honour. One of these people is my very precious
son George, who having fallen into many losses, and being very much overwhelmed by his
troubles, can find only one harbour of safety, namely, to be introduced to you by us, and to
obtain some favour at the hands of the Most Illustrious the Count of the Domestics. Grant
them this favour, either to him and his need, or else, if you prefer it, to me, to whom I know
you have resolved to grant all favours; and facts also persuade me that this is true of you.

Letter CLXXXV.

Letter CLXXXV.

Ep. CLXXXV.

(See Introduction to Ep. CLXXXIV. above, p. 469. Bosporius was to be sent to Constantinople that his cause might there be tried in the Civil Courts. Gregory therefore writes
to the Archbishop to point out what a serious infringement of the rights of the Church this
would be. Probably the attitude which Nectarius took up at the suggestion of Gregory was
the occasion of the Edict which Theodosius addressed in February, a.d. 384 or 5, to the
Augustal Prefect, withdrawing all clerics from the jurisdiction of the civil tribunals, and
placing them under the exclusive control of the episcopal courts.)

Whenever different people praise different points in you, and all are pushing forward
your good fame, as in a marketplace, I contribute whatever I can, and not less than any of
them, because you deign also to honour me, to cheer my old age, as a well-beloved son does
that of his father. For this reason I now also venture to offer to you this appeal on behalf of
the Most Reverend and God-beloved Bishop Bosporius; though ashamed on the one hand
that such a man should need any letter from me, since his venerable character is assured
both by his daily life and by his age; and on the other hand not less ashamed to keep silence
and not to say a word for him, while I have a voice, and honour faith, and know the man
most intimately. The controversy about the dioceses you will no doubt yourself resolve according to the grace of the Spirit which is in you, and to the order of the canons. But I hope
Your Reverence will see that it is not to be endured that our affairs are to be posted up in
the secular courts. For even if they who are judges of such courts are Christians, as by the
mercy of God they are, what is there in common between the Sword and the Spirit? And
even if we yield this point, how or where can it be just that a dispute concerning the faith
should be interwoven with the other questions? Is our God-beloved Bishop Bosporius today a heretic? Is it to-day that his hoar hair is set in the balance, who has brought back so
many from their error, and has given so great proof of his orthodoxy, and is a teacher of us
all? No, I entreat you, do not give place to such slanders; but if possible reconcile the opposing parties and add this to your praises; but if this may not be, at all events do not allow us
all, (with whom he has lived, and with whom he has grown old,) to be outraged by such insolence,-us whom you know to be accurate preachers of the Gospel, both when to be so
was dangerous, and when it is free from risk; and to be unable to endure any detraction
from the One Unapproachable Godhead. And I beg you to pray for me who am suffering
from serious illness. I and all who are with me salute the brethren who surround you. May
you, strong and of good courage and of good fame in the Lord, grant to us and the Churches
the support which all in common demand.

Letter CLXXXVI.

Letter CLXXXVI.

Ep. CLXXXVI.

(A letter of introduction for a relative.)

What would you have done if I had come in person and taken up your time? I am quite
certain you would have undertaken with all zeal to deliver me from the slander, if I may
take as a token what has happened before. Do me this favour, then, through my most discreet
kinswoman who approaches you through me, reverencing first the age of your petitioner,
and next her disposition and piety, which is more than is ordinarily found in a woman; and
besides this, her ignorance in business-matters, and the troubles now brought upon her by
her own relations; and above all, my entreaty. The greatest favour you can do me is speed
in the benefit for which I am asking. For even the unjust judge in the Gospel4751 shewed
kindness to the widow, though only after long beseeching and importunity. But from you
I ask for speed, that she may not be overwhelmed by being long burdened with anxieties
and miseries in a foreign land; though I know quite well that Your Piety will make that alien
land to be a fatherland to her.

S. Luke xviii. 1, etc.

Letter CCII.

Ep. CCII.

(An important letter on the Apollinarian controversy has already been given above.)

Letter CCII.

To Theodore, Bishop of Tyana.

Letter LXXVII.

To Theodore, Bishop of Tyana.

§7. To Theodore, Bishop of Tyana.

(Theodore, a native of Arianzus, and an intimate friend of Gregory, accompanied him
to Constantinople a.d. 379, and shared his persecution by the Arians, who broke into their
church during the celebration of the divine liturgy, and pelted the clergy with stones. 
Theodore could not bring himself to put up with this, and declared his intention of prosecuting the aggressors. Gregory wrote the following letter to dissuade him from this course,
by shewing him how much more noble it is to forgive than to revenge.)

Ep. LXXVII.

I hear that you are indignant at the outrages which have been committed on us by the
Monks and the Mendicants. And it is no wonder, seeing that you never yet had felt a blow,
and were without experience of the evils we have to endure, that you did feel angry at such
a thing. But we as experienced in many sorts of evil, and as having had our share of insult,
may be considered worthy of belief when we exhort Your Reverence, as old age teaches and
as reason suggests. Certainly what has happened was dreadful, and more than dreadful,-no
one will deny it: that our altars were insulted, our mysteries disturbed, and that we ourselves
had to stand between the communicants and those who would stone them, and to make
our intercessions a cure for stonings; that the reverence due to virgins was forgotten, and
the good order of monks, and the calamity of the poor, who lost even their pity through ferocity. But perhaps it would be better to be patient, and to give an example of patience to
many by our sufferings. For argument is not so persuasive of the world in general as is
practice, that silent exhortation.

We think it an important matter to obtain penalties from those who have wronged us: 
an important matter, I say, (for even this is sometimes useful for the correction of others)-but it is far greater and more Godlike, to bear with injuries. For the former course
curbs wickedness, but the latter makes men good, which is much better and more perfect
than merely being not wicked. Let us consider that the great pursuit of mercifulness is set
before us, and let us forgive the wrongs done to us that we also may obtain forgiveness, and
let us by kindness lay up a store of kindness.

Phineas was called Zelotes because he ran through the Midianitish woman with the
man who was committing fornication with her,4752 and because he took away the reproach
from the children of Israel: but he was more praised because he prayed for the people when
they had transgressed.4753 Let us then also stand and make propitiation, and let the plague
be stayed, and let this be counted unto us for righteousness. Moses also was praised because

4752 Num. xxiv. 7.

Ps. cvi. 30, 31.

Letter LXXVII.

he slew the Egyptian that oppressed the Israelite;4754 but he was more admirable because
he healed by his prayer his sister Miriam when she was made leprous for her murmuring.4755 
Look also at what follows. The people of Nineve are threatened with an overthrow, but by
their tears they redeem their sin.4756 Manasses was the most lawless of Kings,4757 but is
the most conspicuous among those who have attained salvation through mourning.

O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee,4758 saith God. What anger is here expressed-and
yet protection is added. What is swifter than Mercy? The Disciples ask for flames of Sodom
upon those who drive Jesus away, but He deprecates revenge.4759 Peter cuts off the ear of
Malchus, one of those who outraged Him, but Jesus restores it.4760 And what of him who
asks whether he must seven times forgive a brother if he has trespassed, is he not condemned
for his niggardliness, for to the seven is added seventy times seven?4761 What of the debtor
in the Gospel who will not forgive as he has been forgiven?4762 Is it not more bitterly exacted
of him for this? And what saith the pattern of prayer? Does it not desire that forgiveness
may be earned by forgiveness?

Having so many examples let us imitate the mercy of God, and not desire to learn from
ourselves how great an evil is requital of sin. You see the sequence of goodness. First it
makes laws, then it commands, threatens, reproaches, holds out warnings, restrains, threatens
again, and only when forced to do so strikes the blow, but this little by little, opening the
way to amendment. Let us then not strike suddenly (for it is not safe to do so), but being
self-restrained in our fear let us conquer by mercy, and make them our debtors by our
kindness, tormenting them by their conscience rather than by anger. Let us not dry up a
fig tree which may yet bear fruit,4763 nor condemn it as useless and cumbering the ground,
when possibly the care and diligence of a skilful gardener may yet heal it. And do not let
us so quickly destroy so great and glorious a work through what is perhaps the spite and
malice of the devil; but let us choose to shew ourselves merciful rather than severe, and
lovers of the poor rather than of abstract justice; and let us not make more account of those
who would enkindle us to this than of those who would restrain us, considering, if nothing

Exod. ii. 12.

4755 Num. xii. 40.

Jon. iii. 10.

2 Chron. xxxiii. 12, 13.

4758 Hos. vi. 4.

S. Luke ix. 54.

Ib. xxii. 50.

S. Matt. xviii. 21.

Ib. xviii. 28 sq.

S. Luke xiii. 7.

Letter LXXVII.

else, the disgrace of appearing to contend against mendicants who have this great advantage
that even if they are in the wrong they are pitied for their misfortune. But as things are,
consider that all the poor and those who support them, and all the Monks and Virgins are
falling at your feet and praying you on their behalf. Grant to all these for them this favour
(since they have suffered enough as is clear by what they have asked of us) and above all to
me who am their representative. And if it appear to you monstrous that we should have
been dishonoured by them, remember that it is far worse that we should not be listened to
by you when we make this request of you. May God forgive the noble Paulus his outrages
upon us.

Letter CXV.

Letter CXV.

Ep. CXV.

(Sent about Easter a.d. 382 with a copy of the Philocalia, or Chrestomathy of Origen's

works edited by himself and S. Basil.)

You anticipate the Festival, and the letters, and, which is better still, the time by your
eagerness, and you bestow on us a preliminary festival. Such is what Your Reverence gives
us. And we in return give you the greatest thing we have, our prayers. But that you may
have some small thing to remember us by, we send you the volume of the Philocalia of
Origen, containing a selection of passages useful to students of literature. Deign to accept
this, and give us a proof of its usefulness, being aided by diligence and the Spirit.

Letter CXXI.

Letter CXXI.

Ep. CXXI.

(Written a little later, as a letter of thanks for an Easter Gift. Theodore had quite recently

been made Archbishop of Tyana.)

We rejoice in the tokens of love, and especially at such a season, and from one at once
so young a man, and so perfect; and, to greet you with the words of Scripture, stablished in
your youth,4764 for so it calls him who is more advanced in wisdom than his years lead us
to expect. The old Fathers prayed for the dew of heaven and fatness of the earth4765 and
other such things for their children, though perhaps some may understand these things in
a higher sense; but we will give you back all in a spiritual sense. The Lord fulfil all thy requests,4766 and mayest thou be the father of such children4767 (if I may pray for you concisely
and intimately) as you yourself have shewn yourself to your own parents, so that we, as well
as every one else, may be glorified concerning you.

Ps. cxliv. 2.

4765 Gen. xxvii. 28.

Ps. xx. 7.

It seems clear, as Benoît remarks, that this expression refers to Spiritual fatherhood. Theodore does not

appear to have been married.

Letter CXXII.

Letter CXXII.

Ep. CXXII.

You owe me, even as a sick man, tending, for one of the commandments is the visitation
of the sick. And you also owe to the Holy Martyrs their annual honour, which we celebrate
in your own Arianzus on the 23rd of the month which we call Dathusa.4768 And at the
same time there are ecclesiastical affairs not a few which need our common examination. 
For all these reasons then, I beg you to come at once: for though the labour is great, the reward is equivalent.

Probably July.

Letter CXXIII.

Letter CXXIII.

Ep. CXXIII.

(To excuse himself for postponing his acceptance of an invitation.)

I reverence your presence, and I delight in your company; although otherwise I counsel
led myself to remain at home and philosophize in quiet, for I found this of all courses the
most profitable for myself. And since the winds are still somewhat rough, and my infirmity
has not yet left me, I beg you to bear with me patiently for a little while, and to join me in
my prayers for health; and as soon as the fit season comes I will attend upon your requests.

Letter CXXIV.

Letter CXXIV.

Ep. CXXIV.

(A little later on, when the weather was more settled, Gregory accepts the invitation and

proposes to come at once, but declines to attend the Provincial Synod.)

You call me? And I hasten, and that for a private visit. Synods and Conventions I salute
from afar, since I have experienced that most of them (to speak moderately) are but sorry
affairs. What then remains? Help with your prayers my just desires that I may obtain that
for which I am anxious.

Letter CLII.

Letter CLII.

Ep. CLII.

(On his retirement from Constantinople Gregory had at the request of the Bishops of
the Province, and especially of Theodore of Tyana the Metropolitan, and Bosporius Bishop
of Colonia (see letters above) and at the earnest solicitation of the people, undertaken the
charge of the Diocese of Nazianzus; but he very soon found that his health was not equal to
so great a task, and that he could not fulfil its calls upon him. He struggled on for some
time, but at length, finding himself quite unequal to it, he wrote as follows to the Metropolitan:)

It is time for me to use these words of Scripture, To whom shall I cry when I am
wronged?4769 Who will stretch out a hand to me when I am oppressed? To whom shall
the burden of this Church pass, in its present evil and paralysed condition? I protest before
God and the Elect Angels that the Flock of God is being unrighteously dealt with in being
left without a Shepherd or a Bishop, through my being laid on the shelf. For I am a prisoner
to my ill health and have been very quickly removed thereby from the Church, and made
quite useless to everybody, every day breathing my last, and getting more and more crushed
by my duties. If the Province had any other head, it would have been my duty to cry out
and protest to it continually. But since Your Reverence is the Superior, it is to you I must
look. For, to leave out everything else, you shall learn from my fellow-priests, Eulalius the
Chorepiscopus4770 and Celeusius, whom I have specially sent to Your Reverence, what these
robbers4771 who have now got the upper hand, are both doing and threatening. To repress
them is not in the power of my weakness, but belongs to your skill and strength; since to
you, with His other gifts God has given that of strength also for the protection of His Church. 
If in saying and writing this I cannot get a hearing, I shall take the only course remaining
to me, that of publicly proclaiming and making known that this Church needs a Bishop, in
order that it may not be injured by my feeble health. What is to follow is matter for your
consideration.

4769 Hab. ii. 1.

4770 Chorepiscopi;-a grade of clergy called into existence in the latter part of the Third Century, first in

Asia Minor, to meet the difficulty of providing Episcopal supervision in the country districts of large Dioceses. 

They seemed to have been allowed to confer the Minor, but not the Holy Orders, unless by special commission

from the Diocesan, on the ground of their lack of original Jurisdiction. That they were originally possessed of

full Episcopal Orders there can be no doubt, but eventually the position was allowed to be held by Priests, and

in the West the office became practically merged in that of the Archdeacon.

4771 The Apollinarians.

To Bosporius, Bishop of Colonia.

To Bosporius, Bishop of Colonia.

Ep. CLIII. To Bosporius, Bishop of Colonia.

(S. Gregory had to carry out his threat. He resigned the care of Nazianzus, and nothing
would induce him to withdraw his resignation. Bosporius wrote him an urgent letter with
this object, but he replied as follows:)

Twice I have been tripped up by you, and have been deceived (you know what I mean),
and, if it was justly, may the Lord smell from you an odour of sweet savour;4772 if unjustly,
may the Lord pardon it. For so it is reasonable for me to speak of you, seeing we are commanded to be patient when injuries are inflicted on us. But as you are master of your own
opinions, so am I of mine. That troublesome Gregory will no longer be troublesome to
you. I will withdraw myself to God, Who alone is pure and guileless. I will retire into myself. 
This I have determined; for to stumble twice on the same stone is attributed by the proverb
to fools alone.

4772 Gen. viii. 21.

To Theodore, Archbishop of Tyana.

To Theodore, Archbishop of Tyana.

Ep. CLVII. To Theodore, Archbishop of Tyana.

(S. Gregory succeeded at the end of a.d. 382 in convincing the Metropolitan and his
Comprovincials of his sincerity in desiring to retire; and so they began to cast about for a
Successor. Gregory desired that his cousin the Chorepiscopus Eulalius should be nominated,
but the Bishops felt some jealousy at what they took to be an attempt on his part to dictate
to them, and refused to allow him to take any part in the election, on the ground that he
either never had been, or at any rate had ceased to be one of the Bishops of the Province. 
He protested, but finding that he could not convince them he withdrew his claim to a vote
and wrote to Theodore, as follows:-)

Our spiritual affairs have reached their limit: I will not trouble you any further. Join
together: take your precautions: take counsel against us: let our enemies have the victory: 
let the canons be accurately observed, beginning with us, the most ignorant of men. There
is no ill-will in accuracy; only do not let the rights of friendship be impeded. The children
of my very honoured son Nicobulus have come to the city to learn shorthand. Be kind
enough to look upon them with a fatherly and kindly eye (for the canons do not forbid this),
but especially take care that they live near the Church. For I desire that they should be
moulded in character to virtue by continual association with Your Perfectness.

Letter CLXIII.

Letter CLXIII.

Ep. CLXIII.

(George a layman of Paspasus, was sent by Theodore of Tyana to Saint Gregory that
the latter might convince him of his error and sin in repudiating an oath which he had taken,
on the ground that it was taken in writing and not viva voce. Gregory seems to have brought
him to a better mind, and sent him back to the Metropolitan with the following letter, requesting that due penance be imposed upon him, and have its length regulated by his contrition. This letter was read to the Second Council of Constantinople in 553, by Euphrantes,
a successor of Theodore in the See of Tyana, and was accepted by the Fathers, wherefore it
is regarded as having almost the force of a Canon of the Church Universal.)

God grant you to the Churches, both for our glory, and for the benefit of many, being
as you are so circumspect and cautious in spiritual matters as to make us also more cautious
who are considered to have some advantage over you in years. Since, however, you have
wished to take us as partners in your spiritual inquiry (I mean about the oath which George
of Paspasus appears to have sworn), we will declare to Your Reverence what presents itself
to our mind. Very many people, as it seems to me, delude themselves by considering oaths
which are taken with the sanction of spoken imprecations to be real oaths, but those which
are written and not verbally uttered, to be mere matter of form, and no oaths at all. For
how can we suppose that while a written schedule of debts is more binding than a verbal
acknowledgment, yet a written oath is something other than an oath? Or to speak concisely,
we hold an oath to be the assurance given to one who asked for and obtained it. Nor is it
sufficient to say that he suffered violence (for the violence was the Law by which he bound
himself), nor that afterwards he won the cause in the Law Court-for the very fact that he
went to law was a breach of his oath. I have persuaded our brother George of this, not to
pretend excuses for his sin, and not to seek out arguments to defend his transgression, but
to recognize the writing as an oath, and to bewail his sin before God and Your Reverence,
even though he formerly deceived himself and took a different view of it. This is what we
have personally argued with him; and it is evident that if you will discourse with him more
carefully, you will deepen his contrition, since you are a great healer of souls, and having
treated him according to the Canon for as long a time as shall seem right, you will afterwards
be able to confer indulgence upon him in the matter of time. And the measure of the time
must be the measure of his compunction.

Letter CLXXXIII.

Letter CLXXXIII.

Ep. CLXXXIII.

(Helladius, Archbishop of Caesarea, contested the validity of the election of Eulalius to
the Bishopric of Nazianzus, and accused Bosporius of heresy. S. Gregory here throws the
whole weight of his authority into the other scale. It is however manifest from the very
terms of the letter that the person addressed is not Theodore of Tyana. It was conjectured
by Clémencet that perhaps he was Theodore of Mopsuestia.)

Envy, which no one easily escapes, has got some foothold amongst us. See, even we
Cappadocians are in a state of faction, so to speak-a calamity never heard of before, and
not to be believed-so that no flesh may glory4773 in the sight of God, but that we may be
careful, since we are all human, not to condemn each other rashly. For myself, there is some
gain even from the misfortune (if I may speak somewhat paradoxically), and I really gather
a rose out of thorns, as the proverb has it. Hitherto I have never met Your Reverence face
to face, nor conversed with you by letter, but have only been illuminated by your reputation;
but now I am of necessity compelled to approach you by letter, and I am very grateful to
him who has procured me this privilege. I omit to write to the other Bishops about whom
you wrote to me, as the opportunity has not yet arisen. Moreover my weak health makes
me less active in this matter; but what I write to you I write to them also through you. My
Lord the God-beloved Bishop Helladius4774 must cease to waste his labour on our concerns. 
For it is not through spiritual earnestness, but through party zeal, that he is seeking this;
and not for the sake of accurate compliance with the canons, but for the satisfaction of anger,
as is evident by the time he has chosen, and because many have moved with him unreasonably, for I must say this, and not trouble myself about it. If I were physically in a condition
to govern the Church of Nazianzus, to which I was originally appointed, and not to Sasima
as some would falsely persuade you, I should not have been so cowardly or so ignorant of
the Divine Constitutions as either to despise that Church, or to seek for an easy life in preference to the prizes which are in store for those who labour according to God's will, and
work with the talent committed to their care. For what profit should I have from my many
labours and my great hopes, if I were ill advised in the most important matters? But since
my bodily health is bad, as everyone can plainly see, and I have not any responsibility to
fear on account of this withdrawal, for the reason I have mentioned, and I saw that the
Church through cleaving to me was suffering in its best interests and almost being destroyed
through my illness, I prayed both before and now again my Lords the God-beloved Bishops
(I mean those of our own Province) to give the Church a head, which they have done by
God's Grace, worthy both of my desire and of your prayers. This I would have you both

1 Cor. i. 29.

Basil's successor.

Letter CLXXXIII.

know yourself, most honourable Lord, and also inform the rest of the Bishops, that they
may receive him and support him by their votes, and not bear heavily on my old age by believing the slander. Let me add this to any letter. If your examination finds my Lord the
God-beloved Priest Bosporius guilty concerning the faith-a thing which it is not lawful
even to suggest-(I pass over his age and my personal testimony) judge him so yourselves. 
But if the discussion about the dioceses is the cause of this evil report and this novel accusation, do not be led away by the slander, and do not give to falsehoods a greater strength
than to the truth, I beg you, lest you should cast into despair those who desire to do what
is right. May you be granted good health and spirits and courage and continual progress
in the things of God to us and to the Church, whose common boast you are.

Letter CXXXIX.

Letter CXXXIX.

Ep. CXXXIX.

(This letter is written at a somewhat earlier date in reference to the consent he had been
induced to give to remaining for some time longer as administrator of the See of Nazianzus. 
It is certainly not addressed to Theodore of Tyana, and it is not known who this Theodore
is.)

He Who raised David His servant from the Shepherd's work to the Throne, and Your
Reverence from the flock to the Work of the Shepherd: He that orders our affairs and those
of all who hope in Him according to His own Will: may He now put it into the mind of
Your Reverence to know the dishonour which I have suffered at the hands of my Lords the
Bishops in the matter of their votes, in that they have agreed to the Election,4775 but have
excluded us. I will not lay the blame on Your Reverence, because you have but recently
come to preside over our affairs, and are, as is to be expected, for the most part unacquainted
with our history. This is quite enough: for I have no mind to trouble you further, that I
may not seem burdensome at the very beginning of our friendship. But I will tell you what
suggests itself to me in taking counsel with God. I retired from the Church at Nazianzus,
not as either despising God, or looking down on the littleness of the flock (God forbid that
a philosophic4776 soul should be so disposed); but first because I am not bound by any such
appointment: and secondly because I am broken down by my ill health, and do not think
myself equal to such anxieties. And since you too have been heavy on me, in reproaching
me with my resignation, and I myself could not endure the clamours against me, and since
the times are hard, threatening us with an inroad of enemies to the injury of the commonwealth of the whole Church, I finally made up my mind to suffer a defeat which is painful
to my body, but perhaps not bad for my soul. I make over this miserable body to the Church
for as long as it may be possible, thinking it better to suffer any distress to the flesh rather
than to incur a spiritual injury myself or to inflict it upon others, who have thought the
worst of us, judging from their own experience. Knowing this, do pray for me, and approve
my resolution: and perhaps it is not out of place to say, mould yourself to piety.

See Introd. to Ep. 157.

Probably equivalent to A Monk.

To Nicobulus.

Letter XII.

To Nicobulus.

§8. To Nicobulus.

(See the introduction to the first letter to Sophronius above.)

Ep. XII. (About a.d. 365).

You joke me about Alypiana as being little and unworthy of your size, you tall and immense and monstrous fellow both in form and strength. For now I understand that soul is
a matter of measure, and virtue of weight, and that rocks are more valuable than pearls, and
crows more respectable than nightingales. Well, well! rejoice in your bigness and your cubits,
and be in no respect inferior to the famed sons of Aloeus.4777 You ride a horse, and shake
a spear, and concern yourself with wild beasts. But she has no such work; and no great
strength is needed to carry a comb,4778 or to handle a distaff, or to sit by a loom, "For such
is the glory of woman."4779 And if you add this, that she has become fixed to the ground
on account of prayer, and by the great movement of her mind has constant communion
with God, what is there here to boast of in your bigness or the stature of your body? Take
heed to seasonable silence: listen to her voice: mark her unadornment, her womanly virility,
her usefulness at home, her love of her husband. Then you will say with the Laconian, that
verily soul is not a subject for measure, and the outer must look to the inner man. If you
look at the things in this way you will leave off joking and deriding her as little, and you will
congratulate yourself on your marriage.

4777 Otus and Ephialtes, the two Homeric Giants, who piled Pelion on Ossa and Olympus on Pelion in the

vain endeavour to reach heaven and dethrone Zeus, but were slain by Apollo. (See Hom., Odyss., xi., 305-320.)

4778 An instrument used in weaving to make the web firm and close.

From his own Poem against women who take too much pains about adorning themselves (i., 267).

Letter LI.

Letter LI.

Ep. LI.

(An answer to a request made by Nicobulus for a treatise on the art of writing letters. 

Benoît thinks this and the following ones were written to the Younger Nicobulus.)

Of those who write letters, since this is what you ask, some write at too great a length,
and others err on the side of deficiency; and both miss the mean, like archers shooting at a
mark and sending some shafts short of it and others beyond it; for the missing is the same
though on opposite sides. Now the measure of letters is their usefulness: and we must
neither write at very great length when there is little to say, nor very briefly when there is a
great deal. What? Are we to measure our wisdom by the Persian Schoene, or by the cubits
of a child, and to write so imperfectly as not to write at all but to copy the midday shadows,
or lines which meet right in front of you, whose lengths are foreshortened and which show
themselves in glimpses rather than plainly, being recognized only by certain of their extremities? We must in both respects avoid the want of moderation and hit off the moderate. This
is my opinion as to brevity; as to perspicuity it is clear that one should avoid the oratorical
form as much as possible and lean rather to the chatty: and, to speak concisely, that is the
best and most beautiful letter which can convince either an unlearned or an educated
reader; the one, as being within the reach of the many; the other, as above the many; and it
should be intelligible in itself. It is equally disagreeable to think out a riddle and to have to
interpret a letter. The third point about a letter is grace: and this we shall safeguard if we
do not write in any way that is dry and unpleasing or unadorned and badly arranged and
untrimmed, as they call it; as for instance a style destitute of maxims and proverbs and pithy
sayings, or even jokes and enigmas, by which language is sweetened. Yet we must not seem
to abuse these things by an excessive employment of them. Their entire omission shews
rusticity, but the abuse of them shews insatiability. We may use them about as much as
purple is used in woven stuffs. Figures of speech we shall admit, but few and modest. Antitheses and balanced clauses and nicely divided sentences, we shall leave to the sophists, or
if we do sometimes admit them, we shall do so rather in play than in earnest. My final remark
shall be one which I heard a clever man make about the eagle, that when the birds were
electing a king, and came with various adornment, the most beautiful point about him was
that he did not think himself beautiful. This point is to be especially attended to in letterwriting, to be without adventitious ornament and as natural as possible. So much about
letters I send you by a letter; but perhaps you had better not apply it to myself, who am
busied about more important matters. The rest you will work out for yourself, as you are
quick at learning, and those who are clever in these matters will teach you.

Letter LII.

Letter LII.

Ep. LII.

(Nicobulus asked Gregory to publish a collection of his letters. Gregory forwards a

copy.)

You are asking flowers from an autumn meadow, and arming Nestor in his old age, in
demanding from me now something clever in the way of language, after I have long neglected
all that is enjoyable in language and in life. But yet (since it is not an Eurysthean or Herculean
labour that you are imposing on me, but rather one which is very agreeable and quiet, to
collect for you as many of my own letters as I can), do you place this volume among your
books-a work not amatory but oratorical, and not for display so much as for use, and that
for our own home.4780 For different authors have different characteristics, greater or
smaller. Mine is a tendency to instruct by maxims and positive statements wherever opportunity occurs. And as in a legitimate child, so also in language, the father is always visible,
not less than parents are shewn by bodily characteristics. Mine are such as I have mentioned. 
You may repay me both by writing and by deriving profit from what I have written. I cannot
ask for or request any better reward than this, either more profitable to the asker, or more
becoming him who gives it.

I.e. as a model of Christian style.

Letter LIII.

Letter LIII.

Ep. LIII.

(Gregory put a collection of Basil's letters with his own, and gave them the first place. 
Nicobulus seems to have been surprised at this, and asked the reason. Gregory explains as
follows.)

I have always preferred the Great Basil to myself, though he was of the contrary opinion;
and so I do now, not less for truth's sake than for friendship's. This is the reason why I have
given his letters the first place and my own the second. For I hope we two will always be
coupled together; and also I would supply others with an example of modesty and submission.

Letter LIV.

Letter LIV.

Ep. LIV.

On Laconicism. To be laconic is not merely, as you suppose, to write few words, but
to say a great deal in few words. Thus I call Homer very brief and Antimachus lengthy. 
Why? Because I measure the length by the matter and not by the letters.

Letter LV.

Letter LV.

Ep. LV.

An Invitation. You flee when I pursue you: perhaps in accordance with the laws of
love, to make yourself more valuable. Come then, and fill up at last the loss I have suffered
by your long delay. And if any home affairs detain you, you shall leave us again, and so
make yourself more precious as an object of desire.

To Olympius.

Letter CIV.

To Olympius.

§9. To Olympius.

(Olympius was Prefect of Cappadocia Secunda in 382. One letter to him against the
Apollinarians, has already been given; the rest, which are to follow are mainly recommendations of various persons to his patronage.)

Ep. CIV.

All The Other favours which I have received I know to be due to your kindness; and
may God reward you for them with His own mercies; and may one of these be, that you
may discharge your office of prefect with good fame and splendour from beginning to end. 
In what I now ask I come rather to give than to receive, if it is not arrogant to say so. I personally introduce poor Philumena to you, to entreat your justice, and to move you to the
tears with which she afflicts my soul. She herself will explain to you in what and by whom
she has been wronged, for it would not be right for me to bring accusations against any one. 
But this much it is necessary for me to say, that widowhood and orphanhood have a right
to the assistance of all right-minded men, and especially of those who have wife and children,
those great pledges of pity, since we-ourselves only men-are set to judge men. Pardon
me that I plead with you for these by letter, since it is by ill health that I am deprived of
seeing a ruler so kind and so conspicuous for virtue that even the prelude of your administration is more precious than the good fame of others even at the end of their term.

Letter CV.

Letter CV.

Ep. CV.

The time is swift, the struggle great, and my sickness severer, reducing me almost to
immovability. What is left but to pray to God, and to supplicate your kindness, the one,
that He will incline your mind to gentler counsels, the other that you will not roughly dismiss
our intercession, but will receive kindly the wretched Paulus, whom justice has brought
under your hands, perhaps in order that it may make you more illustrious by the greatness
of your kindness, and may commend our prayers (such as they are) to your mercy.

Letter CVI.

Letter CVI.

Ep. CVI.

Here is another laying before you a letter, of which, if the truth may be said, you are the
cause yourself, for you provoke them by the honour you do them. Here too is another petitioner for you, a prisoner of fear, our kinsman Eustratius, who with us and by us entreats
your goodness, inasmuch as he cannot endure to be in perpetual rebellion against your
government, even though a just terror has frightened him, nor does he choose to entreat
you by anyone else than me, that he may make your mercy to him more conspicuous through
his use of such intercessors, whom at all events you yourself make great by thus accepting
their appeal. I will say one thing, and that briefly. All the other favours you conferred upon
me; but this you will confer upon your own judgment, since once you purposed to comfort
our age and infirmity with such honours. And I will add that you are continually rendering
God more propitious to you.

Letter CXXV.

Ep. CXXV.

(Given above, § 1.)

Letter CXXV.

Letter CXXVI.

Letter CXXVI.

Ep. CXXVI.

(While Gregory was at Xantharis an opportunity presented itself for seeing Olympius,
but a return of illness prevented him from taking advantage of it. He writes to express his
regret, and takes the opportunity also to request that Nicobulus may be exempted from the
charge of the Imperial Posts.)

I was happy in a dream. For having been brought as far as the Monastery to obtain
some comfort from the bath, and then hoping to meet you, and having this good fortune
almost in my hands, and having delayed a few days, I was suddenly carried away by my illness,
which was already painful in some respects and threatening in others. And, if one must
find some conjecture to account for the misfortune, I suffered in the same way as the polypods
do, which if torn by force from the rocks risk the loss of the suckers by which they attach
themselves to the rocks, or carry off some portion of the latter. Something of this kind is
my case. And what I should have asked Your Excellency for had I seen you, I now venture
to ask for though I am absent. I found my son Nicobulus much worried by the care of the
Post, and by close attention to the Monastery. He is not a strong man, and has great distaste
for solitude. Make use of him for anything else you please, for he is eager to serve your authority in all things; but if it be possible set him free from this charge, if for no other reason,
at any rate to do him honour as my Hospitaller. Since I have asked many favours from you
for many people, and have obtained them, I need also your kindness for myself.

Letter CXXXI.

Letter CXXXI.

Ep. CXXXI.

(In 382 Gregory was summoned to a Synod at Constantinople; he wrote to Procopius,
the Prefectus Urbi, and declined to go, on the ground of his great dislike to Episcopal Synods,
from which, he said, he had never known any good to result. However he seems to have
received a more urgent summons through Icarius and Olympius. His reply to Icarius has
been lost; that to Olympius is as follows.)

It is more serious to me than my illness, that no one will believe that I am ill, but that
so long a journey is enjoined upon me, and I am pushed into the midst of troubles from
which I rejoiced to have withdrawn, and almost thought that I ought to be grateful for this
to my bodily affliction. For quiet and freedom from affairs is more precious than the
splendour of a busy life. I wrote this yesterday to the Most Illustrious Icarius, from whom
I received the same summons: and I now beg your Magnanimity also to write this for me,
for you are a very trustworthy witness of my ill health. Another proof of my inability is the
loss which I have now suffered in having been unable even to come and enjoy your society,
who are so kind a Governor, and so admirable for virtue that even the preludes of your term
of office are more honourable than the good fame which others can earn by the end of theirs.

Letter CXL.

Letter CXL.

Ep. CXL.

Again I write when I ought to come: but I gain confidence to do so from yourself, O
Umpire of spiritual matters (to put the first thing first), and Corrector of the Commonweal-and both by Divine Providence: who have also received as the reward of your piety
that your affairs would prosper to your mind, and that you alone should find attainable
what to every one else is out of reach. For wisdom and courage conduct your government,
the one discovering what is to be done, and the other easily carrying out what has been
discovered. And the greatest of all is the purity of your hands with which all is directed. 
Where is your ill-gotten gold? There never was any; it was the first thing you condemned
to exile as an invisible tyrant. Where is illwill? It is condemned. Where is favour? Here
you do bend somewhat (for I will accuse you a little), but it is in imitating the Divine Mercy,
which at the present time your soldier Aurelius entreats of you by me. I call him a foolish
fugitive, because he has placed himself in our hands, and through ours in yours, sheltering
himself under our gray hair and our Priesthood (for which you have often professed your
veneration) as if it were under some Imperial Image. See, this sacrificing and unbloodstained
hand leads this man to you; a hand which has written often in your praise, and will I am
sure write yet more, if God continue your term of government-yours, I mean, and that of
your colleague Themis.

Letter CXLI.

Letter CXLI.

Ep. CXLI.

(The people of Nazianzus had in some way incurred the loss of civic rights; and the
Order for the forfeiture of the title of City had been signed by Olympius. This led to something like a revolt on the part of a certain number of the younger citizens: and this
Olympius determined to punish by the total destruction of the place. S. Gregory was again
prevented by sickness from appearing in person before the Governor: but he pleaded the
cause of his native city (using its official Latin name of Diocaesarea) in the following letters
so successfully as to induce Olympius to pardon the outbreak.)

Again an opportunity for kindness: and again I am bold enough to commit to a letter
my entreaty about so important a matter. My illness makes me thus bold, for it does not
even allow me to go out, and it does not permit me to make a fitting entrance to you. What
then is my Embassy? Pray receive it from me gently and kindly. The death of a single man,
who to-day is and to-morrow will not be and will not return to us is of course a dreadful
thing. But it is much more dreadful for a City to die, which Kings founded, and time compacted, and a long series of years has preserved. I speak of Diocaesarea, once a City, a City
no longer, unless you grant it mercy. Think that this place now falls at your feet by me: let
it have a voice, and be clothed in mourning and cut off its hair as in a tragedy, and let it
speak to you in such words as these:

Give a hand to me that lie in the dust: help the strengthless: do not add the weight of
your hand to time, nor destroy what the Persians have left me. It is more honourable to
you to raise up cities than to destroy those that are distressed. Be my founder, either by
adding to what I possess, or by preserving me as I am. Do not suffer that up to the time of
your administration I should be a City, and after you should be so no longer: do not give
occasion to after times to speak evil of you, that you received me numbered among cities,
and left me an uninhabited spot, which was once a city, only recognizable by mountains
and precipices and woods.

This let the City of my imagination do and say to your mercy. But deign to receive an
exhortation from me as your friend: certainly chastise those who have rebelled against the
Edict of your authority. On this behalf I am not bold to say anything, although this piece
of audacity was not, they say, of universal design, but was only the unreasoning anger of a
few young men. But dismiss the greater part of your anger, and use a larger reasoning. 
They were grieved for their Mother's being put to death; they could not endure to be called
citizens, and yet to be without political rights: they were mad: they committed an offence
against the law: they threw away their own safety: the unexpectedness of the calamity deprived them of reason. Is it really necessary that for this the city should cease to be a city? 
Surely not. Most excellent, do not write the order for this to be done. Rather respect the
supplication of all citizens and statesmen and men of rank-for remember the calamity will

Letter CXLI.

touch all alike-even if the greatness of your authority keeps them silent, sighing as it were
in secret. Respect also my gray hair: for it would be dreadful to me, after having had a great
city, now to have none at all, and that after your government the Temple which we have
raised to God, and our love for its adornment, is to become a dwelling for beasts. It is not
a terrible thing if some statues were thrown down-though in itself it would be so-but I
would not have you think that I am speaking of this, when all my care is for more important
things: but it is dreadful if an ancient city is to be destroyed with them-one which has
splendidly endured, as I, who am honoured by you, and am supposed to have some influence,
have lived to see. But this is enough upon such a subject, for I shall not, if I speak at greater
length, find anything stronger than your own reasons, by which this nation is governed-and
may more and greater ones be governed by them too, and that in greater commands. This
however it was needful that Your Magnanimity should know about those who have fallen
before your feet, that they are altogether wretched and despairing, and have not shared in
any disorder with those who have broken the law, as I am certified by many who were then
present. Therefore deliberate what you may think expedient, both for your own reputation
in this world, and your hopes in the next. We will bear what you determine-not indeed
without grief-but we will bear it: for what else can we do? If the worse determination
prevail, we shall be indignant, and shall shed a tear over our City that has ceased to be.

Letter CXLII.

Letter CXLII.

Ep. CXLII.

Though my desire to meet you is warm, and the need of your petitioners is great, yet
my illness is invincible. Therefore I am bold to commit my intercession to writing. Have
respect to our gray hair, which you have already often reverenced by good actions. Have
respect also to my infirmity, to which my labours for God have in part contributed, if I may
swagger a little. For this cause spare the citizens who look to me because I use some freedom
of speech with you. And spare also the others who are under my care. For public affairs
will suffer no damage through mercy, since you can do more by fear than others by punishment. May you, as your reward for this, obtain such a Judge as you shew yourself to your
petitioners and to me their intercessor.

Letter CXLIII.

Letter CXLIII.

Ep. CXLIII.

What does much experience, and experience of good do for men? It teaches kindness,
and inclines them to those who entreat them. There is no such education in pity as the
previous reception of goodness. This has happened to myself among others. I have learned
compassion by the things which I have suffered. And do you see my greatness of soul when
I myself need your gentleness in my own affairs? I intercede for others, and do not fear lest
I should exhaust all your kindness on other men's concerns. I am writing thus on behalf of
the Presbyter Leontius-or, if I may so describe him, the ex-Presbyter. If he has suffered
sufficiently for what he has done, let us stop there, lest excess become injustice. And if there
is still any balance of punishment due, and the consequences of his crime have not yet
equalled his offence, yet remit it for our sake and God's, and that of the sanctuary, and the
general assembly of the priests, among whom he was once numbered, even though he has
now shewn himself unworthy of them, both by what he has done and by what he has suffered. 
If I can prevail with you it will be best; but if not, I will bring to you a more powerful intercessor, her who is the partner both of your rule and of your good fame.

Letter CXLIV.

Letter CXLIV.

Ep. CXLIV.

(Verianus, a citizen of Nazianzus, had been offended by his son-in-law, and on this account wished his daughter to sue for a divorce. Olympius referred the matter to the Episcopal
arbitration of S. Gregory, who refused to countenance the proceeding, and writes the two
following letters, the first to the Prefect, the second to Verianus himself.)

Haste is not always praiseworthy. For this reason I have deferred my answer until now
about the daughter of the most honorable Verianus, both to allow for time setting matters
right, and also because I conjecture that Your Goodness does not approve of the divorce,
inasmuch as you entrusted the enquiry to me, whom you knew to be neither hasty nor uncircumspect in such matters. Therefore I have refrained myself till now, and, I venture to
think, not without reason. But since we have come nearly to the end of the allotted time,
and it is necessary that you should be informed of the result of the examination I will inform
you. The young lady seems to me to be of two minds, divided between reverence for her
parents and affection for her husband. Her words are on their side, but her mind, I rather
think, is with her husband, as is shewn by her tears. You will do what commends itself to
your justice, and to God who directs you in all things. I should most willingly have given
my opinion to my son Verianus that he should pass over much of what is in question, with
a view not to confirm the divorce, which is entirely contrary to our law,4781 though the
Roman law may determine otherwise. For it is necessary that justice be observed-which
I pray you may ever both say and do.

4781 The law of the Church.

Letter CXLV.

Letter CXLV.

Ep. CXLV. To Verianus.

Public executioners commit no crime, for they are the servants of the laws: nor is the
sword unlawful with which we punish criminals. But nevertheless, the public executioner
is not a laudable character, nor is the death-bearing sword received joyfully. Just so neither
can I endure to become hated by confirming the divorce by my hand and tongue. It is far
better to be the means of union and of friendship than of division and parting of life. I
suppose it was with this in his mind that our admirable Governor entrusted me with the
enquiry about your daughter, as one who could not proceed to divorce abruptly or unfeelingly. For he proposed me not as Judge, but as Bishop, and placed me as a mediator in your
unhappy circumstances. I beg you therefore, to make some allowance for my timidity, and
if the better prevail, to use me as a servant of your desire: I rejoice in receiving such commands. But if the worse and more cruel course is to be taken, seek for some one more
suitable to your purpose. I have not time, for the sake of favouring your friendship (though
in all respects I have the highest regard for you), to offend against God, to Whom I have to
give account of every action and thought. I will believe your daughter (for the truth shall
be told) when she can lay aside her awe of you, and boldly declare the truth. At present her
condition is pitiable-for she assigns her words to you, and her tears to her husband.

To Olympius.

To Olympius.

To Olympius. Ep. CXLVI.

This is what I said as if by a sort of prophecy, when I found you favourable to every request, and was making insatiable use of your gentleness, that I fear I shall exhaust your
kindness upon the affairs of others. For see, a contest of my own has come (if that is mine
which concerns my own relations), and I cannot speak with the same freedom. First, because
it is my own. For to entreat for myself, though it may be more useful, is more humiliating. 
And next, I am afraid of excess as destroying pleasure, and opposing all that is good. So
matters stand, and I conjecture only too rightly. Nevertheless with confidence in God before
Whom I stand, and in your magnanimity in doing good, I am bold to present this petition.
Suppose Nicobulus to be the worst of men:-though his only crime is that through me
he is an object of envy, and more free than he ought to be. And suppose that my present
opponent is the most just of men. For I am ashamed to accuse before Your Uprightness
one whom yesterday I was supporting: but I do not know if it will seem to you just that
punishment should be demanded for one man's crimes from another, though these were
quite strange to him, and had not even his consent; from the man who has so stirred his
household and been so upset as to have surrendered to his accuser more readily than the
latter wished. Must Nicobulus or his children be reduced to slavery as his persecutors desire? 
I am ashamed both of the ground of the persecution and of the time, if this is to be done
while both you are in power and I have influence with you. Not so, most admirable friend,
let not this be suggested to Your Integrity. But recognizing by the winged swiftness of your
mind the malice from which this proceeds, and having respect to me your admirer, shew
yourself a merciful judge to those who are being disturbed-for to-day you are not merely
judging between man and man, but between virtue and vice; and to this more consideration
than by an ordinary man must be given by those who are like you in virtue and are skilful
governors. And in return for this you shall have from me not only the matter of my prayers,
which I know you do not, like so many men, despise; but also that I will make your government famous with all to whom I am known.

Letter CLIV.

Letter CLIV.

Ep. CLIV.

To me you are Prefect even after the expiry of your term of office-for I judge things
differently from the run of men-because you embrace in yourself every prefectoral virtue. 
For many of those who sit on lofty thrones are to me base, all those whose hand makes them
base and slaves of their subjects.4782 But many are high and lofty though they stand low,
whom virtue places on high and makes worthy of greater government. But what have I to
do with this? No longer is the great Olympius with us, nor does he bear our rudder-lines. 
We are undone, we are betrayed, we have become again the Second Cappadocia, after having
been made the First by you. Of other men's matters why should I speak? but who will
cherish the old age of your Gregory, and administer to his weakness the enchantment of
honours, and make him more honourable because he obtains kindness for many from you? 
Now then depart on your journey with escort and greater pomp, leaving behind for us many
tears, and carrying with you much wealth, and that of a kind which few Prefects do, good
fame, and the being inscribed on all hearts, pillars not easily moved. If you preside over us
again with greater and more illustrious rule, (this is what our longing augurs), we shall offer
to God more perfect thanks.

I.e. who are accessible to bribery.

Indexes

Indexes

Indexes

Index of Scripture References

Index of Scripture References

Index of Scripture References

Genesis
1 1:2 1:2 1:5 1:6 1:11 1:11 1:14 1:16 1:24 1:26 1:26 1:26 1:26 1:26 1:26 1:27 
1:27 1:27 2:7 2:7 2:7 2:7 2:7 2:7 2:7 2:7 2:7 2:8 2:9 2:16 2:17 2:18 3:3 3:5 
3:6 3:6-23 3:8 3:15 3:15 3:17-18 3:19 3:22 3:24 3:24 4:1 4:12 4:24 4:24 4:26 
4:26 4:26 5:3 5:21 5:22 6:8 6:13 8:11 8:21 9:6 11:4 11:4 11:7 12:1 12:6 13:12 
14:10 14:14 14:22 15:6 15:16 17:5 18:1 18:2 18:5 18:10 18:18 18:25 18:27 19:1 
19:5 19:15 19:17 19:17 19:23 19:24 19:24 19:24 19:24 19:24 19:26 21:12 21:19 
21:21 22:1 22:2 22:8 22:11 24:3 24:43 27:21 27:28 27:28 28:2 28:12 29:21 31:19 
32:28 32:28 32:30 35:19 36:11 36:15 36:42 37:28 41:1 41:29 41:38 41:39 41:40 
46:29 48:7 49:8 49:8 49:9 49:9 49:10 49:11 49:17 49:22
Exodus
1:8 2:8 2:12 2:15 3:1 3:2 3:2 3:4 3:5 3:6 3:6 3:7 3:14 4:2 4:10 4:10 4:13 4:22 
4:27 4:27 5:6 7:1 7:1 7:8 7:19 7:22 9:10 10:21 11:2 11:5 12 12:9 12:11 12:15 
12:15 12:22 12:22 12:23 12:29 12:37 13:20 13:21 14:9 14:15 14:20 14:20 14:21 
14:21 14:22 14:23 14:28 15:20 16:2 16:4 16:13 16:14 16:15 16:15 16:18 17:6 
17:6 17:6 17:10-11 17:11 17:12 19:10 19:13 19:13 19:14 19:15 19:16 19:16-18 
20:19 20:19 20:21 21:2 21:17 24:1 24:1-2 24:1-2 24:8 24:15 24:18 25:32 25:37 
25:40 26:31 26:33 28:36 29:4 30:22-25 30:33 30:38 31:1-6 31:2 31:3 32:4 32:11 
32:15 32:20 32:26 33:13 33:17 33:19 33:19 33:20 33:20 33:20 33:22 33:22 33:23 
33:23 34:1 34:5-7 34:8 34:9 34:30 34:30 36:1 37:7 37:7 38:28
Leviticus
3:4 4:5 4:16 6:16 6:22 7:14 7:32 7:34 8:2 8:3 8:31 8:33 10:1 10:1 11 12:8 
14:8 16:34 20:9 21:17 22:19 26:1 26:27-28
Numbers
1:3 1:12 11:24-25 11:26 11:28 11:29 11:29 12:3 12:7 12:7 12:40 17:8 17:10 
20:17 21:9 21:9 21:22 24:7 24:9 25:6 35:7 708
Deuteronomy
4:10 4:15 4:24 4:24 4:24 5:16 5:26 5:27 6:7 9:10 9:20 13:4 14:1 18:10-11 18:15 
19:15 22:27 23:3 23:3 27:5 28:39 28:66 32:5 32:6 32:6 32:15 32:21 32:25 32:32 
32:34 32:34 32:49 33:2 34:9 34:9
Joshua
1:2 2:11 3:1 3:15-16 3:16 5:14 6:4 6:20 6:25 7:19 7:19 7:21 10:12 10:13 14:1 
14:6 18:1 19:15 23:12 24:12
Judges
3:10 6:34 7:5 11:29 13:6 13:22 13:23 16:19
1 Samuel

Index of Scripture References

1:10 1:13 1:20 1:20 2:5 2:6 2:6 2:8 2:11 2:12 2:15 2:19 2:23 2:30 6:1 7:5 9:3 
9:9 9:9 10:11 10:22 15:26 15:28 16:7 16:13 16:16 16:23 17:14 17:32 17:49 17:49 
18:7 19:20 19:24 23:23
2 Samuel
1:21 5:1 6:2 6:6 6:14 12 12:13 12:16 14:19 15:5 16:10-11 23:2 23:14
1 Kings
1:4 1:39 3:12 4:29 5:4 6:23-26 8:6 8:6-7 8:27 10:1 11:14 11:33 12:2 13:6 17:4 
17:6 17:8 17:14 17:21 17:21 18:4 18:33 18:33 18:42 18:44 19:8 19:10 19:11 
19:11-12 19:18 21:29
2 Kings
1:1 2:11 2:11 2:11 2:11 2:11 2:13 2:15 4:25 4:34 5:25 20:1 20:1 24:13 25:7 
25:11
1 Chronicles
11:4 11:16 13:6
2 Chronicles
6:18 15:1 20:7 20:14 24:20-21 33:6 33:12-13 33:12-13 36:7 36:32 38:12
Ezra
6:15
Nehemiah
9:20
Esther
8:13
Job
1:1 1:3 1:21 2:7 3:6 3:8 3:9 5:8-9 5:19 5:26 7:9 7:18 9:8 9:8 9:9 9:23 9:24 
10:10-11 10:11 10:22 11:7 12:8 12:14 12:24 14:7-10 14:9 14:14 14:14 15:8 16:2 
17:16 19:26 20:8 21:13 21:18 26:8 26:10 28:14 29:2 29:15 29:16 29:18 31:26-27 
31:32 33:4 36:27 37:9-10 37:10 37:16 37:22 37:23 38:1 38:1 38:2-3 38:3 38:3 
38:4 38:11 38:14 38:17 38:28 38:28 38:29 38:31 38:36 38:37 38:37 39:16 39:26 
40:3 40:4 40:14 40:20 40:23 40:26 41:5 41:13 41:15 41:22 41:24
Psalms
1:1 1:2 1:5 1:6 2:1 2:1 2:2 2:3 2:7 2:7 2:7 2:7 2:7 2:7 2:7 2:8 2:9 2:10 2:11 
2:12 2:25-26 3:15 3:20 4 4:2 4:3 4:3 4:4 4:4 4:4-5 4:7 4:8 4:15 4:15 4:15 4:15 
4:15 4:24 4:25 4:26 4:30 5:9 5:10 5:13 5:15 5:15 5:15 5:18 5:32 6:5 6:6 6:23 
6:30 6:30-31 6:37 6:39 6:39 7:6 7:7 7:9 7:9 7:10 7:32 7:32 7:40 8:1 8:3 8:3 
8:5 9:1 9:1-3 9:6 9:18 9:25 9:25 10:1 10:1 10:1 10:1 10:3 10:3 10:3 10:3 10:3 
10:3 10:7 10:7 11:2 11:6 11:7 11:10 12:1 12:5 12:7 12:9 12:9 13:3 13:7 14:3 
14:3 14:3 14:6 14:7 14:7 15:17 16:1 16:4 16:6 16:6 16:7 16:8 16:10 16:11 17:8 
18:8 18:9 18:9 18:11 18:12 18:12 18:19 18:22 18:24 18:32 18:33 18:39 18:46 

Index of Scripture References

19:1 19:1 19:2 19:3 19:4 19:5 19:5 19:5 19:6 19:6 19:10 19:21 19:24 19:37 
19:91 19:103 19:103 19:105 19:131 19:131 19:164 19:176 20:7 22 22:1 22:1 22:2 
22:9 22:11 22:15 22:18 23:1-3 23:2 23:2 23:2 23:5 23:5 23:5 23:5 24 24:3 24:7 
24:7 24:7 24:10 25:3 25:4 26:4 26:5 26:5 26:5 26:5 26:6 26:7 26:8 26:12 27:1 
27:4 28:14 29:3 29:7 29:9 30:1 30:3 30:3 30:5 31:6 31:16 31:20 32:1 32:1 32:1 
32:1 32:1 32:4 32:5 32:6 32:6 32:11 32:13-14 32:15 32:17 33:6 33:6 33:6 33:9 
33:19 34 34:1 34:3 34:3 34:5 34:5 34:8 34:9 34:16 35:7 35:18 36 36:5 36:6 
36:7 36:8 36:9 36:9 36:9 36:9 36:12 37:7 37:24 37:27 37:27 37:34 38:5 38:9 
38:9 38:11 38:14 39:4-5 39:7-8 39:7-15 39:8 39:8 39:11 39:12 39:12 39:16 39:21 
40:2 40:3 40:3 40:9 41:3 41:4 41:4 41:5 41:9 41:10 42 42:1 42:4 42:5 42:8 
43:1 43:3 43:4-5 43:5 43:10 43:10 43:10 44:2 44:5 44:19 44:20 45:2 45:4 45:4 
45:6 45:6 45:6-7 45:7 45:10 45:14 45:19 46:4 46:10 46:10 47:1 47:4 47:4 47:4 
47:5 47:6 47:8 47:14 47:16 48:4 48:4 48:5 48:5 48:7 48:8 48:12 49:1 49:6 50:3 
50:6 50:14 50:18 50:21 50:21 50:23 51:5 51:7 51:8 51:10 51:11 51:12 51:12 
51:19 52 52:2 52:4 52:10 53:5 55:6 55:7 55:9 55:17 55:21 57:4 57:9 58:4 58:4-5 
58:5-6 59:3 59:6 60:2-3 62:10 63:1 64:32 65:2 65:9 65:10 65:11 66:6 66:7 
66:10-12 66:12 67:6 67:6 68:4 68:5 68:9 68:11 68:17 68:18 68:25 68:26 68:31 
68:35 69:2 69:2 69:21 72 72:5 72:5 72:6 72:6 72:6 72:6-7 72:17 73:2 73:8 73:9 
73:20 73:23-24 74:12 74:13 74:14 75:8 75:9 75:10 76:4 76:7 77:19 77:20 77:20 
78:15 78:24 78:24 78:25 78:50 78:70 79:4 79:6 79:12 79:12 79:13 80:1 80:8 80:9 
80:12 80:17-18 81:6 81:10 81:11 82:1 82:6 82:8 83:13 84:5 84:6 84:7 85:8 85:11 
85:13 87:4 87:7 88:1 88:4 88:4 88:5 88:5 88:5 88:5 88:8 88:10 88:13 89:22 
89:26-27 89:29 89:35-37 89:36 89:37 89:37 90:10 91:5 91:14 92:13 93:1 93:2 
94:1 94:11 94:17 94:17 95:1 95:2 95:6 95:7-8 96:1 96:11 96:11 97:3 97:11 99:6 
102:25-27 104:2 104:6 105:32 107:9 112:5 119:6 119:60 119:81 119:103 120:4 
127:2 129:6 133:2 137:6 139:6 139:13 140:3 143:8 144:1 145:21 146:8
Proverbs
1 1:7 1:11 1:16 2:3 3:12 3:24 3:28 4:7 4:25 4:25 4:27 5:3 5:15 5:17 6:6 6:6-8 
6:9 6:23 6:27 7:3 8:22 8:22 8:25 9 9:5 10:1 10:7 11:18 11:26 13:9 14:30 14:30 
15:7 16:31 16:31 17:4-6 17:6 18:3 18:17 19:17 20:6 20:10 22:20 22:20 24:32 
25:3 25:12 25:16 26:12 27:1 29:20 30:15 30:15 30:21-22 30:29-30 30:33 31 31:7 
31:10 31:10
Ecclesiastes
1:14 1:17 1:18 2:6 3:1 3:1 3:1 3:1 3:1 3:2 5:9 7:23 7:24 7:29 9:7-8 9:11 10:4 
10:5 10:16 11:1 11:2 11:2 11:9 11:10 11:28 12:1 12:2 12:3 12:5 12:5 12:6 12:8 
12:13 12:14
Song of Solomon

Index of Scripture References

1:3 1:3 1:4 2:10 2:11 2:12 2:14 2:14 3:1 3:3-4 3:11 3:11 4:1-2 4:11 4:12 4:14 
4:15 5:1 5:1 5:3 5:3 5:3 5:12 5:16 6:1 6:3 8:4 8:7 11:15
Isaiah
1:3 1:5 1:6 1:6 1:6 1:8 1:9 1:9 1:10 1:10 1:11 1:12 1:14 1:16 1:16 1:16 1:17-18 
1:18 1:19-20 1:22 1:23 1:26 2:2 2:3 3:4 3:7 3:9 3:12 3:14 3:14 3:14 3:34 4:4 
5:1 5:1-2 5:2 5:6 5:8 5:8 5:10 5:24 6:1 6:1 6:1 6:1 6:2 6:2-3 6:3 6:6 6:6-7 
6:8 6:10 7:2 7:9 7:10-14 7:11 7:14 7:14 7:23 8:14 8:18 8:18 8:19 8:19 8:21 9:1 
9:5 9:6 9:6 9:7 9:13 9:15 9:16 10:3 10:22 10:22-23 11:1-3 11:2 11:2 11:2 11:2 
11:3 11:10 13:3 16:3 19:1 19:11 21:2 21:2 21:6 23:4 24:2 25:6 25:7 25:8 25:8 
26:6 26:11 26:13 26:18 26:19 26:19 26:20 27:1 27:11 28:1 28:11 28:15 28:16 
28:16 28:17 28:19 28:25 29:9 29:10 29:21 30:10 30:15 30:17 32:20 34:4 35:4-6 
35:6 37:31 38:8 38:8 40:2 40:2 40:3 40:3 40:3 40:9 40:9 40:9-10 40:12 40:12 
40:12 40:12 40:18 40:22 40:22 40:25 40:31 41:4 41:4 41:8 41:22 42:1 42:1 42:8 
42:14 42:19 43:10 44:1 44:2 44:3 44:17 44:21 44:22 45:3 45:7 45:7 45:14-15 
45:16-17 46:3 47:13 47:14 48:4 48:16 48:16 48:29 49:1 49:2 49:3 49:5 49:6 49:6 
49:7 49:13 49:18 49:18 50:4 50:4 50:6 50:6 50:11 51:1 51:1 51:2 51:6 51:17 
52:5 52:5 52:7 52:7 52:13 52:15 53:1 53:1 53:1 53:2 53:4 53:4 53:4-5 53:7 53:7 
53:7 53:7 53:7 53:7-8 53:8 53:8-9 53:9 53:9 53:11 53:11 53:12 53:12 53:23 54:2 
54:8 54:13 55:1 55:1 55:2 57:1 57:1 57:2 57:4 57:13 57:14 58:5 58:7 58:7 58:9 
59:21 60:1 60:4 60:8 61:1 61:1 61:1 61:1-2 61:10 61:10 61:10 62:3 62:4 62:4 
62:6 62:10 62:10 62:11 63:1 63:1-2 63:10 63:10 63:11 63:11 63:14 63:16 63:16 
63:19 64:1 64:2 64:4 64:5 64:8 64:12 65:2 65:2 65:2 65:8 65:9 65:15 65:15 
65:15-16 65:18 66:1 66:1 66:1 66:5 66:8 66:10 66:18 66:19
Jeremiah
1:5 1:5 1:5 1:6 1:6 1:10 1:18 2:8 2:10 2:21 2:21 2:21 2:27 3:9 3:14 3:15 4:3 
4:3 4:4 4:19 4:19 4:22 5:3 5:6 5:7 5:7 5:8 5:8 6:29 8:1 8:5 9:1 9:21 10:16 
10:16 10:21 10:21 10:24 11:19 11:19 11:19 12:1 12:8 12:10 13:23 15:10 18:12 
22:14 23:1-2 23:18 23:24 23:24 23:24 23:29 25:34 26:18 32:15 32:18-19 37:16 
39:18-19 42:16 49:7 49:20 50:25 50:31 51:34
Lamentations
1:1 3:19 3:28 3:34 3:53 4:7 4:20 4:20 4:20
Ezekiel
1:4-28 1:6-11 1:16 1:28 2 3:18 3:20 7:26 8:3 10:1 10:21 11:5 11:5 11:24 13:14 
14:5 14:14 14:20 18:20-23 18:31 18:31 21:9 22:24 22:26 23:42 25:13 28:1-2 28:12 
28:12-17 31 33:2 33:3 33:8 34:2 34:6 34:6 34:8 34:12 34:14 36:25 36:25 36:26 
36:27 37:1 37:1 37:3 37:7 37:10 37:12 39:17
Daniel

Index of Scripture References

2:26 2:31 2:35 2:44 2:45 2:45 3:5 3:12 4:9 4:33 4:34 4:34 5:3 5:12 5:25 5:31 
6:22 6:22 6:23 7:7 7:9 7:9 7:9-14 7:10 7:10 7:10 7:13 7:13-14 7:14 7:21 7:23 
7:23 7:24 7:24 7:25 7:27 9:1 9:5 9:18 9:23 9:25 10:6 10:9 10:11 10:11 10:12 
10:16 10:16-17 10:18 10:18 12:1 12:1-2 12:2 12:2 12:3 12:3 12:7 12:9 12:11 
12:12 14:33
Hosea
2:20 3:4 4:2 4:2 4:6 4:6 4:9 4:12 4:13 5:1-2 5:13 6:1-2 6:2 6:4 6:5 6:6 7:7 
8:3 8:4 8:11 9:7 9:10 9:12 10:1 10:1 10:6 10:12 11:1 13:7-8 13:14 13:14
Joel
1:4 1:10 1:13 1:19 2:3 2:5 2:14 2:15 2:17 2:17 2:23 2:28 2:28 2:28 2:29 2:31 
3:18
Amos
1:12 2:7 2:8 4:7 4:9 4:13 4:13 5:8 5:8 5:10 5:10 5:26 6:4-6 7:14 8:5 8:9 8:10 
8:11 8:11 9:6 9:6
Obadiah
1:9
Jonah
1:3 1:3 1:6 1:12 1:12 2:1 2:2 2:6 2:8 3:5 3:7-10 3:10 4:8
Micah
2:3 3:8 3:10-12 3:12 3:12 4:2 5:2 5:2 5:2 5:3 6:3 7:1 7:1-4 7:2 7:6
Nahum
1:1-2 2:1 2:10
Habakkuk
1:2 1:5 1:16 2:1 2:1 2:1 2:15 2:16 3:2 3:3 3:13
Zephaniah
3:4 3:7 3:8 3:9 3:9 3:10 3:14-15
Haggai
1:1 1:9 2:4 2:5 2:6 2:7 2:8 2:8 2:8 2:12
Zechariah
1:6 2:10-11 3:1 3:9 4:7 4:10 5:1 5:8 7:11 7:13 9:9 9:9 9:11 9:11 10:3 11:2 
11:2 11:3 11:5 11:5 11:5-6 11:12 11:12 11:13 11:15 12:1 12:10 12:12 12:12 
12:12 13:7 13:7 14:4 14:6-7 14:7
Malachi
1:1 1:6 1:7 1:10 1:11 1:13 2:5-7 2:13 3:1 3:1-3 3:2-3 3:5 3:6 3:8 4:2 4:2
Matthew
1:1 1:20 1:23 1:24 1:25 2 2:2 2:4 2:6 2:9 2:9 2:11 2:13 2:13 2:13 2:16 3:3 
3:3 3:4 3:5 3:5 3:6 3:6 3:7 3:7 3:10 3:11 3:11 3:11 3:12 3:13 3:13 3:13 3:13-17 
3:14 3:16 3:17 3:17 3:17 3:17 3:17 4:1-11 4:2 4:2 4:6 4:9 4:11 4:17 4:23 5:4 

Index of Scripture References

5:6 5:6 5:14 5:14 5:15 5:16 5:16 5:16 5:17 5:17 5:18 5:23 5:28 5:28 5:30 5:40 
5:45 5:48 6:8 6:19 6:19 6:22 6:24 6:26 6:26 7:2 7:2 7:6 7:6 7:6 7:6 7:6 7:6 
7:13 7:13-14 7:14 7:15 7:26 8:8 8:17 8:17 8:17 8:24 8:24 8:25-26 8:25-26 8:32 
9:2 9:6 9:6 9:13 9:14 9:15 9:20 9:20 9:25 9:33 10:7-8 10:8 10:9 10:9 10:10 
10:16 10:20 10:23 10:23 10:28 10:29 10:34 10:35 10:37 11:3 11:3 11:11 11:11 
11:11 11:12 11:13 11:15 11:20 11:25 11:27 11:27 11:27 11:27 11:27 11:27 11:27 
11:28 11:28 11:28 11:29 12:28 12:29 12:31 12:31 12:32 12:32 12:34 12:35 12:36 
12:40 12:42 13:5 13:7 13:13 13:13 13:15 13:15 13:16 13:21 13:25 13:31 13:32 
13:43 13:43 13:43 13:46 13:47 14:10 14:19 14:25 14:29 14:29 14:30 15:4 15:17 
15:21 15:27 16:1 16:16-17 16:17 16:18 16:19 16:19 16:19 16:22-23 17:2 17:2 
17:20 17:24 18:6 18:10 18:10 18:12 18:12 18:19 18:20 18:21 18:22 18:22 18:23 
18:28 19:1 19:10 19:16-18 19:21 19:24 19:26 19:26 19:29 20:1 20:12 20:12 20:14 
20:18 20:20 20:30 21:9 21:9 21:10 21:19 21:31 21:31 22:10 22:12 22:12 22:13 
22:32 22:32 22:43 23:2 23:7 23:12 23:13 23:15 23:25-26 23:27 23:37 23:38 23:39 
24 24:2 24:2 24:3 24:3-4 24:4 24:5 24:6 24:10 24:12 24:12 24:14 24:15 24:15 
24:16 24:21 24:22 24:23 24:23 24:24 24:27 24:29 24:30 24:30 24:30 24:30 24:31 
24:35 24:42 24:42 24:44 24:50 25:2 25:8 25:12 25:15 25:21 25:26 25:27 25:27 
25:29 25:31 25:32 25:33 25:34 25:35 25:35-36 25:41 25:41 25:46 26:2 26:2 26:15 
26:25 26:26 26:28 26:39 26:41 26:49 26:49 26:63 26:64 26:67 27:3 27:3 27:5 
27:5 27:7 27:13 27:24 27:24-25 27:26 27:28 27:34 27:35 27:45 27:45 27:48 27:50 
27:51 27:51 27:52 27:52 27:52 27:52-53 27:54 27:60 27:63 27:63 27:65 28:5 28:5 
28:7 28:7 28:9 28:9 28:13 28:19 28:19 28:20 38:14
Mark
1:1 1:4 1:4 1:5 1:24 2:4 2:15-16 2:19 3:17 3:23 3:29 4:3 4:14 4:34 4:38 5:3 
5:13 6:5 7:5 7:32 9:24 9:24 9:44 10:17 10:21 10:38 11:1 11:23 13:32 13:32 
14:31 14:32 14:38 14:51 15:21 15:23 15:46 16:16 16:17 16:19
Luke
1 1:1 1:17 1:23 1:26-27 1:32 1:33 1:33 1:34-35 1:35 1:35 1:35 1:35 1:41 1:41 
1:41 1:43 1:44 1:45 1:53 1:67 1:69 1:76 1:76 1:78 2:1-5 2:4-5 2:7 2:9 2:10-11 
2:11 2:14 2:14 2:14-15 2:24 2:26-35 2:29-30 2:33 2:41 2:41 2:49 2:52 2:52 3:3 
3:4 3:9 3:11 3:22 3:22 3:23 3:23 3:29 3:34 4:1 4:1 4:2 4:6 4:6 4:18 4:23 4:29-30 
4:34 4:41 5:8 5:8 5:29 6:6 6:12 6:16 6:44 7:26 7:38 8:6 8:6 8:14 8:18 8:28-33 
8:31 8:44 9:1 9:3 9:5 9:30-31 9:32 9:34 9:54 9:60 10:17 10:18 10:18 10:18 10:18 
10:19 10:19 10:22 10:30 11:13 11:24 11:24 11:36 12:11-12 12:18 12:28 12:42 
12:44 12:46 12:47 12:49 12:49 12:49 12:49 13:7 13:8 13:8 13:10 13:11 13:15 
14:5 14:16 14:16 14:28 15:2 15:4 15:4 15:4-5 15:5-6 15:7 15:8 15:8-9 15:9 15:10 
15:20 16:9 16:9 16:13 16:19 16:24 17:5 17:12 17:34 17:35 18:1 18:13 18:14 
18:19 19:1 19:3 19:9 19:13 19:23 19:23 19:35 21:11 21:11 21:20-24 21:28 22:44 

Index of Scripture References

22:48 22:50 23:6-7 23:7 23:9 23:12 23:14 23:40 23:41 23:42 23:43 23:43 23:43 
23:43 23:46 23:50 23:52 24:1 24:5 24:32 24:36-53 24:37 24:39 24:39 24:41 24:49 
24:50 24:51
John
1:1 1:1 1:1 1:1 1:1 1:1 1:1-3 1:2 1:2 1:3 1:3 1:3 1:3 1:3 1:3 1:4 1:5 1:5 1:8 
1:9 1:9 1:9 1:9 1:10-11 1:11 1:11 1:12 1:12 1:12-13 1:14 1:14 1:14 1:14 1:14 
1:18 1:18 1:18 1:18 1:18 1:18 1:23 1:23 1:27 1:29 1:29 1:29 1:32 1:33 1:33 
2:1-11 2:1-11 2:15 2:15 2:16 2:25 3:3 3:3 3:3 3:4 3:5 3:8 3:8 3:8 3:8 3:13 3:13 
3:14 3:16 3:18 3:18 3:18 3:24 3:24 3:29 3:33 3:34 3:34-35 3:36 3:36 3:36 3:39 
4:7 4:14 4:23 4:24 4:24 4:24 4:24 4:29 4:34 4:36 5:1 5:8 5:14 5:14 5:17 5:17 
5:17 5:19 5:19 5:19 5:19 5:21 5:22 5:22 5:22 5:23 5:23 5:24 5:24 5:24 5:26 
5:27 5:29 5:29 5:30 5:34 5:35 5:35 5:35 5:35 5:35 5:37 5:43 6:10 6:27 6:27 
6:32-33 6:33 6:33 6:38 6:40 6:45 6:46 6:46 6:50 6:51 6:53 6:57 6:63 6:63 7:7 
7:12 7:17 7:19 7:37 7:38-39 8:12 8:25 8:29 8:38 8:39 8:40 8:41 8:44 8:48 8:48 
8:49 8:54 8:56 8:58 8:59 9:5 9:28 10:1 10:7 10:9 10:9 10:11 10:11 10:11 10:11 
10:14 10:15 10:15 10:15 10:18 10:18 10:18 10:18 10:30 10:36 11:14-44 11:34 
11:43 11:43 11:43 11:47 12:13 12:23 12:24 12:25 12:25 12:35 12:48 12:49 13:4 
13:4-5 13:9 13:31 14:6 14:6 14:6 14:9 14:9 14:9 14:11 14:16 14:16 14:16 14:16 
14:16-17 14:16-17 14:23 14:24 14:25 14:25 14:26 14:26 14:26 14:28 14:30 14:31 
15:1 15:1 15:3 15:4 15:5 15:5 15:10 15:26 15:26 15:26 15:26 16:7 16:7 16:7 
16:8 16:8 16:12 16:12 16:12-15 16:13 16:13-14 16:14-15 16:15 16:28 16:33 16:33 
17:2 17:2 17:3 17:5 17:5 17:5 17:10 17:24 17:25 17:25 18:8 18:18 19:1 19:15 
19:17 19:19 19:22 19:24 19:26-27 19:29 19:29 19:30 19:34 19:39 19:39 19:41 
19:41 20:1 20:3 20:3-4 20:11 20:13 20:17 20:17 20:17 20:17 20:22 20:25 20:28 
20:28 21:15 21:17 21:25
Acts
1 1:5 1:7 1:18 2:2 2:2 2:3 2:4 2:4 2:4 2:6 2:8 2:9 2:13 2:15 2:15 2:25 2:34 
2:36 2:36 2:37 2:41 2:42 2:58 3:1 3:15 3:21 4:8 4:8 4:13 4:13 4:32 5:3 5:3 
5:4 5:8 5:9 5:12 5:13-16 5:15 5:15 5:15 5:16 5:32 5:42 6:2 6:3 6:8 6:10 6:15 
7:14 7:37 7:44 7:48 7:51 7:55 7:58 7:59 7:59 8 8:5 8:7 8:13 8:17 8:17 8:18 
8:18-21 8:19 8:20 8:27 8:29 8:32 8:36 9:3 9:3 9:3-8 9:17 9:21 9:25 9:41 10:9 
10:11-16 10:19 10:36 10:38 10:44 10:48 11:24 11:26 11:28 13:2 13:2 13:2-4 13:41 
14:15 15:20 15:28-29 15:29 16:3 16:18 17:21 17:28 17:28 17:32 18:8 18:25 19:1-6 
19:12 19:12 19:12 19:14 19:19 20:9-12 20:23 20:23 20:35 21:21 21:24 21:26 
26:24 26:28 28:25
Romans
1:3 1:3 1:3-4 1:4 1:6 1:19 1:20 1:22-31 1:23 1:25 1:27 1:28 1:28 2:15-16 2:18 
2:20 2:24 2:24 2:25 2:29 3:12 3:30 4 4:11 4:17 4:17 4:17-18 4:18 4:19 5:3 5:12 

Index of Scripture References

5:14 5:17 5:17-18 5:20 5:20 5:20 6:3 6:3-4 6:3-4 6:3-14 6:4 6:4 6:4 6:4 6:5 
6:5 6:6 6:11 6:12 6:13 6:13 6:13 6:14 6:17 6:19 6:22 7:16 7:23 7:23 8:9 8:9 
8:11 8:11 8:11 8:14 8:14 8:15 8:15-16 8:17 8:18 8:26 8:26 8:26 8:28 8:29 8:34 
8:35 9:3 9:5 9:11 9:16 9:17 9:27 9:28 9:28 9:33 10:2 10:2 10:2 10:6-7 10:15 
10:18 11:4 11:16 11:16 11:20 11:23 11:24 11:33 11:33 11:33 11:33 11:35 11:36 
11:36 11:36 12:1 12:1 12:1 12:4 13:1-3 13:13 13:13 14:2 14:3 14:6 14:9 15:1 
15:12 15:16 15:19 15:19 15:21 16:17 19
1 Corinthians
1:9 1:9 1:17 1:18 1:23 1:23 1:23 1:24 1:24 1:27 1:29 2:4 2:4 2:6 2:6 2:7 2:7 
2:8 2:9 2:9 2:9 2:10 2:10 2:10 2:10 2:10 2:10 2:10-11 2:10-11 2:11 2:11 2:13 
2:13 2:16 2:16 2:17 3:1-2 3:2 3:2 3:6 3:6 3:9 3:12 3:12 3:12 3:12 3:12-13 
3:12-19 3:13 3:15 3:15 3:18 4:1 4:1 4:3 4:5 4:9 4:9 4:9 4:12 4:12 4:15 4:15 
4:15 4:15 4:15 4:15 4:21 4:21 5:5 5:8 5:17 6:1 6:7 6:9-10 6:19 6:19 6:19 7:3 
7:5 7:8 7:8-9 7:9 7:25 7:31 7:40 8:2 8:5-6 8:5-6 8:5-6 8:6 8:6 9:3 9:18 9:22 
9:22 9:22 9:22 9:27 10:2 10:4 10:10 10:11 10:14-21 10:19-21 10:20 10:21 10:33 
11:2 11:3 11:3 11:3 11:7 11:23 11:23 12:1 12:3 12:4 12:7-11 12:8 12:8 12:8-9 
12:9-10 12:11 12:11 12:11 12:12 12:20 12:23 12:28 12:29 13 13:7 13:7 13:9 
13:12 13:12 13:12 13:12 13:12 14:2 14:8 14:15 14:19 14:22 14:22 14:23 14:24 
14:28 14:28 14:29 14:32 14:34 15:1-4 15:3-4 15:4 15:5-6 15:7 15:8 15:9 15:9 
15:10 15:14-15 15:16 15:17 15:19 15:20 15:20 15:22 15:25 15:25 15:27-28 15:28 
15:28 15:28 15:35 15:35 15:36 15:36 15:41 15:45 15:47 15:47 15:49 15:49 15:49 
15:49 15:52 15:53 15:55 15:55 15:55 16:20
2 Corinthians
1:3 1:3 1:22 1:22 2:6 2:7 2:8 2:11 2:15 2:16-17 3:1 3:3 3:6-7 3:7 3:10 3:14-15 
3:18 3:18 3:18 4:3 4:4 4:4 4:4 4:5 4:6 4:7 4:10 4:18 5:1 5:4 5:6 5:16 5:17 
5:17 5:20 5:21 5:21 6 6:1 6:2 6:2 6:7 6:7 6:7-8 6:10 6:14 6:14 6:16 6:16 6:16 
8:3 8:6 8:9 8:9 8:9 9:7 10:5 10:14-16 11:6 11:6 11:14 11:14 11:16 11:17 11:23 
11:23 11:28 11:28-29 12:2 12:2 12:2 12:2 12:2 12:2 12:4 12:4 12:4 12:7 12:7 
12:9-10 12:13 12:17 13:3 13:3 13:4 13:5-7 13:14
Galatians
1:8-9 1:10 1:10 2:2 2:2 2:7 2:8-9 2:9 2:9 2:18 3:1 3:10 3:13 3:13 3:13 3:13 
3:24 3:24 3:27 3:27 3:28 4:2 4:4 4:4-6 4:6 4:10 4:25 4:26 4:26 5:10 5:12 5:12 
5:16 5:22 5:22-23 6:6 6:14 6:14 7:7-17
Ephesians
1:3 1:5 1:7 1:11 1:13 1:13 1:17 1:17 1:17-18 1:18 1:19-20 1:23 1:23 2 2:4 2:8 
2:10 2:10 2:14 2:22 3:2 3:5 3:6 3:9 3:11 3:13 3:14-15 3:14-15 3:14-16 3:17 3:17 
4:5 4:8 4:11 4:11 4:13 4:14 4:15 4:15 4:16 4:22 4:22 4:22 4:24 4:24 4:26 4:27 

Index of Scripture References

4:30 5:6 5:7 5:11 5:14 5:14 5:22 5:22 5:25 5:25 5:26 5:26 5:27 5:32 6:1-4 6:5 
6:9 6:11 6:11 6:12 6:12 6:14 6:15 6:16 6:16 6:17 6:17 6:18-19 7:6
Philippians
1:11 1:19 1:23 1:23 1:23 1:23 2:4 2:6 2:7 2:7 2:7 2:7 2:7 2:8 2:9 2:9 2:10 
2:11 2:11 2:15 2:15-16 2:16 2:17 3:1 3:3 3:4 3:8 3:13 3:14 3:21 3:21 3:21 4:1 
4:4 4:7 4:13
Colossians
1:5 1:11 1:15 1:16 1:16 1:16 1:16 1:16 1:16-17 1:17 1:18 1:18 1:20 1:20 1:25 
2:5 2:8 2:8 2:10 2:11 2:11-12 2:12 2:12 2:14 2:15 2:15 3:1 3:3 3:5 3:5 3:5 3:5 
3:9 3:9 3:10 3:10 3:11 3:20 4:18 712
1 Thessalonians
2:16 2:19 4:13 4:16 4:16 4:16 4:16-17 4:17 4:17 5:18 5:19 5:21-22 5:21-22 5:23 
5:23
2 Thessalonians
2:3-10 2:4 2:7 2:8 2:9 2:11-12 2:15 3:5
1 Timothy
1:13 1:13 1:14 1:17 1:17 2:2 2:2 2:5 2:6 2:7 2:8 2:12 2:16 3 3:2 3:2 3:15 3:16 
4:1 4:3 5:21 5:21 5:23 6:8 6:10 6:13-14 6:15-16 6:16 6:16 6:16 6:19 6:20 6:20 
6:20 7:15
2 Timothy
1:10 1:11 1:11 1:14 1:14 1:14 2:3 2:4 2:5 2:8 2:8 2:8 2:13 2:16 3:8 4:2 4:3 
4:3 4:7
Titus
1:7 2:11 2:14 2:14 3:4 3:4
Hebrews
1:1 1:2 1:3 1:3 1:3 1:6 1:8 1:9 1:10-12 1:10-12 1:13 1:14 2:4 2:12 2:13 2:13 
2:14 2:14 2:14 2:14-15 2:18 3:1 3:7 3:13 3:14 3:15 4:12 4:14 4:15 4:15 4:16 
5:2 5:4-6 5:7 5:7 5:8 5:8 5:9 5:12 5:12 5:12-14 5:14 5:14 5:14 6:11-14 6:13-20 
6:18 7:3 7:10 7:13 7:21 7:23 7:24 7:25 7:27 8:2 8:8-13 9:3 9:7 9:7 9:10 9:11 
9:11 9:14 9:19 9:19 9:24 9:24 9:24 9:26 10:1 10:1 10:4 10:12 10:15 10:19 10:20 
10:22 10:29 10:31 10:38 11:1-2 11:5 11:6 11:8 11:8-10 11:9 11:11-12 11:19 11:26 
11:27 11:27 11:34 11:37 11:38 11:38 12:2 12:2 12:2 12:2 12:9 12:15 12:15 12:16 
12:18 12:20 12:21 12:22 12:22-23 12:23 12:23 12:26 12:26 12:26 12:27 12:27 13 
13:4 13:4 13:8 13:8 13:15 13:20 13:20
James
1:2 1:5 1:12-13 1:17 1:21 2:17 2:19 2:21 2:23 2:25 3:9 3:16 4:6 4:8 5:16-17 
5:17
1 Peter

Index of Scripture References

1:7 1:11 1:17 1:19 2:1 2:1 2:4-6 2:5 2:6 2:8 2:9 2:9 2:9 2:22 2:22-23 2:24 3:4 
3:15 3:19 3:21 3:22 4:19 5:2 5:4 5:4 5:6 5:6 5:7 5:8 5:8 5:8 5:8 5:9 5:9
2 Peter
1:4 1:4 1:4 1:17 1:19 3:10
1 John
1:5 1:5 1:7 1:8 1:9 2:1 2:15 2:19 2:20 2:20-28 2:22 2:22 2:23 2:23 3:8 3:10 
4:18 5:1 5:7 5:7 5:8 5:8 5:20 10:9 14:6
2 John
1:7 1:10 1:11
Jude
1:14
Revelation
1:1 1:7 1:8 2:1 2:5 2:7 5:5 5:6 5:12 7:17 12:7 12:17 17:11 18:1 21:23 22:5 
22:14
Judith
5:6
Wisdom of Solomon
1:2 1:6 1:7 2:12 2:24 2:24 3:7 3:15 4:8 5:9 5:10 6:16 7:25 7:26 9:15 13:5 13:5
Baruch
2:25 3:17 3:35 3:35-37 3:37 3:37
Susanna
1:5 1:45
Bel and the Dragon
1:33 1:33
1 Maccabees
2:58
2 Maccabees
2:4 7:1 9:4 9:27
1 Esdras
1:54
2 Esdras
10:22
Sirach
1:2 3:9 3:10 3:11 3:21-22 3:22 4:30 4:31 25:1 25:9 25:9 32:3 38:16 45:12 49:14

Greek Words and Phrases

Greek Words and Phrases

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0): 242
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0): 196
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0): 844
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0): 278
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)"(cid:0)(cid:0): 278
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0): 30
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0): 161
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0): 212
(cid:0)&x#o@"(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0): 212
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0): 302
(cid:0)(cid:0) (cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)": 190
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0): 190
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0): 247
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0): 247
(cid:0)(cid:0): 279
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0): 150
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0): 279
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)": 244
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0): 277
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0): 279
ἀΐδια: 82
ἀγένητοι: 225
ἀγέννητοι: 225
ἀγέννητος: 225
ἀγαπήσωμεν: 45
ἀγαπῶμεν: 394
ἀδόκιμος: 398
ἀδελφιδόν: 127
ἀεὶ κατὰ τὰ αὐτὰ καὶ ὡσαύτως ἔχειν: 130
ἀκόυω: 468
ἀκροώμενοι: 25
ἀκτήμοσι: 321
ἀκτημονοῦσι: 321
ἀκτημοσύνην: 321
ἀληθινὸν γέννημα: 222

Greek Words and Phrases

ἀλλὰ Υἱὸς [τοῦ Πατρὸς]* ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἐγεννήθη, [ὑπεράνω πάσης ἀρχῆς καὶ αἰώνων τυγχάνων:
ἀλλά: 193
ἀμύητοι: 57 57
ἀνάγνωσις: 104
ἀνάδοχος: 26
ἀνέβη: 289
ἀνήκει: 397
ἀναγνωσμάτων: 74 289
ἀναδίδοται: 62
ἀναδεδεγμένοι: 62 390
ἀναδιδομένου: 62 390
ἀναστάσεως: 287
ἀναστῆναι: 152
ἀναστῆσαι: 152
ἀνεκράθη: 436
ἀνελθόντα εἰς οὐρανούς,: 78
ἀνεξικάκως καὶ συμμέτρως συμπεριφέροιντο αὐτοῖς: 140
ἀνθεμίς: 307
ἀντίτυπα τῶν ἀληθινῶν: 384
ἀντίτυπον: 51 54 66 382 384 384
ἀντίτυπος: 66
ἀντιγεννῆσαι: 186
ἀντιπρόσωπος: 306
ἀντιπροσώπως: 306
ἀντιτύπου σώματος: 400
ἀνυπόστατον: 223 308
ἀνυπεύθυνος: 394
ἀνυποστάτοις λόγοις: 133
ἀπήγξατο: 399
ἀπὸ τῶν δικαίων τῶν πολλῶν: 306
ἀπόκρυφος: 305
ἀπόρροια: 84
ἀπαύγασμα: 84 219
ἀπαγγέλλω: 295
ἀπαθὲς καὶ ἀναλλοίωτον: 129
ἀπαθές: 80

Greek Words and Phrases

ἀπαράλλακτοι: 81 227
ἀπείραστος: 398
ἀπεπνίγη: 399
ἀποθέμενοι οὖν πᾶσαν κακίαν καὶ πάντα δόλον καὶ ὑποκρίσεις καὶ πάσας καταλαλίας: 393
ἀποπτώσεις: 163
ἀπορρήτῳ: 597
ἀποτομήν: 83
ἀποτρόπαιον: 374
ἀριθμηταὶ δὲ αὐτῷ σταγόνες ὑετοῦ: 158
ἀρχάς: 156
ἀρχή: 131
ἀρχιερέα τῆς ὁμολογίας ἡμῶν: 137
ἀσαγῆ: 237
ἀσπάσασθε: 394
ἀσπαζώμεθα: 45
ἀτελέστεροι: 25
ἀτμίς: 84
ἀφ ̓ οὗπερ ἔστιν, (ἔστι δὲ ἀεὶ γεννηθείς: 291
ἀφαίρεμα: 838 839
ἀφορμάς: 11
ἀφορμή: 301
ἁγίων πατέρων: 322
ἁληθινός: 222
ἃς καὶ ἐν ̓Εκκλησίᾳ μετὰ παρρησίας ἀναγινώσκομεν: 303
ἄκρος: 315
ἄλλος: 386
ἄναρχον καὶ ἀειγενές: 219
ἄναρχος: 218 219
ἄνθρωπος: 619 619
ἄρτους ἠλισγημένους ,: 391
ἄρχειν: 428
ἄρχοντας: 458
ἄτερ δ ̓ εὐνᾶς κτησάσθαν λίθινον γόνον: 247
ἄχρι: 315
ἅρχεσθαι: 428
ἐ: 30
ἐίδωλον: 494

Greek Words and Phrases

ἐγγράφων: 283
ἐγκεχειρίσθαι: 190
ἐγκεχειρῆσθαι: 190
ἐγκρίτοις πάντων: 209
ἐγκρίτων: 209
ἐθαυματούργησε τὴν παραδοξοποιίαν: 389
ἐθεοποιήθη: 234
ἐκ Διὸς ἀρχώμεσθα, καὶ ἐις Δία λήγετε, μοῖσαι: 426
ἐκ Παρθένου καὶ Πνεύματος ̔Αγίου: 233
ἐκ γαστρὸς πρὸ ἑωσφόρου γεγέννηκά σε: 221
ἐκ δύοιν ἐναντιωτάτοιν συγκεκραμένης, ἑλληνικῆς τε καὶ νομικῆς τερατείας· ὧν
αμφοτέρων τὰ μέρη φυγὼν, ἐκ μέρων συνετέθη. Τῆς μέν γὰρ τὰ εἴδωλα καὶ τὰς θυσίας
ἀποπεμπόμενοι, τιμῶσι τὸ πῦρ καὶ τὰ λυχνα· τῆς δὲ τὸ σάββατον αἰδούμενοι καὶ τὰ περὶ
τὰ βρώματά ἐστιν ἃ μικρολογίαν, τὴν περιτομὴν ἀτιμάζουσιν: 403
ἐκ προκοπῆς: 204 205 217 291
ἐκ τῆς ἀχράντου παρθένου Μαρίας τὸν ἡμέτερον ἀνείληφεν ἄνθρωπον Χριστὸν ̓Ιησοῦν:
ἐκ τῆς ὑπερθέσεως τῆς νηστείας τῆς παρασκευῆς: 363
ἐκ τῆς γῆς: 286
ἐκ τῆς θαλάσσης: 286
ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος: 86
ἐκκαλεῖσθαι: 366
ἐκκαλοῦμεν: 47
ἐκκλησία: 365
ἐκκλησίας: 366
ἐκκλησίασον: 366
ἐκκλησιαζομένων: 303
ἐκκρίτοις π.: 209
ἐκπόρευσις: 608
ἐκπετάσεως: 309
ἐλαίῳ: 381
ἐμβάλωμεν: 262
ἐμπαγῆναι: 399
ἐμπαρῆναι: 399
ἐν: 69
ἐν ἀνθρώποις πολιτευσάμενον: 234
ἐν ἐκκλησίαις: 366

ἐν ἐξουσιᾳ: 729
ἐν ὀλίγῳ: 350
ἐν ὑποστάσει: 223
ἐν εἰδωλολατρείᾳ: 301
ἐν εἰκόνι ἡ μίμησις, ἐν ἀληθείᾳ δὲ ἡ σωτηρία,: 66
ἐν λάκκῳ: 271
ἐν οὐσίᾳ καὶ ὑποστάσει: 84
ἐν πᾶσιν ὅμοιος: 219
ἐν παλατίοις: 327
ἐν τόπῳ ἁγίῳ: 555
ἐν τύπῳ γὰρ ἄρτου δίδοταί σοι τὸ σῶμα: 66
ἐν τῇ νυκτὶ ἐν ᾗ παρεδίδοτο, μᾶλλον δε ἑαυτὸν παρεδίδου: 697
ἐν τῷ Γ τούτῳ λέγομεν: 69
ἐν τῷ αὐτῷ κρίματι: 253
ἐν τοῖς προστάγμασι: 320
ἐνάργεια: 284
ἐνανθρώπησις: 234
ἐνανθρωπήσαντα: 234 234
ἐνεργεία: 182
ἐνηνθρώπησεν: 234
ἐνυπόστατον: 223 223 338
ἐνυπόστατος: 132
ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἀνάρχου: 218
ἐξ ἑτέρας ὑποστάσεως ἢ οὐσίας: 86 709
ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων ἐγένετο: 86
ἐξ οὗπερ ἦν: 81
ἐξέλιπεν: 266
ἐξειργάσαντο: 72
ἐξελθεῖν: 846
ἐξεταζόμενον: 241
ἐξομολόγησιν.: 30
ἐξομολόγησις: 31
ἐξομολογήσει: 30
ἐξομολογήσομαι: 30
ἐξομολογεῖσθαι, ἐξομολόγησις: 30
ἐξομολογούμενος τῷ θεῷ: 30
ἐξομολογοῦνται οἱ δαίμονες τὴν γαστριμαργίαν τὴν αὑτῶν: 31

Greek Words and Phrases

ἐπὶ μετώπου καὶ τῶν ἄλλων σου αἰσθητηρίων: 386
ἐπὶ περιοπῆς: 762
ἐπὶ πληρώματα ὑδάτων: 340
ἐπὶ προφάσει τοιᾷδε: 11
ἐπὶ τούτοις μεγάλη ἡ δόξα καὶ τιμὴ παντοκράτορος: 190
ἐπί: 398
ἐπίστασιν: 448
ἐπ ̓ αὐτῆς τῆς λέξεως: 154 155
ἐπαγγέλλω: 295
ἐπαρχία: 328
ἐπεσημειωσάμεθα: 276
ἐπιγνώσεσθε: 595
ἐπιούσῃ ἡμέρᾳ: 398
ἐπιούσιος: 49 62 398
ἐπιστήμη: 96 178 226
ἐπιστασίαν: 448
ἐπιστολή: 349
ἐπιφοίτησιν: 43
ἐρεῖν: 241
ἐρευνήσεως: 153
ἐς τοῦτο διέβησαν: 377
ἐστιγμένους ἀνθέμια: 307
ἐφόδιον: 154 154 301
ἐφ ̓ ἑκάστης λέξεως: 365
ἑῶά τε ὅμοῦ λῆξις καὶ ἑσπέριος-λῆξις: 481
ἑκκλησιαστικός: 298
ἑξῆς: 244
ἑορτὴ ἑορτῶν, καὶ πανήγυρις πανηγύριον. ἑορτή: 833
ἑορτή: 833
ἔκπεμψις, πρόοδος: 710
ἔμφασις: 373
ἔξ ὄρους φαρὰν κατασκίου δασέος: 244
ἔστι καὶ οὕτως εἰπεῖν: 174
ἔστιν: 291
ἔχοντες ζῆλόν τινα ἐν ἀλλήλοις περὶ πρωτείων: 339
ἕως: 290
ἠλισγημένην: 391

Greek Words and Phrases

Greek Words and Phrases

ἠλυγισμένην: 391
ἠνείχετο: 261
ἠνεσχετο: 261
ἡ ἁγιωσύνη: 116
ἡ ̔Υπαπαντή: 87
ἡ θεότης: 619
ἡ θεοτόκος: 213
ἡ καρδία αὐτοῦ...ἕστηκεν ὥσπερ ἄκμων ἀνήλατος: 128
ἡ σωτήριος: 295
ἡ σωτηρία γὰρ αὕτη τῆς πίστεως ἡμῶν: 137
ἡ τῶν ἀγαθῶν πρᾶξις: 251
ἡ χὲιρ ̓Αβεσσαλὤμ: 556
ἡγίασται καὶ μεταβέβληται: 61
ἡγεμονικῷ: 337
ἢ τοιαῦτα: 377
ἣν ἐγγράφου σὺ μνήμοσιν δέλτοις φρενῶν: 154
ἦν ὅτε οὐκ ἦν: 698
ἦν ποτὲ ὅτε οῦκ ἦν: 571
ἦν ποτε ὅτε οὐκ ἦν: 222
ἰδέαν: 130
ἰδιότῆς: 555
ἰδιότητες: 571 802
ἱερεύς: 45 393
ἵνα: 197
ἵνα μὴ τοῦ ψύχους πλείων γένηται ὁ χρόνος, ἀλλ ̓ ἵνα αἱ νύκτες, κ.τ.λ: 193
ἵνα τῇ μιμήσει τῶν παθημάτων αὐτοῦ κοινωνήσαντες, ἀληθείᾳ τὴν σωτηρίαν κερδήσωμεν:
ἵπτανται: 197
ὀλγιοστὸς εἶ, μὴ ὀλ, εἶ οὐκ ὀλ. εἶ: 229
ὀμιχλη: 196
ὀνοματογραφία: 26 95
ὀπωροφυλάκιον: 327
ὀφθαλμοφανῶς: 340
ὁ ἀρχόμενος: 45
ὁ ἐν τῷ Γ. τούτῳ σταυρωθείς: 69
ὁ ἱερεὺς ὁ Χριστός: 209
ὁ Γ. ὁ ἅγιος οὗτος ὁ ὑπερανεστηκὼς μαρτυρεῖ φαινόμενος: 69

Greek Words and Phrases

ὁ Θεὸς δὲ ἄναρχος ἀρχὴ τῶν ὅλων παντελὴς ἀρχῆς ποιητικός: 218
ὁ Λόγος: 390
ὁ γὰρ Θεὸς αὐτός: 248
ὁ γὰρ αὐτὸς Θεός: 248
ὁ γεννηθεὶς ἀπαθῶς: 159
ὁ γεννηθεὶς ἀπαθῶς.: 181
ὁ γεννηθεὶς [ἀπαθῶς πρὸ τῶν χρόνων αἰωνίων]: 159
ὁ διαλλάσσων,: 260
ὁ θεραπευτής.: 281
ὁ κάτω: 619
ὁ λόγος: 64
ὁ μακάριος οὗτος Γ. ἐν ᾧ νῦν διὰ τὸν ἐν αὐτῷ σταυρωθέντα συγκεκροτήμεθα: 69
ὁ παρών: 275
ὁ πρωτοστάτης τῶν ̓Αποστόλων καὶ τῆς ̓Εκκλησίας κορυφαῖος κήρυξ: 218
ὁ τῆς ἀποστασίας ἄνθρωπος: 300
ὁ τοῦ Πατρὸς ὅρος καὶ λόγος: 637
ὁμιλήσας: 619
ὁμιλίᾳ: 597
ὁμοήθειαν Θεοῦ: 280
ὁμοίωσις: 280
ὁμοιούσιος: 80
ὁμοιοπαθῆ: 133
ὁμοούσιον: 9 16 18 79 80 82 82 83 83 83 84 85 85 132 226
ὁμοούσιος: 11 13 14 18 80 82 84 84 85 88 181 219 227
ὃ χρόνοις: 221
ὃ χρόνος: 221
ὃρος: 695
ὄντα, ἀεὶ ὄντα: 160
ὅμοιόν τε καὶ ἀπαράλλακτον αὐτὸν κατὰ πὰντα τῷ Πατρί: 81
ὅμοιος ἐν πᾶσιν: 80
ὅμοιος τῷ γεγεννηκότι· [ἀΐδιος ἐξ ἀϊδίου Πατρός,]* ζωὴ ἐκ ζωῆς γεγεννημένος. ...καὶ Θεὸς
ἐκ Θεοῦ: 220
ὅσα ἐν ̓Εκκλησίαις μὴ ἀναγινώσκεται: 303
ὅταν: 360
ὅταν γέγραπται ....καὶ ἀπιστῶσιν: 360
ὑδάτων χριστοφόρων ἐχόντων εὐωδίαν: 384
ὑμεῖς: 282

Greek Words and Phrases

ὑπάρχουσα: 63
ὑπὲρ ἀνθρώπων: 203
ὑπὲρ ἄνθρωπον: 203
ὑπὲρ εἰρήνης καὶ εὐσταθείας τοῦ κόσμου: 396
ὑπὲρ τοῦ βασιλέως, καὶ τῶν ἐν ὑπεροχῇ: 100
ὑπόστασιν: 83 197
ὑπόστασις: 13 83 84 84 84 84 86 86 123 590 709 709 709 709 709 709 709 709 710
ὑπόστημα: 597
ὑπ ̓ εἰδώλοις πάρος ἦεν ζώων: 494
ὑπερ: 437
ὑπερθέσεως: 74
ὑπογραφὴν ...ἣν ἀντωμοσίαν καλοῦσιν: 95
ὑπογραφή: 95
ὑποστάσεις: 709
ὑποστήματι: 597
ὑφαρπάσαι τὸν τῷ ἑτέρῳ διαφέροντα: 397
ὕπαρξις: 86
ὡς: 290 290
ὡς εἰς τὸν οὐρανόν: 290
ὡςφωτιζομένων τὴν διάνοιαν τῶν ταῦτα μανθανόντων: 28
ὺπόστασις: 86
ᾠκονόμησε: 289
 ̓Αδωναΐ: 190
 ̓Αλλ ̓ ὅρα μὴ ὑπονοήσῃς ἐκεῖνο τὸ μύρον ψιλὸν εἶναι. ὥσπερ γὰρ ὁ ἄρτος τῆς εὐχαριστίας
μετὰ τὴν ἐπίκλησιν τοῦ ἁγίου Πνεύματος οὐκ ἔτι ἄρτος λιτός, ἀλλὰ σῶμα Χριστοῦ, οὕτω
καὶ τὸ ἅγιον τοῦτο μύρον οὐκ ἔτι ψιλόν, οὐδ ̓ ὡς ἂν εἴποι τις κοινὸν μετ ̓ ἐπίκλησιν, ἀλλὰ
Χριστοῦ χάρισμα, καὶ Πνεύματος ἁγίου παρουσίᾳ τῆς αὐτοῦ θεότητος ἐνεργητικὸν
γινόμενον: 60
 ̓Αλλ ̓ ὡς Θεοῦ Λόγον ἀκούσαντες ....σύνδρομον ἔχουσαν τῇ βουλήσει τὴν δύναμιν: 318
 ̓Ανάστασις: 354
 ̓Αναδιδομένου: 390 390
 ̓Αρειανόφρων: 82
 ̓Εγκράτεια: 310
 ̓Εξομολόγησις: 30
 ̓Εξομολογήσομαί σοι, Κύριε.: 30
 ̓Επιβοᾶς ἐπαίνῳ ὡς συντιθέμενος: 69
 ̓Ηλίας μὲν γὰρ ἀνελήφθη εἰς οὐρανόν: 290

Greek Words and Phrases

 ̓Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ τοῦ Κ. ἡμ.: 287
 ̓Ιωάννῃ τῷ Θεολόγω: 232
 ̓Οξὺν ἀπαγγελτῆρα λόγων, Λόγον ὕδασιν ἁγνοῖς: 385
 ̓͂Ην ποτε ὅτε οὐκ ἦν: 86
 ̔́Ος σε Λόγον γέννησε Πατήρ Πνεῦμ ̓ ὄρνιν ἄφηκεν,: 385
 ̔Ο Χριστὸν ἔχων ἐν στέρνοις: 101
 ̔Ο μὲν γὰρ πορνεύσας, πρὸς μίαν ὥραν δ ἐπιθυμίαν τελεῖ τὴν πρᾶξιν· καταγινώσκων δὲ
τῆς πράξεως ὡς μιανθεὶς οἶδε λουτροῦ ἐπιδεόμενος, καὶ γινώσκει τῆς πρὰξεως τὸ μυσαρόν.
 ̔Ο δὲ Μανιχαῖος θυσιαστηρίου μέσον, οὗ νομίζει, τίθησι ταῦτα, καὶ μιαίνει καὶ τὸ στόμα
καὶ τὴν γλῶτταν. παρὰ τοιούτου στόματος, ἄνθρωπε κ.τ.λ: 177
 ̔Ομολογία: 36
 ̔Ομοούσιος: 85
 ̔Ορᾶς τοῦ Γολγοθᾶ τὸν τόπον: 69
 ̔Ορατῶν τε πάντων καὶ ἀοράτων: 77
 ̔Ραίνων, σὸν Βάπτισμα δι ̓ οὗ πυρὸς ἐξεφαάνθης .: 385
 ̔συναναλίσκεσθαι: 63
"ἐνέργεια: 284
Αἴθειν: 636 636
Βαπτἰζεσθαι: 725
Βασιλεύς: 100
Βοτανὴν χόρτου σπεῖρον σπέρμα: 280
Γάλα μὲν ἡ κατήχησις οἱονεὶ πρώτη ψυχῆς τροφὴ νοηθήσεται: 20
Δόγῳ παλαίει πᾶς λόγος: 257
Διαφέρει, ἀνήκει: 397
Διγαμία: 141
Διπλοῦς ἦν ὁ Χριστός, κ.τ.λ: 88
Δοξολογία: 156
Θέειν: 636 636
Θύρα ὁ Σωτηρ ἀναγέγραπται: 203
Θαιμάν: 244
Θεὸν ἀληθινὸν: 77
Θεὸν ἐκ Θεοῦ, φῶς ἐκ φῶτος. Θεὸν ἀληθινὸν ἐκ Θεοῦ ἀληθινοῦ,: 77
Θεὸς λέγεται ἀπὸ τὸ θεωρεῖν τὰ πάντα, οἱονεὶ θεωρὸς καὶ θεος, ἤγουν θεάτης πάντων: 636
Θεός: 636 636
Θεᾶσθαι: 636
Θεῷ: 218
Θεοῦ ἀνθρώπους πνευματοφόρους Πνεύματος ἁγίου: 332

Greek Words and Phrases

Θεοῦ γὰρ οὐδὲ ὁ σύμπας κόσμος ἀξίον ἂν εἴη χωρίον καὶ ἐνδιαίτημα, ἐπεὶ αὐτὸς ἑαυτῷ
τήπος: 161
Θεολόγος: 232
Θεοποιεῖσθαι: 234
Θεοτόκος: 232
Θεοφόρος: 101
Θεωρεῖν: 636
Θεϊκῶς: 220
Κύριος: 207 636
Κᾀκεῖνοι περὶ οὐρανῶν τὰς δυσφήμους ἔχουσι γλώσσας. ̓Ιησοῦς λέγει περὶ τοῦ πατρὸς
αὐτοῦ, ̔́Οστις τὸν ἥλιον αὐτοῦ ἀνατέλλει ἐπὶ δικαίους καὶ ἀδίκους, καὶ βρέχει ἐπὶ πονηροὺς
καὶ ἀγαθούς. κᾀκεῖνοι λέγουσιν, ὅτι οἱ ὑετοὶ ἐξ ἐρωτικῆς μανίας γίνονται, καὶ τολμῶσι
λέγειν, ὅτι ἐστί τις παρθένος ἐν οὐρανῷ εὐειδὴς μετὰ νεανίσκου εὐειδοῦς, καὶ κατὰ τὴν
τῶν καμηλῶν ἢ λύκων καιρὸν, τοὺς τῆς αἰσχρᾶς ἐπιθυμίας καιροὺς ἔχειν, καὶ κατὰ τὴν
τοῦ χειμῶνος καιρὸν, μανιωδῶς αὐτὸν ἐπιτρέχειν τῇ παρθένῳ, καὶ τὴν μὲν φεύγειν φασί,
τὸν δὲ ἐπιτρέχειν, εἶτα ἐπιτρέχοντα ἱδροῦν, ἀπὸ δὲ τῶν ἱδρώτων αὐτοῦ εἶναι τὸν ὑετόν.
 Ταῦτα γέγραπται ἐν τοῖς τῶν Μανιχαίων βιβλίοις· ταῦτα ἡμεῖς ἀνέγνωμεν, κ.τ.λ: 177
Καὶ εἰς ἓν ἅγιον Πνεῦμα: 78
Καὶ εἰς ἕνα Κύριον ̓Ιησοῦν Χριστόν: 77
Κρόνου πολυώνυμος υἱός: 203
Κωνσταντίνου τοῦ βασιλέως: 100
Λόγος: 637 637
Λόγος προφορικός: 132
Λυχνοκαΐη: 377
Μακρόστιχος: 313
Μαλακία: 699 699
Μαρτυρῆσαι: 328
Μοναρχία: 156 156 179
Μυσταγωγία πρώτη ̓Ιωάννου ἐπισκόπου ̔Ιεροσολύμων: 87
Μυσταγωγίαι: 76
Μυσταγωγικαὶ κατηχήσεις πέντε ̓Ιωάννου ̓Επισκόπου ̔Ιεροσολύμων, περὶ βαπτίσματος,
χρίσματος, σώματος, καὶ αἵματος Χριστοῦ: 87
Νόσος: 699 699
Νὺξ δ ̓ ἄρ ̓ ἐπῆλθε κακὴ σκοτομήνιος: 150
Οὐ τολμῶ εἰπεῖν, τίνι ἐμβάπτοντες τὴν ἰσχάδα, διδόασι τοῖς ἀθλίοις. διὰ συσσήμων δὲ
μόνον δηλούσθω. ἄνδρες γὰρ τὰ ἐν τοῖς ἐνυπνιασμοῖς ἐνθυμείσθωσιν, καὶ γυναῖκες τὰ ἐν
ἀφέδροις. Μιαίνομεν ἀληθας τὸ στόμα κ.τ.λ: 177

Greek Words and Phrases

Οὐσία: 82 82
Οὗτος ὁ ἄρτος....εἰς πᾶσάν σου τὴν σύστασιν ἀναδίδοται, εἰς ὠφέλειαν σώματος καὶ ψυχῆς:
Παιδαγωγός: 143
Παντοκράτορα: 77
Παντοκράτωρ: 187
Πατέρα: 77
Πατέρα παντοκράτορα,: 77
Περὶ Θεοῦ Μοναρχίας: 156
Πιστός: 26
Πιστεύομεν εἰς ἕνα Θεόν: 77
Πιστεύομεν εἰς ἕνα Θεόν,: 77
Πνεύματος ἁγίου παρουσίᾳ τῆς αὐτοῦ θεότητος ἐνεργητικόν: 386
Πνευμα: 338
Πν. ἁγ. παρουσίᾳ: 386
Ποιητὴν οὐρανοῦ καὶ γῆς: 77
Πρὸς Βοιωτὸν περὶ τοῦ ὀνόματος: 217
Πρωτότοκον: 219
Σύναξις: 211
Σικυήλατον: 327
Στέφανος: 347
Σταυρός: 309
Τὸν ὅμοιον κατὰ πάντα τῷ γεννησαντι: 132
Τό εἶ σύ, ἄχρονον καὶ ἀΐδιον· τὸ δὲ σήμερον πρόσφατον, ἀλλ ̓ οὐκ ἀΐδιον, οἰκειουμένου
τοῦ Πατρὸς καὶ τὴν κάτω γέννησιν. Καὶ πάλιν λέγει· ̓Εκ γαστρὸς πρὸ ἑωσφόρου γεγέννηκά
σε· τοῦτο μόνον τῆς Θεότητος· Πίστευσον, κ.τ.λ: 220
Τύπος: 390
Τῷ: 393
Τιθέναι: 636
Τοὺς δὲ λέγοντας· ἦν ποτε ὅτε οὐκ ἦν, καί τρὶν γεννηθῆναι οὐκ ἦν, καὶ ὅτι ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων
ἐγένετο, ἢ ἐξ ἑτέρας ὑποστάσεως ἢ οὐσίας φάσκοντας εἶναι ἢ κτιστὸν ἢ τρεπτὸν ἢ
ἀλλοιωτὸν τὸν Ψἱὸν τοῦ Θεοῦ. ἀναθεματίζει ἡ καθολικὴ ἐκκλησία.: 78
Τράπεζα Κυρίου ἠλισγημένη ἐστίν: 391
Τραπεζίτης: 178
Υἱῷ: 218
Υἱῷ Θεοῦ μονογενεῖ: 218
Υιοπάτωρ: 132

Greek Words and Phrases

Φοῖνιξ: 357
Χάρισμα: 42 61
Χαίρετε: 275
Χιτών: 37
Χρίσμα: 52
Χρισοί: 66
Χριστόν: 217
Χριστοί: 38
Χριστοῦ χάρισμα καὶ Πνεύματος ἁγίου παρουσίᾳ τῆς αὐτοῦ Θεότητος ἐνεργητικὸν
γινόμενον: 386
Χριστοφόροι γινόμεθα: 390
αἴωνιος: 692
αἵων: 692
αἷμα: 389
αὐτή: 389
αὐτὸν Χριστόν: 217
αὐτὸν ζητεῖν τοὺς εὖ πεισομένους ἀξίους τε ὄντας τοῦ Σωτῆρος μαθητάς: 327
αὐτὸς ἐνηνθρώπησεν, ἵνα ἡμεῖς θεοποιηθῶμεν: 234
αὐτὸς ἔθα: 583
αὐτοπροσώπως: 306
αὕτη: 389
βαπτιζόμενοι: 28
βαπτιζόμενον: 58
βαπτιζόμενος: 53
βαπτιζομένῳ: 43
βλάσφημον: 452
βωμοῖς: 120
γεγεννημένος ἀνάρχως: 221
γενόμενος ἄνθρωπος ὁ κάτω θεός: 619
γεννηθέντα ἐκ τοῦ Πατρὸς μονογενῆ,: 77
γεννηθέντα οὐ τοιηθέντα, ὁμοούσιον τῷ Πατρί,: 77
γεωργότατος: 198
γινομένων: 364
γονυκλίνοντες, εὐχόμενοι: 25
γοργότατος: 198
γυμνός: 37
γυνὴ καὶ ἁνὴρ ἑαυτοῖς συμπεριφερόμενοι: 140

Greek Words and Phrases

δέχεσθαι: 428
δόκησις: 253
δόξα: 802
δύσχρηστος: 259
δεύτεραι οὐσίαι: 83
δεῖ καὶ ὡς: 174
δει και ως: 174
δευτέρον: 502
διὰ τῆς προς ἀλλήλους εὑρεσιλογίας: 137
διάκρισιν νεφῶν: 196
διὸ ἀποθέμενοι πᾶσαν ῥυπαρίαν: 393
δι ̓ ἄσκησιν: 142
δι ̓ οὗ τὰ πάντα ἐγένετο: 77
δι ̓ οὗ τὰ πάντα ἐγένετο,: 77
διακρίνεσθαι καὶ διαλύεσθαι τὸ διάτμίζον ὑγρὸν ὑπὸ τοῦ πλήθους τῆς θερμῆς
ἀναθυμιάσεως, ὥστε μὴ συνίστασθαι ῥαδίως εἰς ὕδωρ: 196
διακρίσεις καὶ συγκρίσεις: 196
διασχεδασθήσεται: 308
διαφέροντα τῇ Αἰγύπτῳ καὶ τῂ ἁγιωτάτῃ ̓Αλεξανδρέων ἐκκλησία: 397
δικαιώσει περιτομήν: 301
δικαιως: 174
δοῦλεύοντα: 625
δοῦλον: 625 625 625
δοῦλος: 625
δοκήσει: 165
δοκιμασίας: 308
δοκιμαστικόν: 308
εἰ δὲ δεῖ καὶ ὥς τινες ἐξηγοῦνται τοῦτο εἰπεῖν: 174
εἰ δὲ δικαίως τινὲς ἐξηγοῦνται, δεῖ τουτο εἰπεῖν: 174
εἰ δὲ οὐκ ἐγκρατεύονται: 310
εἰδωλόθυτον: 594
εἰκών: 280
εἰκονικῶς ....εἰκόνες τοῦ Χριστοῦ: 384
εἰς ἐπαγγελίαν: 75
εἰς προκοπὴν υἱοθεσίας.: 219
εἰς τὰ ἡμέτερα ἀναδιδομένου μέλη: 62
εἰσέβαια: 430

Greek Words and Phrases

εἴ τις ἐπίσκοπος, ἢ πρεσβύτερος, ἢ διάκονος, ἢ ὅλως τοῦ καταλόγου τῶν κληρικῶν, κ.τ.λ:
εἴδη: 82
εἴτε κυριότητες, καὶ εἴ τινές εἰσιν ἕτεραι λογικαὶ φύσεις ἁκατονόμαστοι: 329
εἶδος μοναρχίας βασιλικῆς: 156
εἶναι: 82
εὐαγγέλια ἀναστασιμὰ ἑωθινά: 289
εὐαρεστήσεως: 153
εὐγλωττίας: 129
εὐδοκία: 832 833
εὐδοκίας: 832 833 833
εὐθηνεῖν: 290
εὐλάβεια: 442
εὐλογίαι,: 24
εὐλογίας: 129
εὐπρέπειαν: 366
εὐσέβειαν: 384 484
εὐστάθεια: 396
εὐσυμπερίφορος: 140
εὐχόμενος τοῦτο λέγεις: 399
εὑρεῖν: 241
εὑρεσιλογία: 137
ζάω: 494
ζώων: 244 494
ζῶα: 244
ζωάς: 244
ζωή: 244
ζωῶν: 244
ζωων: 244
θάλαμος: 327
θάρσει: 268
θέσει καὶ χάριτι: 217
θαρρῶν γράφω τῇ ἀξιοθέῳ ἀγάπη ὑμῶν: 335
θεὸς παρὰ τὴν θέσιν εἴρηται: 636
θεότης: 85
θεῖον: 358
θεατρομανίαι: 375

Greek Words and Phrases

θεολογία: 654
θεολογίαν: 395
θεοποιόν: 136
θεοτόκον: 620
θεοτόκος: 213 213 214
θετόν: 217
θρησκεία: 705
κάππαρις: 308
κύπτων: 401
καὶ ἀναστάντα ἐκ νεκρῶν τῇ τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ,: 78
καὶ ἀναστάντα τῇ τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ,: 78
καὶ ἀνελθόντα εἰς τοὺς οὐρανούς,: 78
καὶ ἀοράτων ποιήτην,: 77
καὶ ἐρχόμενον: 78
καὶ ὄντα ἐν δεξίᾳ τοῦ Πατρός: 291
καὶ αὐτοῦ ἐστιν ἡ αἰώνιος βασιλεία: 295
καὶ γενόμενος ...θεός: 619
καὶ εἰς ἓν βάπτισμα μετανοίας εἰς ἄφεσιν ἁμαρτιῶν: 78
καὶ εἰς ἕνα Κύριον ̓Ιησοῦν Χριστόν,: 77
καὶ εἰς ζωὴν αἰώνιον: 78
καὶ εἰς μίαν ἁγίαν καθολικὴν ἐκκλησίαν,: 78
καὶ εἰς σαρκὸς ἀνάστασιν,: 78
καὶ εἰς τὸ ἅγιον Πνεῦμα.: 78
καὶ καθίσαντα ἐκ δεξιῶν τοῦ Πατρός: 78 291
καὶ πάλιν ἐρχόμενον ἐν δόξῃ: 78
καὶ τὴν ἐνδουχίαν ἀπέδοντο καὶ τὰ σώματα, καὶ σὺν τουτοις ἔτι τινὰς τῶν κτήσεων: 189
καὶ τί πιστεύομεν: 328
καὶ τοὺς λοίπους ἀκατονομάστους ἡμῖν: 329
καί: 193
καῦσιν: 197 197
καῦστιν: 197
κανονικῶν: 96
κατὰ θέσιν: 217
κατὰ καιρόν: 74
κατὰ μεταβολήν: 63
κατὰ τὴν προσηγορίαν: 153
κατὰ φύσιν: 217

Greek Words and Phrases

κατὰ φαντασίαν: 272
κατάσκοποι: 579
κατ ̓ οἰκονομίαν: 284
κατ ̓ οἰκονομίαν τῆς Θείας χάριτος: 289
κατακριθῶσι: 306
καταξίωσειεν: 186
καταξιούμενοι: 232
καταξιωθείς: 53
καταχρηστικῶς: 180 180 205
κατελθόντα καὶ σαρκωθέντα, ἐνανθρωπήσαντα, παθόντα,: 78
κατηχεῖσθαι τὸν τῆς εὐσεβείας λόγον: 20
κατηχοῦμεν: 25
κεκοίμηται: 109
κινήσεις: 198
κλῆρος δὲ ἦν ὁ λαχμός: 266
κλῆσις στρατείας: 26
κλαδεύσεως: 279
κλειδοῦχος: 348
κοινωνικοὶ: 438
κοινωνικοί: 438 819
κολυμβήθρα: 39
κολυμβήθραν: 381
κορυφὰν κατ ̓ ἄκραν ἀνορούσαισ ̓ ἀλάλαξεν ὑπερμάκει βοᾷ: 247
κρῖναι ζῶντας καὶ νεκρούς,: 78 78
κτίσμα: 698
κυνηγεσίαις: 376
κυρίως: 180 180
λέγει: 295 295
λόγῳ: 615
λόγον: 207
λόγος: 391 430
λόγος ἐνδιάθετος: 132 132
λόγος προφορικός: 132 132
λύτρον μετανοίας: 143
λαμπάδες νυμφαγωγίας: 27
λιτός: 56 56
λιτῷ: 56

λογική: 203
λουτρὸν μετανοίας: 143
λουτροῦ μετάνοιαν: 143
μἰαν ὑπόστασιν: 709
μάλιστα μὲν...ἐξαιρέτως δέ: 289
μέλλει δὲ καὶ ἐπὶ σὲ τὸν βαπτιζόμενον φθάνειν ἡ χάρις: 28
μέλλετε στρατολογεῖσθαι: 353
μέχρι: 315
μὴ ἐπιτρέπεται: 400
μὴ ἐπιτρέπητε: 400
μή: 193
μία οὐσία, τρεῖς ὑποστάσεις: 709
μίμων: 375
μόλις: 445
μόνον: 150
μύρῳ: 42 381
μῆκος, μακρός: 315
μεῖζον ἐπεκαλέσατο δικαστήριον: 11
μετὰ πάσης ἐπιστήμης: 96
μετὰ τὰ φῶτα: 702
μετὰ τοῦ ὕδατος: 53
μετάνοια τῆς σωτηρίας: 178
μεταποιεῖται: 364
μετουσία: 390
μετουσίας: 390
μηδὲ ὁ νοῦς σου ῥεμβέσθω: 98
μιγάδας: 438
μιγάδες: 438 438 438 554 819
μονάζοντες: 5 140
μονάς: 82
μοναδικοὶ: 438
μοναρχία: 156
μοναστήρια: 819
μονογενὲς ὕπαρχον: 357
μονοειδής: 358
μονοειδῆ: 160
μονονουχὶ δακτυλοδεικτῶν: 364

Greek Words and Phrases

Greek Words and Phrases

μορφωθέν: 83
μυοξός: 357
μυρεψικόν: 211
μυσταγωγίαι: 380
νάρθηξ: 23
νύσσαι: 580
νῦν ἐν τρίαδι ἡ θεολογία τελεία ἐστίν: 395
νῦν παρεδόθη: 295
νεήλυδας·: 241
νεύματι: 205 311
νεῦρα: 152
νιψάμενοι: 393
νιψασθαι: 393
νοήματα: 174 174
νοῦς: 712
νοητά: 94 116 288
νοητή: 106
νοητόν: 106
νοητός: 119
νοητῷ: 385
οἰακίζει: 196
οἰκείῳ νεύματι: 389 389
οἰκεῖον αἵματι: 61 389
οἰκονομία: 619 654
οἱ κατὰ φρύγας: 320
οἱ νῦν βασιλεῖς: 72
οἱ τῆς ἐπιμιξίας: 438
οἱ τῆς ἐρημίας: 438
οἱ τῆς ἐρηυίας: 438
οἱ τούτοις διαφέροντες: 397
οἱ φωτιζόμενοι: 27 28 28
οὐ πάθει Πατὴρ γενόμενος: 81
οὐ πάθει πατὴρ γενόμενος: 159
οὐδὲ τῷ ὕδατι βαπτιζόμενος μὴ καταξιωθεὶς δὲ τοῦ Πνεύματος: 54
οὐκ ἐπολιτεύετο: 212
οὐκ ἔστι πιστεῦσαι ἄνευ κατηχήσεως: 20
οὐσίᾳ: 84

Greek Words and Phrases

οὐσία: 13 82 82 82 82 83 83 83 83 83 83 83 83 83 84 84 84 84 85 85 85 86 86 86 398 570 709 709 709
709 710
οὐσίαι: 82 82 82 83 84 85
οὐσίαν: 82 83 83 338
οὐσίας: 80 82
οὐσιώδης ἐπιφοίησις ἐγένετο: 385
οὐσια: 83
οὐσιον: 84
οὐσιωδής: 385
οὐσιωδῶς: 385
οὐσιωδῶς καὶ σωματικῶς: 385
οὐχί: 400
οὔτε ὁ βαπτιζόμενος κ.τ.λ: 54
οὔτε ὁ βεβαπτισμένος κ.τ.λ: 54
οὕτω καὶ τὸ ἄτρεπτον καὶ ἀναλλοίωτον αὐτὸν εἶναι σωθήσεται: 129
οὕτως μία ἀρχὴ θεότητος καὶ οὐ δύο ἀρχαί, ὅθεν κυρίως καὶ μοναρχία ἐστίν: 131
οὖν: 390
οὗ νομίζει: 177
οὗ τῆς βασιλείας οὐκ ἔσται τέλος: 78
οὗτος ὁ Γολγοθᾶς οὗ πλησίον νῦν πάντες πάρεσμεν: 69
πάθη: 181
πάλιν οἱ λέγοντες μόνον ὄνομα εἶναι υἱοῦ, ἀνούσιον δὲ καὶ ἀνυπόστατον εἶναι τὸν υἱὸν
τοῦ Θεοῦ, κ.τ.λ.: 133
πάντων ὁρατῶν τε: 77
πάσχω: 838
πάχνη: 196
πέδας: 310
πᾶν τὸ πλάσμα: 719
παἴδες, δοῦλοι: 625
παῖδα: 625
παῖδας: 310
παῖς: 625 625 625 625
παιδευόμενοι ἐκ παιδίου ἕως γήρως: 129
πανήγυρις: 833 833
πανηγύρεσι: 376
πανηγύρις: 375
πανηγυρίσεις: 378

πανηγυρικὰ γράμματα: 833
παντοκράτορα: 190 190
παρὰ τῆς σῆς εὐλαβείας: 369
παρὰ τῇ σῇ θεοσεβείά: 369
παρῆλθεν, ἐπορεύθη ἑαυτῷ: 279
παρα φθειρέσθωσαν: 628
παραχαράσσω: 145
παροικία: 287 328
παρουσίᾳ: 396
παστάδας: 327
παστάς: 327
πειραθήσῃ: 377
πειρασθήσῃ: 377
πεπεδημένους: 310
περὶ Μοναρχίας: 156
περὶ φυσῶν: 437
περιῤῥαντήρια δύο ἀνέθηκε: 393
περικοπαί: 289
πηγῆς: 198
πιστός: 25
πλάσμα: 719
πλαγίως: 263
πνεῦμα: 137 712
πνεῦμα ὁ θεός: 712
πνευματίκῆς: 385
πνευματοφόρων: 332
πνοή: 137
ποίημα: 698
πομπάς: 375
πρὶν γεννηθῆναι οὐκ ἦν: 86
πρὶν γεννηθῆναι οὐκ ἦν.: 210
πρὸ πάντων τῶν αἰώνων,: 77
πρὸς τὰς: 320
πρὸς τοὺς Νεοφωτίστους: 76
πρὸς τοὺς μέλλοντας φωτίζεσθαι: 22
πρόδρομος: 300
πρόξενον: 382

Greek Words and Phrases

πρόσωπα: 709
πρόσωπον: 709 710 777
πρώτως: 83
πρῶτον ψεὺδος: 667
πραγματεία: 353
πραγματεύεοθε: 353
πρεσβεύειν: 641
προέρχεσθαι, προϊέναι: 710
προαιρούμενον τὸν Σκυθιανόν: 171
προβολὴ: 608
προβολεὺς-προβολὴ: 608
προθεσμία: 97
προκοπή: 205
προσέλθῃς: 392
προσῆλθες: 392
προσελθεῖν: 392
προσετέθησαν: 313
προσθέσθαι: 103
προσθεῖναι: 313
προστάγμασι: 320
προστῆναι: 313
προσφοράν: 401
προφορικόν: 223
προφωτιζομένης: 28
πρωτότοκος: 219
πτεροφυησουσιν ὡς ἀετοί: 122
πυγολαμπίς: 364
σάγη: 237
σάρξ: 712
σήμερον: 220 221
σύναξις: 107
σύνταγμα: 597
σύσσωμοι: 389
σώζεται: 137
σώματα: 189
σῶμα: 137
σαρκωθέντα καὶ ἐνανθρωπήσαντα: 233

Greek Words and Phrases

σεμνότατος: 178
σεμνότητος: 178
σεμνύνεται: 250
σημείων καὶ τεράτων φαντασίας ἐδείκνυον: 304
σημεῖα: 297
σικυηράτῳ: 327
σιωπωμένης: 58
σκευαστῷ: 211
σκοτομήνη: 150
στόμα ἀθεότητος: 178
σταυρωθέντα καὶ ταφέντα: 77
στηλή: 121
στηρίξωσιν: 186
στρατολογία: 353
συγγώμην αἰτῶ παρὰ τῆς ὑμετέρας ἀγάπης: 335
συγκατάθεσις: 153
συναιτοῦντες: 26
συναλοιφήν: 319
συναριθμεῖται: 649
συντάσσομαι: 36
συντασσόμενος: 37 377
σχεδιασθεῖσα: 104
σχολάζεις: 106
σχολάσατε: 100 106
σωμάτων: 119
σωτισμός: 27
τὁν προαύλιον: 374
τὰ ἔσχατα: 161
τὰ ζεύγη: 250
τὰς ἀπαρχὰς καὶ τὰ πρωτεῖα: 339
τὰς εὐλογίας: 255
τά τε ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ καὶ τὰ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς,: 78
τὴν ἀνάβασιν αὐτοὐ: 289
τὴν ἔμφασιν τὴν....γεγενημένην: 373
τὴν ἔνσαρκον παρουσίαν: 292
τὴν αὐτὴν οὐσίαν ἔχειν: 698
τὴν δι ̓ ὕδατος σφραγῖδα: 53 54

Greek Words and Phrases

Greek Words and Phrases

τὴν δι ̓ εὐχῆς λόγου τοῦ παρ αὐτοῦ εὐχαριστηθεῖσαν τροφήν: 47
τὴν δι ̓ εὐχῆς λόγου τοῦ παρ ̓ αὐτοῦ εὐχαριστηθεῖσαν τροφήν: 62
τὴν παροῦσαν: 314
τὴν στεφανηφορίαν: 355
τί μεμπτόν: 200
τὸ ἀνθέμιον τοῦ χρυσιόυ: 307
τὸ ἀντίτυπον: 41
τὸ ἐξουσιαστικόν: 205 205
τὸ ἴδίον πὰρα τὸ κοινόν: 709
τὸ ὑποκείμενον: 83
τὸ βλέμμα ῥεμβόμενον: 98
τὸ βούλεσθαι: 565
τὸ γῆρας: 110
τὸ δοκεῖν αὐτὸν πεπονθέναι: 253
τὸ θεοδόχον σῶμα: 64
τὸ καθόλον: 83
τὸ κοινωνικόν: 400
τὸ κρειττον: 479
τὸ κυριοκτόνον τῶν ̓Ιουδαίων: 210
τὸ λαλῆσαν ἐν τοῖς προφήταις: 78
τὸ μὲν κατὰ τὸν Δαβίδ....τὸ δὲ κατὰ τὴν Θεότητα: 220
τὸ ξένον: 212
τὸ οὐσιῶδες: 280
τὸ πῶς: 57
τὸ παρ ̓ ἡμῖν λεγόμενον ὑποκάμισοε: 38
τὸ πολυώνυμον: 203
τὸ σύμβολον: 57
τὸ σύνολον: 103
τὸ σῶμα αὔτου κατὰ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τύπον ἔφερεν ἄρτου: 66
τὸ συμπεριφερεσθαι τοῖς φίλοις: 140
τὸ τί ἦν εἶναι: 83
τὸ χάρισμα: 447
τὸν ἐκ τοῦ Πατρὸς γεννηθέντα,: 77
τὸν ̓Ηλειμυένον: 302
τὸν Μονογενῆ,: 77
τὸν Παράκλητον,: 78
τὸν Χριστὸν αὐτοῦ: 212

Greek Words and Phrases

τὸν Χριστόν: 302
τὸν Ψἱὸν τοῦ Θεοῦ: 77
τὸν Ψἱὸν τοῦ Θεοῦ,: 77
τὸν δι ̓ ἡμὰς τοὺς ἀνθρώπους καὶ διὰ τὴν ἡμετέραν σωτηρίαν: 78
τὸν θεόν: 184
τὸν μὲν γὰρ Χριστὸν ἀλλοτριουσι τοῦ Πατρός: 132
τὸν πάντων δεσπότην: 190
τὸν πάντων ποιητὴν...ἀγνοοῦντες, τὸν ἄναρχον Θεόν: 218
τὸν πρόειρῃμένον Σκ: 171
τὸν σαρκωθέντα καὶ ἐνανθρωπήσαντα: 77
τόδε τι: 83
τότε θαυματουργεῖ καὶ παραδοξοποιεῖ: 389
τύπον: 57
τύπον παραδηλοῦν: 340
τύπος: 66 384 384
τῆς ὑμετέρας ἐν Χριστῷ ἀγάπης: 369
τῆς ὑπερθέσεως: 363
τῆς γῆς: 198
τῆς γῆς τὴν φυλακὴν ἐγχειρισθεὶς παρὰ Θεοῦ: 190
τῆς θεότητος τῆς Πατρικῆς κοινωνός: 85
τῆς μοναρχίας τοῦ θεοῦ: 131
τῇ ὑποστάσει: 84
τῇ δυνάμει: 64
τῇ προσευχῇ: 106
τῇ χθὲς ἡμέρᾳ: 74
τῶν: 448
τῶν ἀποκρύφων: 144
τῶν ἀρχομένων: 46
τῶν ἔργων ἐπειράθην: 377
τῶν αὐτοῦ τοῦ Σωτῆρος θεολόγων ἀνδρῶν: 232
τῶν γενομένων: 364
τῶν....γεγενημένων: 373
τῷ ἱερεῖ: 44
τῷ διὰ τῆς ἀληθοῦς κατηχήσεως γεννήσαντι κεῖταί τις μισθός: 306
τῷ μὲν θείω καὶ ἀθανάτῳ καὶ νοητῷ καὶ μονοειδεῖ καὶ ἀδιαλύτῳ καὶ ἀεὶ ὡσαύτως κατὰ
τὰ αὐτὰ ἔχοντι ἑαυτῷ ὁμοιότατον εἶναι ψυχήν: 160
τῷ σχήματι τῆς προσηγορίας: 153

Greek Words and Phrases

ταύτην προσφέρομεν τὴν θυσίαν: 47
ταύτην τὴν παρακαταθηκην: 240
ταύτης τῆς λέξεως: 155
ταῖς τῆς ὑμετέρας ἀγάπης ἀκοαῖς: 335
ταραχθήσονται ἀπὸ προσώπου αὐτοῦ: 184
τελειότεροι, φωτιζόμενοι: 25
τοὺς δευτέρῳ γάμῳ συμπεριενεχθέντας: 140
τοῖς ἰδίοις: 283
τοῖς ̓Ιουδαίοις: 283
τοῦ: 448
τοῦ ἀποκριθῆναι: 242
τοῦ Σωτῆρος: 295
τοῦ αἵματος: 390
τοῦ αὐτοῦ Κυρίλλου καὶ ̓Ιωάννου ἐπισκόπου: 87
τοῦ καθαρισμοῦ αὐτῶν: 250
τοῦ πονηροῦ: 49 399
τοῦ σώματος: 390 400
τοῦ τοίνυν πρωτοτύπου ἐπισκόπου ἰδόντος: 287
τοῦ χρίσματος δηλαδὴ τοῦ τυπικοῦ: 57
τοῦτ ̓ ἔστιν ἀρχὴ πλάσματος Κυρίου, πεποιῃμένον ἐγκαταπαίζεσθαι ὑπὸ τῶν ἀγγέλων
αὐτοῦ: 188
τοιούτου τοίνυν ἐπισκόπου πρωτοτύπως ἰδόντος: 287
τομῆς: 279
τουτέστιν ἐκ τῆς οὐσίας τοῦ Πατρός,: 77
τρία πρόσωπα: 709
τρεῖς ὑποστάσεις: 709 709 709
τριῶν ἀρχῶν λόγος: 319
τυφλῶν αἰσθητῶν: 210
τ. ν. ᾗ ἑαυτ, παρεδ: 697
υἱὸν ἐκ τοῦ Πατρὸς ἀνάρχως καὶ ἀϊδίως γεγεννημένον, λόγον δὲ οὐ προφορικόν, οὐκ
ἐνδιάθετον: 132
υἱοθεσίαν: 54
υἱοπατορία: 132 225 300
φάω: 721
φύσει καὶ οὐ θέσει: 221
φύσις: 84 570
φώς: 721

φώτισμα: 28 28
φώτων: 384 384 384
φαίνω: 721
φαντασίαν: 253
φαντασιώδης: 253
φαντασιοκοπῶν: 301
φαντασιοκοπεῖ: 304
φαράν: 244 244 244
φημί: 721
φθάνει καθελών: 11
φθοράν: 131
φιλάνθρωπος δὲ ὢν...ποιμὴν γινεται: 203
φιλοσοφία: 428
φιλοστοργία: 183
φοράν: 131
φρόνησις: 194
φυγαδεύω: 374
φυγαδευτήριον: 374
φωνῆς: 198
φωτίζω: 27 28 28
φωτιζόμενοι: 22 27 28 28 94
φωτιζομένων: 76
φωτισθέντας: 27
φωτισμός: 28 28 28 719
χάρακα: 560
χάρις: 447
χάρισμα: 56
χῥονικὴν ἀρχήν: 219
χαμευνιῶν: 568
χαρακτηρα: 560
χειμῶνες: 297
χειροθεσίᾳ: 57
χιλιάδες εὐθηνούντων: 290
χιτών: 38
χιτώνιον: 37
χρώτων: 384 384 384
χρῖσμα: 381 387

Greek Words and Phrases

Greek Words and Phrases

χρῶμα: 96
χρῶτα: 384 384 384
χρῶτες: 384
χρῶτων: 384
χριστοφόρον: 101
χριστοφόρος: 101
χωρὶς τοῦ ἐπισκόπου: 41
ψευδόχριστοι: 301
ψευδεπίγραφα: 146
ψευδεπίσκοποι: 579
ψιλόν: 56 56
ψυχὰς ἐκτραχήλιζον: 376
, [καὶ δύναμις ἐκ δυνάμεως: 220
Compare x. 11, 15; xvi. 13: xxi. 1.: 217
[τῷ] νίψασθαι: 393
]*, Υιὸς τοῦ Πατρὸς [ἐν πᾶσιν]: 220

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

i iii v vii ix x xi xii xiii xiv xv xvi xvii xviii xix xx xxi xxii xxiii xxiv xxv xxvi xxvii xxviii xxix xxx 
xxxi xxxii xxxiii xxxiv xxxv xxxvi xxxvii xxxviii xxxix xl xli xlii xliii xliv xlv xlvi xlvii xlviii xlix l li 
lii liii liv lv lvi lvii lviii lix lx lxi lxii lxiii lxiv lxv lxvi 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 
18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 
49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 
80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 
108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 
131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 
154 155 156 157 185 187 188 189 190 191 192 193 194 195 196 197 198 199 200 201 202 203 204 
205 206 207 208 209 210 211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 221 222 223 224 225 226 227 
228 229 230 231 232 233 234 235 236 237 238 239 240 241 242 243 244 245 246 247 248 249 250 
251 252 253 254 255 256 257 258 259 260 261 262 263 264 265 266 267 268 269 270 271 272 273 
274 275 276 277 278 279 280 281 282 283 284 285 286 287 288 289 290 291 292 293 294 295 296 
297 298 299 300 301 302 303 304 305 306 307 308 309 310 311 312 313 314 315 316 317 318 319 
320 321 322 323 324 325 326 327 328 329 330 331 332 333 334 335 336 337 338 339 340 341 342 
343 344 345 346 347 348 349 350 351 352 353 354 355 356 357 358 359 360 361 362 363 364 365 
366 367 368 369 370 371 372 373 374 375 376 377 378 379 380 381 382 383 384 385 386 387 388 
389 390 391 392 393 394 395 396 397 398 399 400 401 402 403 404 405 406 407 408 409 410 411 
412 413 414 415 416 417 418 419 420 421 422 423 424 425 426 427 428 429 430 431 432 433 434 
435 437 438 439 440 441 442 443 444 445 446 447 448 449 450 451 452 453 454 455 456 457 458 
459 460 461 462 463 464 465 466 467 468 469 470 471 472 473 474 475 476 477 478 479 480 481 

Related Books

Related Books

You might also enjoy these classic Christian books from the CCEL:

NPNF2-08. Basil: Letters and Select Works by Philip Schaff

With over twenty volumes, the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers is a momentous achievement.
Originally gathered by Philip Schaff, the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers is a collection of
writings by classical and medieval Christian theologians. The purpose of such a collection
is to make their writings readily available. The entire work is divided into two series, each
with fourteen volumes. The second series focuses on a variety of important Church Fathers,
ranging from the fourth century to the eighth century. This volume contains selected works
of St. Basil the Great. St. Basil is well-known for his care for the poor and his important
impact upon the communal practices of the monastic life. The Nicene and Post-Nicene
Fathers are comprehensive in scope, and provide keen translations of instructive and illuminating texts from some of the great theologians of the Christian church. These spiritually
enlightening texts have aided Christians for over a thousand years, and remain instructive
and fruitful even today!
Tim Perrine
CCEL Staff Writer
Formats available: PDF, Web, ePub, iBook, Kindle, and others. Visit the Kindle or iBook
store or see http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/npnf208.html.

NPNF2-05. Gregory of Nyssa: Dogmatic Treatises, Etc. by Philip
Schaff

With over twenty volumes, the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers is a momentous achievement.
Originally gathered by Philip Schaff, the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers is a collection of
writings by classical and medieval Christian theologians. The purpose of such a collection
is to make their writings readily available. The entire work is divided into two series, each
with fourteen volumes. The second series focuses on a variety of important Church Fathers,
ranging from the fourth century to the eighth century. This volume contains selected
treatises of St. Gregory of Nyssa. A fourth century bishop, St. Gregory wrote on theology,
philosophy, ethics, oration, and asceticism. The Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers are comprehensive in scope, and provide keen translations of instructive and illuminating texts from
some of the great theologians of the Christian church. These spiritually enlightening texts
have aided Christians for over a thousand years, and remain instructive and fruitful even
today!
Tim Perrine
CCEL Staff Writer
Formats available: PDF, Web, ePub, iBook, Kindle, and others. Visit the Kindle or iBook
store or see http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/npnf205.html.

